
























































Hansard: November 24, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 88B  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 24, 2015, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Hon. Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7801 
 November 24, 2015 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, debate will resume. 
 
I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
[Applause] 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Trans-Pacific Partnership 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Nilson: — So thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 
the government for all that applause. I mean, all that does is 
encourage some more very erudite reasoning around this 
particular document. And for all of the public who are just 
joining us now, we are dealing with a motion in support of the 
Trans-Pacific Partnership and it includes a number of different 
things. 
 
But I think what I want to do is set the tone for the whole 
discussion that we have. And I’m going to go back to the very 
first paragraph of the whole 6,000-page document, and this 
paragraph says: 

 
The Parties to this Agreement, resolving to: 
 
ESTABLISH a comprehensive regional agreement that 
promotes economic integration to liberalise trade and 
investment, bring economic growth and social benefits, 
create new opportunities for workers and businesses, 
contribute to raising living standards, benefit consumers, 
reduce poverty, and promote sustainable growth. 

 
And that’s the first paragraph. There’s quite a number of 
paragraphs in the purpose of the whole partnership agreement, 
but I think that that clause in and of itself sets out the principles 
on which this agreement is based and the negotiation that’s 
based. 
 
And as we’ve seen as we’ve gone through the first two chapters 
out of 31, there are a substantial number of issues that relate to 
Saskatchewan, and it’s important for us to look at them. But it’s 
also important to recognize that one of the issues that relates to 
documents like this and to governments that are working to 
provide information, whether it’s negotiating international 
treaties or negotiating contracts to build highway bypasses or to 
build new hospitals, build new schools, it’s always about 
providing due diligence. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in The Atlantic monthly just over a month 
ago, September, there was a poem that I think is important to 
put on the record because it talks about this whole concept of 
due diligence. So this is the poem “Due Diligence” by the poet 
David Lehman who is the author of The State of the Art: A 
Chronicle of American Poetry. 
 
So here’s the poem: 
 

Due Diligence 
 
They didn’t do their due diligence. 
They didn’t do it, 
And now they rue it, 
And how they will rue not doing it 
With vigilance when they had the chance. 
They talked the talk but didn’t dance the dance. 
 
They committed the folly 
Of failing to follow the lolly. 
They didn’t learn about the booze, 
They didn’t learn about the flooze, 
The smack, the jack, and the lolly. 
And, in short, they missed the trolley. 
 
They overlooked some obvious flaws. 
Why? Was it arrogance 
Or the need to spare the expense 
Or just a lack of common sense? 
Who can say? Whatever the cause, 
They failed to observe the clause. 
 
They didn’t do their due diligence. 
They didn’t do it, 
And now they rue it, 
And how they will rue not doing it, 
How they will rue the day 
They didn’t do their due diligence. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I dedicate that poem to the ministers who are 
working on a number of these projects. It’s very important that 
due diligence be done. It also includes the work that needs to be 
done on this particular Trans-Pacific Partnership. 
 
And as I said earlier, this Trans-Pacific Partnership involves 12 
countries, and those countries are Australia, Brunei Darussalam, 
Canada, Chile, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, 
Singapore, United States, and Vietnam. And, Mr. Speaker, 
these countries, the 12 of them, are on four continents around 
the Pacific Ocean. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important to take a look at the motion that the 
government has put forward. And I’m going to read that motion 
again, because a lot of people won’t have heard it from this 
afternoon. And so it reads in this Orders of the Day: 
 

Hon. Mr. Harrison to move the following motion: 
 
That this Assembly supports the Trans-Pacific Partnership 
trade agreement, the largest and most ambitious free trade 
initiative in history, and calls on the Government of 
Canada to ratify the finalized agreement at the earliest 
possible opportunity. 

 
And that’s the end of the clause. Now I read that because I think 
there needs to be some discussion about what we are actually 
doing and what the motion is saying. 
 
And I’m going to rely on some very careful analysis of this 
agreement by a lawyer, law professor that I read regularly 
because I trust his advice. And I think it’s important, actually, 



7802 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2015 

for all of us to listen as he . . . This was posted yesterday, 
November 23rd. And it’s posted by Michael Geist of the 
University of Ottawa Centre for Law, Technology and Society. 
And the article’s called “Signing vs. Ratifying: Unpacking the 
Canadian Government Position on the Trans-Pacific 
Partnership.” 
 
And I think this is important to put into the record here: 
 

The official release of the Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP), 
a global trade agreement between 12 countries including 
Canada, the United States, and Japan, has generated 
considerable confusion over where the Trudeau 
government stands on the deal. The TPP was concluded 
several weeks before the October election and the Liberals 
were careful to express general support for free trade, but 
refrain from embracing an agreement that was still secret. 
 
Over the past month, there have been mixed signals over 
the issue. Chrystia Freeland, the new Minister of 
International Trade, has committed to a public 
consultation and noted that her government is not bound 
by commitments made by the Conservatives [and then he 
puts in a subnote] (in the interests of full disclosure, I had 
the opportunity to meet with Minister Freeland to discuss 
the TPP earlier this month). [And then the end of that 
subparagraph there.] Yet following a meeting between 
Prime Minister Justin Trudeau and U.S. President Barack 
Obama at the APEC conference in Manila, Obama 
indicated that he expects Canada to soon be a signatory to 
the deal. 
 
How to explain the seemingly inconsistent comments on 
the Canadian position on the TPP? The answer may well 
lie in the differences between reaching an 
agreement-in-principle, signing the formal text, and 
ratifying the deal. Each step is distinct and carries different 
legal obligations. 
 
The agreement-in-principle occurred in early October 
during the final round of negotiations in Atlanta. Contrary 
to reports that Canada “signed” the TPP at the time, there 
was nothing to sign. The agreement-in-principle closed off 
the outstanding issues, but the formal text still needed to 
be finalized. There were some legal implications of the 
agreement-in-principle, however. For example, the 
intellectual property chapter includes an annex that 
permits Canada’s notice-and-notice rules to qualify as an 
alternative to the TPP’s notice-and-takedown system 
(which is modeled on U.S. law). The annex states that only 
countries that have a similar system at the time of the 
agreement-in-principle can use the exception, effectively 
creating a Canadian-only rule. 

 
So just commenting, the first part of this is then there’s an 
agreement in principle, but there’s no text at that point. Now: 
 

The next formal stage may be the signing of the TPP, 
which reports indicate could happen in New Zealand as 
early as February 2016. There will be strong incentives for 
all TPP negotiating countries, including Canada, to sign 
the agreement even if they are unsure about whether they 
will ultimately ratify it. Chapter 30 of the TPP on Final 

Provisions addresses some of the technical issues 
associated with the TPP. The chapter grants special rights 
to “original signatories,” who are the only ones who 
qualify for the rules related to entry into force of the 
agreement (in the event that not all TPP countries ratify 
the agreement within two years, it takes effect once six 
original signatories which account for 85 percent of the 
GDP of the original signatories have ratified it). In other 
words, if Canada does not participate in the signing of the 
text, it will not be an original signatory and it will not 
count for the purposes of the TPP taking formal effect. 
 
The benefits of being an original signatory may be what 
ultimately motivate Canada to sign the TPP and why 
President Obama expects it to do so. However, the TPP 
would only become binding upon ratification of the 
agreement. That would require Canada to amend a wide 
variety of laws to ensure that it is compliant with TPP 
requirements. From a legal perspective, there is a 
significant difference between signing a treaty (which 
represents only a supportive gesture) vs. ratifying a treaty 
(which creates new legal obligations). Howard Knopf has 
characterized it as the difference between dating and 
marriage. 
 
It should be noted that many countries sign but do not 
ratify treaties. Indeed, Canada has a fair number of 
international treaties that it has signed but not ratified, 
including a 1988 Convention on International Bills of 
Exchange and International Promissory notes. The same is 
true for the United States, which has signed the United 
Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, but has not 
ratified it. 
 
Canada could find itself in the same position with the TPP. 
Assuming it signs early next year, there will still be ample 
time to conduct a full, open consultation on the treaty. 
Many have already expressed serious concerns with the 
implications of the TPP for intellectual property, privacy, 
Internet governance, and the environment. In light of the 
mounting concerns, the government could sign the TPP as 
an original signatory, but still decide to not ratify without 
changes to the deal. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s the end of the article, but I think it’s 
important for all of us to understand that the motion here goes 
down about one or two or maybe three years from now because 
it’s going past the signing of the agreement and it’s going on to 
the ratification of the finalized agreement. And from what the 
federal government has said, we’re going to end up with a 
period of consultation in Canada, probably some time starting 
in the spring or summer or fall, and it wouldn’t be until after 
that consultation that there would be even any request for 
ratification of the signed agreement. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, this motion seemed to have some urgency 
to it but it’s, you know, practically it is very unlikely that it has 
any real sort of need until such time as Canada has actually 
signed it. They’re hoping to sign, you know . . . I guess all the 
parties are hoping to try to sign it in February. What we do 
know is that there have been so many issues coming from each 
of the different parties, each of the different countries that it 
could be much later than February that the signing takes place. 

http://www.pressprogress.ca/will_canada_actually_have_a_full_and_open_debate_on_the_trans_pacific_partnership
http://globalnews.ca/news/2346460/tpp-dairy-compensation-package-under-review-by-liberals-freeland/


November 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7803 

So we have this original agreement in principle, October 2015; 
possible signing in February 2016. I would guess more likely 
that it’s going to be April or May or sometime later. Then there 
will be some further consultation, and people will have up to 
two years after that to ratify the agreement. 
 
Now given that we’ve only had a few weeks of discussion on 
this treaty and clearly we haven’t had much review in 
Saskatchewan on a number of the issues that we’ve already 
talked about just in the first two chapters, I think that this 
motion is jumping the gun quite dramatically, and that 
practically we still need to do a lot of work before we proceed 
with this. 
 
[19:15] 
 
Now I think what I hope to do here is to continue to discuss 
some of the clauses in the agreement. We’ve gone through 
some of the more contentious ones, and that’s the one that talks 
about sort of the national sort of rights that people are wanting 
to protect. But as we go through the agreement, we see quite a 
number of places where those issues impact our people in 
Saskatchewan, our companies in Saskatchewan, and clearly 
things right across Canada. 
 
So let’s proceed then to the third chapter of this agreement. And 
for anybody who wants to follow online, I think you have to go 
to the Government of New Zealand, their website, and they’ll 
have a place where you can tap into the document which is 
basically the Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement, and they will 
have this draft document, which is every page at the top says 
“Subject to Legal Review in English, Spanish and French for 
Accuracy, Clarity and Consistency” and “Subject to 
Authentication of English, Spanish and French Versions.” 
 
Now the third chapter talks about rules of origin and origin 
procedures. And this is another one that I think has some 
implications for Saskatchewan very directly, and we need to 
understand what the section is about. And effectively what the 
article . . . I mean I guess what the section is about is the rules 
of origin. And so basically what it says is that: 
 

Each Party shall provide that for the purposes of Article 
3.2 [which talks about] (Originating Goods), a good is 
wholly obtained or produced entirely in the territory of one 
or more of the Parties if it is: 
 

(a) a plant or plant good, grown, cultivated, harvested, 
picked or gathered there; 

 
So clearly that’s something that we do a lot of in Saskatchewan 
is grow plants and grow seeds and things like that. Or: 
 

(b) a live animal born and raised there; 
 
So that clearly relates to what we do here. 
 

(c) a good obtained from a live animal there; 
 
And that includes obviously the dairy industry and a number of 
other issues. And then: 
 

(d) an animal obtained by hunting, trapping, fishing, 

gathering or capturing there; 
 
So that’s clearly something that happens in our province as 
well. And then: 
 

(e) a good obtained from aquaculture there; 
 
And we do have some aquaculture, fish farmers that are 
producing and doing very well in our province. And then: 
 

(f) a mineral or other naturally occurring substance, not 
included in subparagraphs (a) through (e), [so that’s the 
ones we’ve just looked at above, that’s been] extracted 
or taken from there; 

 
So clearly we have a big mining industry, oil and gas industry, 
and that’s definitely included in here. 
 

(g) fish, shellfish and other marine life taken from the 
sea, seabed or subsoil outside the territories of the 
parties in accordance with international law . . . 

 
I think this clause probably doesn’t apply in Saskatchewan 
given that we’re a landlocked province. And it deals with 
whatever fish or other marine products we get through the . . . 
in some other places. 
 
So and then it says, any goods produced “on board a factory 
ship that is registered . . .” We don’t normally have factory 
ships on any of our big lakes, although that’s not beyond the 
realm of possibility if there was some special rule that would 
apply to them. And I make that comment because I know in the 
Great Lakes some of the casino rules were skirted by the fact 
that in the state of Illinois they couldn’t really regulate out over 
Lake Michigan. 
 
Now another part of this one is that it’s: 
 

(h) a good other than fish, shellfish and other marine life 
taken by a Party or a person of a Party from the seabed 
or subsoil outside the territories of the Parties . . . 

 
Well that doesn’t apply here in Saskatchewan. Then this one 
does: 
 

(j) a good that is: 
 

(i) waste or scrap derived from [the] production there; 
or 

 
(ii) waste and scrap derived from used goods 
collected there, provided that these goods are fit only 
for the recovery of raw materials; 

 
And that’s obviously screenings of grain can be sold and used, 
and there are other parts of waste that are used. 
 
And finally: 
 

(k) a good produced there, exclusively from goods 
referred to in subparagraphs (a) through (j), or from 
their derivatives. 

 



7804 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2015 

In other words, anything produced from all of the things that 
I’ve just mentioned. 
 
Now why is there such detail on this rules of origin and 
originating goods? Well I think the whole concern comes down 
to some of the rules around remanufacturing goods and also 
then manufacturing goods and giving special national 
preference, I guess, for goods that may be produced in your area 
or some other country that’s close by. And this whole section 
goes on to set some quite sort of clear rules around percentages 
of regional value content versus things that are brought in from 
other places, and then creates rules around the tariffs that can be 
produced in that context. And I think that some of this is not 
entirely clear for what would happen in Canada or what 
happens in Saskatchewan, and we need to have some fairly 
thorough review of what this does mean for some of the 
products that we produce. 
 
Now it also in this section deals with the whole issue of motor 
vehicles and what percentage of a motor vehicle is produced in 
which country, and that clearly is a contentious point for 
Canada as a whole. It may be a contentious point for us from 
Saskatchewan if in fact it increases dramatically, if the prices 
for purchasing vehicles or machinery increases dramatically 
because of that provision. We don’t know from what 
information we have so far whether that is a concern or not. But 
clearly it’s something that is once again an issue that needs to 
be examined by obviously our trade officials but more 
importantly, probably, in some of the departments like the 
Department of Agriculture and making sure that we are 
protected and that we’re complying with the rules such as are 
necessary. 
 
Now the whole section goes on in quite a bit of detail about 
how all this is basically calculated, and then ultimately it gets 
down to how do we apply these kinds of rules. And so then 
what happens, and this is where some of our Saskatchewan 
residents, some of our Saskatchewan businesses will be 
affected. And where it is, is if you are either importing or 
exporting some of these kinds of products, you’re going to have 
to have certificates of origin that provide in full detail where a 
certain product either comes from or is going to. And if that 
kind of information is not available or if it’s not accurate, then 
that becomes an issue in basically in the trade, probably reduces 
the price of the product that you have. 
 
Where this is of concern, obviously, is in export of wheat 
products to Japan or to Vietnam or some of these places. It 
could relate to the export of different grains and lentils and 
things like that that we have that are transported. And so one of 
the questions will then become is, what kind of provincial 
legislation will we have that meshes with this legislation? And 
as Michael Geist stated earlier, once there’s a signatory to that 
and then a ratification, then provinces and the federal 
government will be required to change their legislation to make 
it match this agreement. And I think it would be a good idea if 
we all knew what kinds of changes are necessary so that that 
can be part of the consultation, so that can be part of the 
discussion as we move forward. 
 
Now it’s got many pages in this section around the actual rules 
because it is crucial for the value of the goods that are being 
traded. So these certification procedures are even being raised 

to a higher level than some that we have seen already, and the 
question is, are we ready as producers or traders or sellers of 
these goods for some new international rules? 
 
And this is one, the kind of issue that sometimes catches all of 
us by surprise. And so I think that it would help to have some 
indication from the government what kinds of steps they’re 
taking already to deal with this. 
 
Now once again, in dealing with this chapter 3 on these rules of 
origin, this agreement will set up a committee on rules of origin 
and origin procedures, and it’ll have representatives from each 
country and they will be discussing and dealing with these 
particular questions for the products that we have from Canada 
and from all of the other countries. And I think it’s important 
that Saskatchewan get their oar in the water on some of these 
issues now to make sure that we have, if not some of our 
people, at least some of our concerns already there when the 
first meetings take place because it will make a big difference in 
the long term in the value of the goods that we trade and in how 
simply the trade is done. 
 
And so this whole battle . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And I 
hear the Minister of Agriculture is wondering what I’m talking 
about. I think it’s his people, it’s his people who have the 
responsibility of dealing with this particular issue. We know 
that some of the rules of origin that have affected the cattle 
prices in Canada are ones that sort of came out of the blue. And 
so practically I think that we need to make sure that we have 
people thinking about this, looking at this, and reviewing this. 
And that’s why, when you bring forward a motion that’s kind of 
simplistic and doesn’t actually deal with all of the kinds of 
issues here, then it basically sets it up so that we can raise some 
questions so that, on the record, there are some of these issues 
stated in a very clear fashion. 
 
So in this whole section, it’s interesting what kinds of things are 
included or not included. And there is an annex C to chapter 3 
or article 3 which is exceptions to this article, which is called 
De Minimis, in other words, the things that really don’t matter. 
But what it says is this article 3.11 will not apply to the 
following items. And the first one is: 
 

non-originating materials of heading 04.01 through 04.06, 
or non-originating dairy preparations containing over 10 
percent by dry weight of milk solids of subheading 
1901.90 or 2106.90, used in the production of a good of 
heading 04.01 through 04.06 other than a good of 
subheading 0402.10 through 0402.29 or 0406.30. 

 
[19:30] 
 
So basically this is where we’ve been seeing some of the press 
about this, and it relates to this expansion of foreign materials 
coming into other countries. And this is an area, but the next 
area is: 
 

non-originating materials of heading 04.01 through 04.06, 
or non-originating dairy preparations containing over 10 
percent by dry weight of milk solids of subheading 
1901.90, used in the production of the following goods: 
 

(i) infant preparations containing over 10 percent by dry 



November 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7805 

weight of milk solids of subheading 1901.10; 
 
(ii) mixes and doughs, containing over 25 percent by dry 
weight of butterfat, not put up for retail sale of 
subheading 1901.20; 
 
(iii) dairy preparations containing over 10 percent by 
dry weight of milk solids of subheading 1901.90 or 
2106.90; 
 
goods of heading 21.05; 
 
beverages containing milk of subheading 2202.90; or 
 
animal feeds containing over 10 percent by dry weight 
of milk solids of subheading 2309.90. 

 
All of these things, you know, relate to the exemptions for 
certain kinds of products. And we know right now that if you 
end up buying some of the new kinds of Greek yogourt and 
other things like that, they have a substantial percentage of 
these milk fats that come from outside of Canada, and it’s 
causing some difficulty within the dairy industry because we 
have a very large amount of liquid milk in our system, but we 
don’t have a lot of these milk fats. 
 
And so some of these rules, we don’t know how they impact on 
what is already happening here, but I think it’s why some of the 
dairy farmers of Canada are raising questions. It’s also why the 
federal government has put in $4.3 billion to give to these dairy 
farmers over the next 15 years. 
 
Now the next section here where there’s this rule is not to apply 
is (c), and it’s: 
 

non-originating materials of heading 8.05 or subheading 
2009.11 through 2009.39, used in the production of a good 
of subheading 2009.11 through 2009.39 or a fruit or 
vegetable juice of any single fruit or vegetable, fortified 
with minerals or vitamins, concentrated or unconcentrated, 
of subheading 2106.90 or 2202.90. 

 
So once again this is where there’s materials that are used in 
some of the fruit juices that come from some other sources, and 
it’s saying that some of these rules are not going to apply. 
 
It then goes on to talk about some other goods under the 
harmonized system, and then finally it talks about: 
 

non-originating peaches, pears or apricots of Chapter 8 or 
20 of the Harmonized System, used in the production of a 
good under heading 20.08. 

 
And I think practically what that is is that when you buy a 
certain kind of juice, there’s often mixed into that peach juice or 
pear juice or apricot juice because sometimes they’re somewhat 
cheaper than the designated juice that’s on the cover or on the 
container of the juice that you buy. And so basically this whole 
chapter 3 around rules of origin has some important issues 
buried within it that I think bear careful scrutiny, especially by 
people in our Ministry of Agriculture, we look forward to 
hearing as this process unfolds. I mean clearly, until the text is 
finalized and then there’s a signature if that comes, it’s probably 

not going to be directly impacted. But we know that this work is 
here to be done, and so we look forward to the Minister of 
Agriculture working carefully with his staff even though that 
this isn’t necessarily part of what he always is wondering about. 
 
So now, Mr. Speaker, the next section is a section . . . And you 
always have to remember that the whole, the chapters that are 
here relate to all 12 countries. So sometimes chapters will come 
from a country other than Canada, but they always have 
applications right across the board. And so this chapter’s title is 
“Textiles and Apparel.” And some people think we don’t have a 
clothing industry in Saskatchewan, but we do. And we have 
people who are, you know, making handmade textiles of 
various kinds, fabrics. We also have people who are designing 
clothes, and we also have a whole series of industrial providers 
of cold-winter clothing or work clothing. This is an important 
part of our Saskatchewan economy. 
 
And what we need to make sure is that some of these rules that 
are created probably for trade between Vietnam and Japan, or 
Vietnam and Australia, or Vietnam and Canada don’t have a 
negative impact on our Canadian production. But what happens 
is that there are rules around, where do the textiles actually 
come from? Where does the cloth come from that’s used in 
making clothes? And as we all know, much of the cloth used in 
clothing around the world comes from places like China or 
Vietnam or India. Ethiopia is another country that produces a 
lot of cotton cloth. And some in the United States and I think 
some in, and probably quite a bit in Mexico, but practically then 
some of these rules are being set up around how, what rules 
apply. 
 
Now one of the interesting sections in here, given that I enjoy 
wearing my Norwegian sweaters, is that they have a clause that 
specifically relates to certain handmade or folkloric goods. And 
so it says: 
 

An importing Party [I guess that could be me] may 
identify particular textile or apparel goods of an exporting 
Party to be eligible for duty-free or preferential tariff 
treatment that the importing and exporting Parties 
mutually agree fall within: 
 

a) hand-loomed fabrics of a cottage industry; 
b) hand-printed fabrics with a pattern created with a 
wax-resistance technique; 
c) hand-made cottage industry goods made of such 
hand-loomed or hand-printed fabrics; or 
d) traditional folklore handicraft goods. 

 
Now the problem is this agreement doesn’t apply between 
Norway and Canada, so I’m kind of out of luck there. But when 
you listen to this, what you can see is that it does apply for 
some of the kinds of batik cloth and things that are created in 
some parts of Asia, which then these things are quite popular 
right across North America. 
 
Now, so practically then, these rules as it relates to textiles are 
quite specific. And they may have implications for us in 
Saskatchewan, but obviously this isn’t an area that’s as crucial 
as some of the issue around the GMO [genetically modified 
organisms] products and others that are listed in the previous 
chapter. So, Mr. Speaker, that’s chapter 4 on textiles and 



7806 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2015 

apparel but, practically, some of these issues that are mentioned 
here will show up in some of these other paragraphs. 
 
So the next chapter that we’re dealing with relates, the title is 
called “Customs Administration and Trade Facilitation.” This is 
chapter 5, and basically it’s a straightforward comment. It says, 
“Each Party shall ensure that its customs procedures are applied 
in a manner that is predictable, consistent and transparent.” 

 
Now that’s a good goal for any government. I think we’d like 
some of those . . . I think some of those goals for some of the 
issues we were talking about the last few days here in this 
legislature — predictable, consistent, and transparent — that 
would be, I think, quite a good goal. 
 
But what happens here is that, on the customs issues, they want 
to end up having a whole system whereby the information is 
provided, gives the opportunity for traders, for people who are 
buying and selling goods to get advance rulings as to what 
kinds of custom fees there might be in the operation. It also 
talks at length about how to put in some automated systems of 
analyzing the trade that does take place, and between Canada 
and the United States we’ve seen quite a few systems put into 
place on the immigration side. This is saying that on the 
customs side that should work. 
 
We also know on the customs side between Canada and the US 
[United States] there are substantial pre-clearance arrangements 
before you get to the actual border. Well this clause that they 
have, or this section of this chapter in this agreement, deals with 
putting in some of those types of arrangements for the 
international trade between the 12 different countries. 
 
So now for members at home who are wondering what all of 
the bellowing is in the background, I’d have to say that it’s one 
of the members from Regina that is a fairly steady patter in the 
background. And it’s almost as if I’m giving this speech over at 
Agribition, but unfortunately I will just continue and provide 
the information that’s here. 
 
What we know also is that the goal in this Trans-Pacific 
Partnership is to speed up trade and make trade happen as 
quickly as possible. And so it has provisions around express 
trade, express shipments, and things like that. Now practically 
once again, in this area it continues to say that the best practice 
is to have as much information available as possible, to have it 
as transparent as possible, so that anybody who is trading 
between the parties, between the countries, is able to do that in 
as efficient a way as possible. And why do we enter into these 
agreements? I think go right back to the original preamble 
clause, which then says that more trade and more exchange is 
good for all of society, even including reduction of poverty and 
dealing with increased, better public welfare for everybody. 
 
So now we go to chapter 6, and this is trade remedies. And 
basically this builds on, and once again we have to remember 
that all of this refers back to the Marrakesh Agreement which 
created the World Trade Organization. And so each decade or 
each agreement that’s reached tries to improve on things that 
aren’t working so well in traditional trading arrangements and 
then setting forward some new ideas, some new plans. And I 
think that, you know, practically here one of the things that is 
being talked about is how to safeguard or protect your own 

domestic industry. So the first definition starts out, “domestic 
industry.” 
 

domestic industry means, with respect to an imported 
good, the producers as a whole of the like or directly 
competitive good operating within the territory of a Party, 
or those producers whose collective production of the like 
or directly competitive good constitutes a major proportion 
of the total domestic production of that good. 

 
[19:45] 
 
So in other words, there’s a domestic industry that provides 
most of the milk for a community, or most of some other 
product — most of the furniture or most of anything like that. 
What this attempts to . . . I mean the goal here is to set up some 
safeguards to make sure that you are not totally wiping out your 
domestic industries. Now we know that this becomes a concern. 
I think the clauses around the automobile manufacturing 
industry is one that’s dealt with more specifically in another 
area but it is an example of a domestic industry that may or may 
not continue. I know in Australia for years they had their own 
automobile production, and I think they still have some but 
none of it is locally owned. It’s all owned from some of the 
international companies and that ends up changing some of 
what happens in local communities. And the question becomes, 
how do you provide a balance in dealing with that? 
 
Now what happens in this whole section, in the safeguard 
section, is that it tries to set some rules about how to protect 
domestic industries, but also, if they are damaged or if they are 
destroyed, what kind of compensation needs to be paid. Now I 
don’t think this one specifically deals with the logging industry, 
but this is another one where Saskatchewan’s a bit on the edge 
of the discussion in forestry and logging when the logging 
disputes arise with the United States. But often the issue 
becomes, well what’s the compensation that is the perceived 
damage or the real damage in Oregon or Georgia or wherever 
the damage is perceived to take place? 
 
And so what’s happening in this particular section of this 
Trans-Pacific Partnership is trying to set out the rules that apply 
specifically to this agreement and then having them tied back to 
the GATT [General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade] 
agreement 1994, the Marrakesh Agreement. And so this issue is 
one where we need to watch pretty carefully what’s happening. 
 
And I know that some of the articles that look at this agreement 
in whole will refer back to this area about the compensation for 
damage to domestic industries, antidumping and countervailing, 
duty proceedings and the whole methods of protection. What 
we know is that under GATT we have some areas right now 
where Canada is contemplating some kind of countervailing 
duty to deal with some of the things that we’ve, some of the 
areas where we’re trading right now. We know in the forestry or 
the logging that the agreements expired and something’s going 
to happen, and we don’t quite know exactly what. 
 
And so once again we have these rules and these ways to 
resolve them. And they look good on paper until you get down 
to trying to enforce them and then obviously, as we’ll see later, 
there’s a whole appeal section which allows for countries or 
parties to appeal quite extensively. But that’s what is designed 



November 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7807 

and that’s what we accept. But I think we need to know whether 
any of our Saskatchewan businesses or products are going to 
get caught up in some of these processes, and that’s why we 
need a thorough review of what’s going on. 
 
So the next chapter is chapter 7 and it’s called “Sanitary and 
Phytosanitary Measures.” This is one where I think the Minister 
of Agriculture and Food probably has lots of concerns and lots 
of interest, but it relates to the scope. It basically says: 
 

1. This Chapter shall apply to all sanitary and 
phytosanitary measures of a Party that may, directly or 
indirectly, affect trade between the Parties. 
 
2. Nothing in this Chapter prevents a Party from adopting 
or maintaining halal requirements for food and food 
products in accordance with Islamic law. 

 
So that’s the scope of this chapter. But it’s about food and it’s 
about using kind of food rules to restrict trade. And I don’t 
think we’ve gone a month in Saskatchewan without some 
article about some rule somewhere that’s caused problems for a 
product, an agricultural product that we have in Saskatchewan 
that’s bumped up against a trade rule. And so this is an area that 
we need to take a careful look. 
 
So then I think obviously we start out with the definitions and 
clearly one that we need to look at is called import check, and 
that means: 
 

an inspection, examination, sampling, review of 
documentation, test or procedure, including laboratory, 
organoleptic or identity, conducted at the border by an 
importing Party or its representative to determine if a 
consignment complies with the sanitary and phytosanitary 
requirements of the importing Party. 

 
I’ve been at the border south of Estevan there where trucks are 
being held up because a complaint’s been made and it appears 
difficult to sort it out. I know when I was in my law practice, 
quite often we were getting calls from down there at the various 
brokers’ offices where they needed some legal advice because 
there were barriers that were related to the sanitary or 
phytosanitary rules, the measures that were there. And so 
having a clear way of developing these and also then making 
sure that what’s done is done in a fair way can go a long way to 
making sure that our trade is good. 
 
So what are the objectives of this chapter? Well they’re to 
“protect human, animal or plant life or health in the territories 
of the Parties while facilitating and expanding trade by utilising 
a variety of means to address and seek to resolve sanitary and 
phytosanitary issues.” And so this is an area where, you know, 
the wording is a bit strange, a bit concerning because it says that 
a party can put in some provisions to protect human, animal, or 
plant life by utilizing a variety of means to address and seek to 
resolve sanitary and phytosanitary issues while at the same time 
facilitating and expanding trade. 
 
And the way these clauses are put together, it almost says, well 
this is one of your tools as a party, as a country, when you’re 
trying to expand your trade, is to create some of these rules. 
And this is exactly the kind of thing that we as Saskatchewan 

people, as Saskatchewan producers should be worried about. 
Because one of the big sort of goals of the government appears 
to be to, you know — which I think we agree with — is to 
expand the trade in food, both animal and plant life. And if in 
fact these parties, these 11 other countries have an ability to 
facilitate and expand trade by utilizing some of these rules in a 
way, we need to make sure that this clause doesn’t set up a 
barrier for some of our trade. And so that one clause alone has 
some concerns. 
 
But also the objectives around this phytosanitary and sanitary 
rules is to “reinforce and build on the SPS Agreement.” Now 
the SPS Agreement [The WTO Agreement on the Application 
of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures] I think relates to the 
world trade kinds of issues as it relates to agriculture. And so 
it’s basically to work with the existing agreements that are 
there. 
 
The chapter also wants to strengthen communication, 
consultation, and co-operation between parties, and there’s 
competent authorities and primary representatives that will 
work at that. And so I think what we will see once again in this 
chapter as we move forward is a setting up of another 
committee or at least some technical things to make sure there’s 
an exchange of information. 
 
The object is also there to make sure these measures 
implemented do not create unjustified obstacles to trade. And I 
think what we’re concerned is that that particular (d) clause will 
override the (a) part, where it seems to hint that you could use 
some of these things to expand your own trade. And I don’t 
think that’s the intention of this, but words matter and so we 
need to raise that concern here. It also once again comments on 
enhancing the transparency of the whole process and making 
sure that all of the measures are clear, that all of the people who 
are doing the trading know what the sanitary and phytosanitary 
rules are. 
 
And finally it’s to “encourage the development and adoption of 
international standards, guidelines and recommendations, and 
promote their implementation by the Parties.” So this whole 
section has clearly some good goals but it’s a question of 
whether the goal of facilitating and expanding trade by one 
party against another using some of these rules or, as it says in 
another part here, making sure that these kinds of rules aren’t 
developed into unjustified obstacles to trade, there appears to be 
a bit of a conflict in that objective section of this agreement. 
 
Now this is the kind of thing that can be pointed out to officials. 
And as the matters are going forward it may be that the wording 
can be corrected, or that the wording is better in Spanish or 
French and we can have the wording come back to the English 
to correct any implications that seem to be there in this 
wording. 
 
One of the parts of this is also, as I said earlier, to set up a 
committee. And so the parties, all the different countries, will 
establish a committee on sanitary and phytosanitary measures, 
and it’s composed of government representatives from each of 
the countries. And that committee, obviously its job is to make 
sure these procedures work well, and hopefully that they 
prevent any of them from becoming unjustified obstacles to 
trade. 



7808 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2015 

This committee actually has more instructions attached to it 
than all of the other committees we’ve seen so far, and I think 
that’s a recognition that in this area there are problems that 
continually arise and people figure out new ways to create 
barriers to trade, using sanitary or phytosanitary measures. 
 
Every time I see the word “phytosanitary,” I remember our 
wedding day. And people will say, well what does that have to 
do with it? Well we received a bunch of gifts in the States that 
were plants, and somehow we had to get these plants to our 
home in Vancouver. And it turned out we had to go and get 
phytosanitary certificates for something like six house plants 
that we received as wedding gifts. And so every time I see that 
word, I think about some of those plants. We don’t have them 
anymore. But maybe they were trying to restrict the ability of 
those American plants getting into Canada. I don’t know. But 
anyway . . . 
 
[20:00] 
 
Now so one of the issues that’s also recognized here, and it’s a 
good clause and it’s I think a positive statement, but basically 
this chapter also deals with the very good efforts around the 
world to develop pest- or disease-free areas, or areas of low pest 
or disease prevalence. And clearly we’ve had examples of some 
of these pest issues both in the livestock area and on the seed 
and plant and fruit area as well. And anything that can be 
developed in agreements like this to further the protection of 
whole areas of production from disease, I think is an important 
thing to do. And so if there’s anything that we as Saskatchewan 
people can add to this mix, I think we should make sure that we 
are part of that. 
 
So now another issue that comes in this area is a term called 
equivalence. And it’s I guess in some ways a bugaboo no matter 
what topic you’re on, but it always relates to the fact that the 
Saskatchewan legislature thinks they know better how to draft 
the law than the Alberta legislature or the Manitoba legislature. 
And every once in a while you have to set up a law that says, 
well your law that you’ve created in your jurisdiction is just as 
good as our law; you just did it in a different way. 
 
And this agreement says that the parties are going to 
acknowledge that there’s a recognition of the equivalence of 
sanitary and phytosanitary measures. And so in other words, 
we’ll accept your rules saying these plants or animals are 
sanitary, and then in turn you accept ours. And this is one of 
those areas where it can become very, very contentious and, you 
know, we know a number of the livestock diseases have 
constant battles around equivalence of laws and who’s doing 
what kinds of procedures, and how is that kind of protection 
there. 
 
And so one of the questions here is, does this commit to 
equivalence without review of actual laws or does it have some 
more to it? And I think, you know, that it’s still obviously being 
finalized in some ways, and this may be another area where our 
people in our department take a good hard look at what’s here 
to make sure that we’re not caught again in some issue that 
arises. 
 
Now there’s a clause directly . . . [inaudible] . . . science and 
risk analysis. I think that’s a signal that it’s important to use 

scientific evidence in developing this, but it’s also a signal or a 
warning that sometimes these rules are created, not based on 
science, but on something else. And so how one challenges 
rules that have no scientific basis or little scientific basis 
becomes a major issue in the long-term use and enforcement of 
an agreement like this. 
 
So once again, as a province that has a big or strong agricultural 
base, this whole area needs to be, I think, carefully watched by 
our Minister of Agriculture and the civil servants who work 
with him in this area and possibly some of the public health 
people as well. 
 
And so because we will be in some way tied in with all this, and 
if we don’t totally understand how it affects what we’re doing, 
then it could cause us some difficulties. And the last thing we 
want is for some of our traders, some of our people selling 
goods into other countries to come to us and say, what’s this 
rule? We didn’t know about that. And so I think that this whole 
area around sanitary, phytosanitary requirements, the 
certificates that are involved, and the ability to move plants or 
animal products back and forth across various borders, is 
important — very important for Saskatchewan — and we hope 
that work is done to make sure that these things are protected. 
 
Now it’s also interesting to note, and this goes back to some of 
my years as Attorney General and then as Health minister, that 
this particular chapter includes a clause on emergency 
measures. And these kinds of situations, and it talks about 
different situations that may arise, do affect trade. There’s no 
question about that. But sometimes there are also questions that 
relate to spread of disease, protection of public in general, and 
also protection of water sources and things like that. And so this 
section on, I guess it’s article 7.14, says that: 
 

If a Party [and if a country] adopts an emergency measure 
that is necessary for the protection of human, animal or 
plant life or health, the Party shall promptly notify the 
other Parties of that measure through the primary 
representative and the relevant contact point . . . The Party 
that adopts the emergency measure shall take into 
consideration any information provided by other Parties in 
response to the notification. 

 
And I think this is clearly important that this whole situation is 
dealt with in as expeditious a way as possible. But I think it’s 
important that it’s here, because it says that basically an 
emergency in one country is not going to be contained to that 
country and, given our modern world, it’s going to be in all 12 
of these countries and possibly into the whole world circuit 
very, very, very quickly. And so the importance of moving back 
and forth very quickly is important. 
 
So anyway it’s a whole area of importance for what we’re 
doing, but once again, it’s in a trade agreement because these 
types of rules, these sanitary and phytosanitary rules, have been 
used either explicitly or indirectly to affect trade. And so by 
putting them right here, it identifies that they are concerns that 
need to be addressed by all of the countries involved and that 
need to be monitored by all the countries involved. 
 
So the next chapter we’re going to get to is a chapter on 
technical barriers to trade. And this whole one, once again it’s 



November 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7809 

here because countries do set up, I guess, complicated ways of 
keeping certain products, certain kinds of things out of their 
country. And when that happens, it does affect trading and it 
does affect what kinds of things can be done. 
 
So in this particular chapter, the objective “. . . is to facilitate 
trade, including by eliminating unnecessary technical barriers to 
trade, enhancing transparency, and promoting greater regulatory 
cooperation and good regulatory practice.” 
 
Now this kind of language is language that we’ve seen in our 
Agreement on Internal Trade in Canada, in some of the Western 
Canada trade arrangements. And there’s always positives to it, 
but there’s also some parts that can create some difficulty. And 
so here we have one that affects 40 per cent of the world’s 
trade. And I think it’s important that we understand what kind 
of technical barriers we have that may be affected by some of 
the provisions here, because clearly the goal is to lower the 
barriers and allow for more goods from other places to enter 
here in the same way that our goods can enter into many new 
markets around the world. 
 
And often as a smaller jurisdiction we end up not benefiting to 
quite the same extent that we think. Maybe some of the larger 
corporations will get some benefits, or corporations that are 
centred somewhere else but do a lot of business in our area, 
they may get some benefit. But some of our local businesses, 
the small, medium enterprises that are dealt with in a different 
chapter, they don’t do as well. 
 
And so these rules in this whole area once again are quite 
detailed, and they attempt to, I think, address various things that 
countries have done to restrict trade using their rules. And 
because most countries want to protect what they think are their 
own unique ways of protecting their trade through technical 
regulations or conformity assessments or other kinds of 
regulations — I guess this is the red tape part of this 
Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement — then there’s a lot of 
words here, because every country is trying to protect the kinds 
of things that they do right now. 
 
And I think our response when we look at this is to say, well 
this is a protection for many of our businesses in Canada as 
well. And so ultimately it comes down to how you reduce or 
remove some of these barriers that are going to be of benefit to 
everybody, while at the same time keeping those rules that 
protect something that’s important for Canadians. 
 
And once again, what this agreement does under article 8.1 is to 
set up a committee on technical barriers to trade. And it seems 
like each chapter we get into, the number of tasks given to the 
committee gets longer and longer. And so this committee’s job 
is to basically say, and I think the language is quite telling, it 
says: 
 

Through the Committee, the Parties shall intensify their 
joint work in the fields of technical regulations, 
conformity assessment procedures and standards with a 
view to facilitating trade between and among the Parties. 

 
And I think, you know, we’ve heard that kind of language 
talking about some of our trade agreements in Canada is about 
that intensifying the work. And what it often means is, well yes, 

look hard at this stuff, but be careful. Don’t give up anything 
that we’ve got that we want to protect. And so part of the 
challenge here is to make sure that it’s transparent, what’s going 
on; make sure that our industries, our traders know what the 
rules are. And then I think it also is what I would call a listening 
committee, a committee that listens very carefully to various 
business segments, industry segments as to the kinds of rules 
that don’t make any sense to them. 
 
[20:15] 
 
I know that some of us have spent a number of years on the 
Council of State Governments; Midwestern Legislative 
Conference Canada, Midwest relations committee. And at every 
meeting that we go to, we have some discussion about the type 
of work that this committee is going to do; in other words, the 
trucking industry will say, look, if you just made the rules the 
same on both sides of the border, it would be a lot easier for us 
in certain areas. And we do some of that, but it always seems to 
take awhile. 
 
Agriculture, there are different standards for certain kinds of 
products that become a problem. We know that things like 
breakfast cereals, there are different standards on one side of the 
border from the other here in North America. And then when 
you use the same kind of discussion around 12 countries, you 
can just imagine the discussions that are there and the types of 
protections that people are concerned about versus how you can 
do that. And so here we have another committee on technical 
barriers to trade, and it’s going to intensify the joint work on 
dealing with red tape on international trade. 
 
So I think, you know, it’s good that it’s here, but I think the 
amount of discussion, the ways that they’ve described the 
different activities that they’re going to do, it’s clear that this is 
an area where everybody knows that there’s a lot of work to do. 
So that’s the chapter. 
 
Then we get into the annexes to chapter 8, and the first one is 
one that is quite interesting. We go immediately into wine and 
distilled spirits, so this annex applies to wine and distilled 
spirits. Effectively I think it’s a way for countries to protect and 
nurture their own businesses in the wine area and distilled 
spirits area. So I think the wording is important for Canada, and 
for us here in Saskatchewan, because it does relate to some of 
the ways that we create some space for development of industry 
like that. 
 
Clearly Australia or New Zealand or the United States would be 
quite willing to have wide open rules on sales of wine and 
distilled spirits, and it would cause a substantial disruption in 
some of the areas of our country that have been able to slowly 
but surely develop some very good skills in making some good 
wines that are available around the world. But they do have a 
cocoon of protection which we don’t always acknowledge and 
understand. And so how we deal with that becomes then a part 
of this agreement. 
 
So the key point, I think, is that each party, each country shall 
make information about its domestic laws and regulations 
concerning wine and distilled spirits publicly available. In other 
words, if you do have rules that protect your industry in 
Canada, well you are required to make them public, make sure 



7810 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2015 

everybody understands what they are, and make sure that 
everybody has an understanding of that protective thing that 
you’re doing. 
 
It also requires that there are clear, specific, truthful, accurate, 
and not misleading-to-the-consumer labels on wine and spirits, 
and that these labels are legible to the consumer and that the 
labels are firmly affixed. So that’s kind of interesting that in an 
agreement like this, it gets down to something as 
straightforward as that. But I think what it’s getting at is that 
labels are important. We don’t want counterfeit or substitute 
alcohol getting special treatment in various countries, and this 
area is an area of concern as far as international trade is 
discussed in the agreement. 
 
So this annex really sets out a lot of detail about the product, the 
wine product and how it can be protected. And clearly the 
reason for that detail is the fact that there are some very special 
trade rules that do protect in a national way some of the 
products that come from various parts of the world. And as we 
know, there’s probably wine produced or some spirits produced 
in every one of the 12 countries. Some of them are very local, 
but some of them are very transportable across the Pacific 
Ocean to other parts of the whole region. So that’s the first 
annex to chapter 8. 
 
The second annex relates to information and communications 
technology products. And this goes back to something we were 
talking about this afternoon, and that relates to cryptography. So 
they very clearly defined four terms in this section, and the first 
one is cryptography. And it means: 
 

the principles, means or methods for the transformation of 
data in order to hide its information content, prevent its 
undetected modification or prevent its unauthorized use; 
and is limited to the transformation of information using 
one or more secret parameters (for example, crypto 
variables) or associated key management. 

 
So that’s the description of cryptography. 
 
And then the next definition is the definition of the word 
“encryption” and: 
 

encryption means the conversion of data (plaintext) into a 
form that cannot be easily understood without subsequent 
re-conversion [or] (ciphertext) through the use of a 
cryptographic algorithm. 

 
So okay. Well then the third definition is cryptographic 
algorithm or cipher. And a “cryptographic algorithm or cipher 
means a mathematical procedure or formula for combining a 
key with plaintext to create a ciphertext.” 
 
And then the fourth definition is the word “key.” And so the 
word “key” means: 
 

a parameter used in conjunction with a cryptographic 
algorithm that determines its operation in such a way that 
an entity with knowledge of the key can reproduce or 
reverse the operation, while an entity without knowledge 
of the key cannot. 

 

So in other words, this section relates to that ability to basically 
put information that’s important into a secret form and then 
transmit it or do whatever with it, store it, and then use a key to 
get back in and actually see what the information is. And so 
this, it’s attached to this particular chapter because there are 
concerns — and I think primarily in the United States, but I 
think probably in Japan and in Canada — around the ability to 
protect intellectual property in this whole area of information 
technology. 
 
And I think a little later, although maybe I should reference 
some of that now, is comments that have come from Mr. 
Balsillie from BlackBerry business. And he’s quite concerned 
about what we have done here, and he’s not alone. And I know 
Mr. Michael Geist has also raised some issues in this area. But 
Mr. Balsillie says that protecting the kind of intellectual 
property that he and his partners had in BlackBerry is going to 
be quite difficult under this Trans-Pacific Partnership, or it 
needs to be much better explained how it’s going to be 
protected. And the concern is that the rules that Canada has had, 
which have been beneficial to the IT [information technology] 
business, will be changed, and virtually what’s happening with 
this agreement is that the US rules are being overlaid over the 
12 nations. 
 
And so I think I will once again go to Mr. Michael Geist from 
University of Ottawa and use his article as a way to describe 
this concern that comes up in this area and then some 
subsequent chapters. 
 
So Mr. Michael Geist writes on November 18th, 2015, and the 
title of his piece here is Why the TPP is a Canadian Digital 
Policy Failure. He says: 
 

The official release of the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a 
global trade agreement between 12 countries including 
Canada, the United States, and Japan, has sparked a heated 
public debate over the merits of the deal. Leading the 
opposition is Research in Motion founder Jim Balsillie, 
who has described the TPP as one of Canada’s worst-ever 
policy moves that could cost the country billions of 
dollars. 
 
My weekly technology . . . column [the Toronto Star 
version] notes that as Canadians assess the 6,000 page 
agreement, the implications for digital policies such as 
copyright and privacy should command considerable 
attention. On those fronts, the agreement appears to be a 
major failure. Canadian negotiators adopted a defensive 
strategy by seeking to maintain existing national laws and 
doing little to extend Canadian policies to other countries. 
The result is a deal that the U.S. has rightly promoted as 
“Made in America.” 
 
In fact, even the attempts to preserve Canadian law were 
unsuccessful. The TPP will require several important 
changes to domestic copyright rules including an 
extension in the term of copyright that will keep works out 
of the public domain for an additional 20 years. New 
Zealand, which faces a similar requirement, has estimated 
that the extension alone will cost its economy NZ$55 
million per year. The Canadian cost is undoubtedly far 
higher. 



November 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7811 

In addition to term extension, Canada is required to add 
new criminal provisions to its digital lock rules and to 
provide the U.S. with confidential reports every six 
months on efforts to stop the entry of counterfeit products 
into the country. 
 
While these are all changes that reflect U.S. standards, 
there was little effort to promote some of Canada’s more 
innovative copyright policies in the agreement. The U.S. 
has allowed Canada to keep its “notice-and-notice” policy 
for Internet providers, but on the condition that no other 
TPP country may adopt it. Meanwhile, Canadian policies 
that promote user generated content, limit statutory 
damages, or establish consumer exceptions are all missing 
from TPP. 
 
The absence of Canadian policies in the agreement is also 
reflected in the privacy and e-commerce provisions. 
Canada features national privacy laws, but the TPP allows 
countries to meet the privacy requirements with 
enforceable “voluntary undertakings,” a nod to the weaker 
U.S. approach. Similarly, Canadian net neutrality 
regulations and anti-spam rules cannot be found in the 
TPP, which instead features watered-down versions of 
each. 
 
The TPP also bans certain digital protections that may 
come back to haunt Canadian policy makers. 

 
I think he’s referring to us as legislators. 
 
[20:30] 
 

For example, it restricts legislative initiatives that require 
storage of personal information in Canada or that limit 
data transfers outside the country. 
 
It also creates a ban on rules requiring the disclosure of 
software source code found in mass-market products, a 
provision that has cyber-security experts and consumer 
advocates concerned about the implications for detecting 
harmful software or products that fail to comply with 
consumer protection or environmental standards (such as 
Volkswagen’s emissions violations). 
 
The agreement even reverses the longstanding Canadian 
hands-off approach to the Internet. While Canada has 
previously rejected regulation of the domain name system, 
the TPP mandates domain name registrant information 
disclosure requirements and intellectual property 
protections for each country-code domain, a remarkable 
intervention into Internet policy. 
 
Failure to . . . comply with the agreement would subject 
the Canadian government to potential lawsuits under the 
TPP’s investor-state dispute settlement rules. With Canada 
already facing a $500 million lawsuit from Eli Lilly over 
its patent rules, the TPP could usher in a wave of claims 
focused on challenges to flexible copyright rules, privacy 
protections and net neutrality regulations. 
 
Proponents of the TPP will likely point to gains in other 
areas to justify support for the deal. Yet digital policies 

form the backbone of the innovation economy, which may 
be hamstrung by an agreement that does little to advance 
Canadian law and policy. 

 
That’s the opinion of Michael Geist. He is a careful, thoughtful 
writer about IT law, and I think we should listen carefully to 
people like him as this matter proceeds forward. 
 
And so practically, this whole area of protection of the 
cryptography is just the start of some of these issues. Some of 
the other items that he’s referencing we will hit as we move into 
further chapters in this agreement. 
 
So the next section of this one, as it relates to information and 
communication technology products, talks about developing 
compatibility of the various equipment products and that there’s 
a goal to, you know, continue that compatibility. Clearly that’s 
not there and we know that or we see that in various products 
that are in use. It’s much better than it was a few years ago but 
it’s still a concern. 
 
Also covered in this area around the technical barriers to trade 
are pharmaceuticals. And this is another area where people have 
raised concerns from a number of different angles, but I’ll tell 
you a bit about the annex here, which is called 8-C, and then I 
will refer to some comments that we get from some other 
sources. And once again this is just the first crack at dealing 
with pharmaceuticals. There’s more as we proceed into some of 
the other chapters. 
 
But effectively this pharmaceutical annex applies to: 
 

the preparation, adoption and application of [all] technical 
regulations, standards, conformity assessment procedures, 
marketing authorisation and notification procedures of 
central government bodies, other than technical 
specifications prepared by governmental entities for 
production or consumption requirements of such entities, 
and sanitary or phytosanitary measures, that may affect 
trade in pharmaceuticals products between the Parties. 

 
And so it’s talking about these rules and these technical rules 
and once again transparency’s the key. The idea is to make sure 
that this information is available so that companies trading in 
this area will know what the information is. But it also spends 
some time talking about how to share information, and part of 
the difficulty is that it appears to be getting at some of the 
concerns coming from the United States around how countries 
around the world will produce pharmaceuticals in ways that 
they think are causing difficulty for the pricing of their products 
in United States and around the world. And so it’s an interesting 
point and we’ll see how this affects what happens with 
pharmaceuticals. 
 
I do have some information though that registers some major 
concerns about this. And one of the first articles is from . . . 
There’s an article from basically The New England Journal of 
Medicine and then also from the Médecins Sans Frontières, the 
Doctors Without Borders. And I’m going to start with these 
two. I also have some more information from members of 
congress in the United States. 
 
So the first issue, and this is one actually written in July by a 



7812 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2015 

lawyer named Amy Kapczynski and it’s quoted in The New 
England Journal of Medicine dated July 16, 2015. And I guess 
the citation would be 373, pages 201 to 203. And this one is 
titled, “The Trans-Pacific Partnership — Is it Bad for Your 
Health?” And basically the article goes like this. It says: 
 

International trade deals once focused primarily on tariffs. 
As a result, they had little direct effect on health, and 
health experts could reasonably leave their details to trade 
professionals. Not so today. Modern trade pacts have 
implications for a wide range of health policy issues, from 
medicine prices to tobacco regulation, not only in the 
developing world but also in the United States. 
 
The Trans-Pacific Partnership Agreement is a case in 
point. A massive trade deal now reportedly on the verge of 
completion, the TPP has nearly 30 chapters. A draft 
chapter on intellectual property alone runs 77 
single-spaced pages. 

 
Now I have to make a comment. This article is dated July, and 
they’re dealing with some chapters. They don’t have the whole 
agreement like we do now in November, but basically the point 
that this writer is making in the summer is that there are a 
number of issues that do affect health. 
 
And so some of the protections that have been developed are in 
a situation where the cost of medicine is going to be affected 
and nobody knows exactly how it’s going to be affected. And 
so what we do know though is that some venture capitalists 
have been purchasing old drugs or the rights to produce old 
drugs and dramatically increasing the prices because their 
argument is it’s become more of a boutique type of drug. What 
this writer is identifying, as a trade lawyer, is that there are a 
number of things that are happening that will raise some 
questions about the costs for pharmaceuticals and for what is 
happening in this document that we’re looking at tonight. 
 
The second article that I have is dated November 5th, and so 
this is after the text is out. It’s a brief official press release 
issued from Doctors Without Borders. It goes this way, and it’s 
November 5th, 2015: 
 

The Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) is a trade agreement 
negotiated between the U.S. and eleven other Pacific Rim 
nations: Australia, Brunei Darussalam, Canada, Chile, 
Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore 
and Vietnam. After more than five years of negotiations 
conducted in secret without the opportunity for public 
review, the agreed text, which will now be submitted to 
national processes for final signature and ratification, has 
been officially and publicly released. Doctors Without 
Borders/Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) remains 
extremely concerned about the inclusion of dangerous 
provisions that would dismantle public health safeguards 
enshrined in international law and restrict access to 
price-lowering generic medicines for millions of people. 
 
MSF statement by Judit Rius Sanjuan, US manager and 
legal policy advisor for MSF’s Access Campaign: 

 
MSF remains gravely concerned about the effects that the 
Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal will have on access to 

affordable medicines for millions of people, if it is 
enacted. Today’s official release of the agreed TPP text 
confirms that the deal will further delay price-lowering 
generic competition by extending and strengthening 
monopoly market protections for pharmaceutical 
companies. 
 
The TPP is a bad deal for medicine: it’s bad for 
humanitarian medical treatment providers such as MSF, 
and it’s bad for people who need access to affordable 
medicines around the world, including in the United 
States. 
 
At a time when the high price of life-saving medicines and 
vaccines is increasingly recognized as a barrier to effective 
medical care, it is very concerning to see that the U.S. 
government and pharmaceutical companies have 
succeeded in locking in rules that will keep medicine 
prices high for longer and limit the tools that governments 
and civil society have to try to increase generic 
competition. 
 
For example, if enacted, the TPP will not allow national 
regulatory authorities to use existing data that 
demonstrates a biological product’s safety and efficacy to 
authorize the sale of competitor products, even in the 
absence of patents. The TPP would also force 
governments to extend existing patent monopolies beyond 
current 20-year terms at the request of pharmaceutical 
companies, and to redefine what type of medicine deserves 
a patent, including mandating the granting of new patents 
for modifications of existing medicines. 
 
The provisions in the TPP text will not only raise the price 
of medicines and cause unnecessary suffering, but they 
also represent a complete departure from the U.S. 
government’s previous commitments to global health, 
including safeguards included in the U.S.’s 2007 “New 
Trade Policy.” 
 
It is not too late to prevent further restrictions on access to 
affordable medicines in the TPP. As the text now goes to 
national legislatures for final approval, we urge all TPP 
governments to carefully consider whether the agreed TPP 
text reflects the direction they want to take on access to 
affordable medicines and promotion of biomedical 
innovation; if it does not, the TPP should be modified or 
rejected. 

 
And so this is a press statement from Doctors Without Borders 
on November 5th. That’s a couple of weeks ago. And it sends 
up a lot of red flags about this agreement. And I’m still dealing 
in a section, in the annex parts, as it relates to some of the rules 
and regulations. 
 
The next annex area is Annex 8-D and this is around cosmetics. 
And so people often don’t think about the competitive world in 
cosmetics, but clearly there’s a lot of money to be made in this 
area, and the trade and the protection and the rules are once 
again a subject of great discussion between the various 
countries. And there are technical aspects for production of 
cosmetics that relate to chemicals or the other things that are 
there, but it also has this very interesting mix of sanitary and 



November 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7813 

phytosanitary measures because clearly cosmetics that have 
problems, in that they create disease or injury to individuals, 
also need to be dealt with in a very direct way. 
 
[20:45] 
 
So there are quite a few pages dealing with these cosmetic 
issues, and once again it comes down to a number of issues 
around protective regulations from a national basis, the fact that 
products need to be very carefully labelled with authorizations 
and notification numbers. And anybody who watches some of 
these CSI [Crime Scene Investigation] or some of these other 
shows on TV knows that you can end up tracking down batch 
numbers for things like cosmetics, and this is an example of 
where that kind of information is being used in trade regulation. 
And so this whole chapter is about trade regulation being done 
in a way that limits the ability of products to be marketed more 
broadly, and it’s also about the use of trade regulation to protect 
your own local companies. 
 
And so cosmetics is once again another area where it’s going to 
be part of the committee for discussion, and they’re going to set 
up good practices and try to keep track of all this. And as we 
know, every time you set up another rule for a product like this 
it means that the product costs more money. And I think it’s 
clear to many of us that cosmetics are expensive already and, 
you know, there’s obviously lots of money to be made, but also 
to make sure you buy safe products that are protected 
internationally. This is maybe part of that process, but I think 
it’s more dealing with trying to protect your own local products 
in some way through a regulatory net or regime. 
 
So the next annex on chapter 8 is called . . . It’s 8-E, and that’s 
medical devices. And in this area the medical device is assigned 
the term from the global harmonization task force final 
document entitled “Definition of the terms ‘Medical Device’ 
and ‘In Vitro Diagnostic Medical Device.’” And so effectively 
it’s saying once again that medical devices and the regulations 
around medical devices are an important regulatory area that 
also needs to be looked at very carefully so that the rules don’t 
restrict trade or try to protect production in a particular country, 
and also at the same time make sure that they meet international 
standards so that patients are protected, that the clinical data 
that’s recovered from the medical devices is at a standard that’s 
going to provide the best care for individuals. 
 
And so it’s interesting that the devices will be regulated by 
different countries, and so one of the questions comes once 
again about equivalence and whether regulation by one country 
will be good in other countries. I think in this area they’re quite 
careful to say that each party — in other words, each country — 
will: 
 

. . . make its determination on whether to grant marketing 
authorisation [in other words, the ability to sell in a 
particular country] for a specific medical device on the 
basis of: 

 
(a) information, including, where appropriate, clinical 
data, on safety and efficacy; 
 
(b) information on performance, design and manufacturing 
quality of the product; 

(c) labelling information related to safety, efficacy, and 
use of the product; and 
 
(d) other matters that may directly affect the health or 
safety of the user of the product. 

 
And so once again there’s this discussion about transparency 
and about how this kind of work is going to be done. 
 
Clearly the rules in place in the 12 countries will be part of the 
discussion. We have a separate system of registering our 
equipment in Canada than the United States although there’s 
much more co-operation than there had been, but there still are 
times when we might approve something that they don’t 
approve or vice versa. Add in 10 more countries — and Mexico 
has been part of a lot of things we do in Canada and the US — 
so you add nine more countries and there are a whole number of 
areas that I think will affect this. 
 
I know many, many years ago — it probably was, I guess, 10 
years ago — I went to China as part of an advisory group to talk 
with . . . it would be like the priorities and planning committee 
of our cabinet. It was the central committee on health issues. 
And one of the issues was related to medical devices and to 
pharmaceuticals. One of the problems they had in their 
modernization of their health system to make it more . . . I’m 
not sure what’s the word. It was more market driven, I think 
was the term they used. And the problem they had was they had 
6,000 producers of pharmaceuticals and so the doctors in a 
particular town were required to use all the drugs that were 
produced in their town, whether they were any good or not. 
Similar rules around medical devices. 
 
And so I think that sometimes some of these value-added kinds 
of products can end up being ones that there are some clear 
rules, regulations in place to protect other places from them, but 
there are also times when those same rules are used to interfere 
with trade. And so this fine balance in this particular section, I 
think, relates to some of those issues. 
 
The second-last annex to chapter 8 is 8-F, and it’s called 
“Proprietary Formulas for Prepackaged Foods and Food 
Additives.” And this is another interesting one and it basically 
says: 
 

The Annex applies to the preparation, adoption and 
application of technical regulations and standards of 
central government bodies that are related to prepackaged 
foods and food additives when sold as such, except that it 
does not apply to technical specifications prepared by 
governmental entities for production or consumption 
requirements of such entities or sanitary or phytosanitary 
measures. 

 
But I think what they’re getting at is that they’re going to try to 
set standards, if they can, across the 12 countries so that if one 
place basically approves a formula for prepackaged food or 
approves the types of ingredients that are in that food, it might 
be possible to have it move right through all of the 12 countries. 
I think that this is an ambitious task. But once again, it’s an area 
where there’s a way of preventing trade or, you know, you can 
keep out some soup product that’s produced in one country 
from another because well, we just don’t know what’s in there, 



7814 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2015 

you know; that kind of a response. 
 
And so I think that once again, this agreement or this trade 
arrangement is good in that it identifies issues, but I don’t think 
it always has the answers. And clearly, being part of the 
discussion, being part of the consultation is absolutely crucial as 
this thing moves forward. 
 
And the final annex to chapter 8 is 8-G and this is organic 
products. And once again, this is an issue that’s important for 
Saskatchewan. And basically what it says is that it: 
 

. . . applies to a Party [so it applies to a country] if that . . . 
[country] is developing or maintains standards, technical 
regulations, or conformity assessment procedures relating 
to the production, processing, or labeling of products as 
organic for sale or distribution within its territory. 

 
The second paragraph then says: 
 

Parties are encouraged to take steps to: 
 
(a) exchange information on matters relating to organic 
production, certification of organic products, and related 
control systems, as appropriate; and 
 
(b) cooperate with each other to develop, improve, and 
strengthen international guidelines, standards, and 
recommendations related to trade in organic products. 

 
Now if there’s any place where our Minister of Agriculture and 
civil servants should get involved, I think this would be an area 
that is important for the future of Saskatchewan, because there’s 
no question that organic products and how those are defined 
will become a major economic driver in Saskatchewan and in 
Canada. 
 
So that chapter 8 had a lot of pieces in there. And it’s given us a 
bit of a foretaste of what’s coming up in following chapters 
because we’ll come back in some more specific, more things on 
pharmaceuticals and IT and some other areas. 
 
Now the next few chapters are interesting in that they get into 
investment and business services and the cross-border trade in 
services, financial services. And all of these kinds of things are 
sort of without rules in some ways, but have many rules. And so 
I think we’ll need to take a look at some of these too, because it 
relates to things like credit cards you’ve got in your pocket. 
And you can go to the other side of the world, get money out of 
your bank account in Saskatchewan. So how does that work? 
Like how are the rules, and where does all that come from? 
 
Well some of that will be in this agreement, but there are 
already existing arrangements or agreements within the banking 
world where this has to kind of catch up to what they’ve already 
been doing. And so I think we need to take a little bit of a look 
at this. 
 
So chapter 9 is called “Investment,” and this is actually one of 
the ones that Michael Geist referred to and some of the others 
referred to in their discussions because what it involves is how 
you settle disputes and what the conventions are. So basically 
the first definition that they have in this chapter is, “Centre 

means the International Centre for Settlement of Investment 
Disputes (ICSID) established by the ICSID Convention.” And 
that’s the one that allows for claims by companies against a 
country for something that one of their businesses have done. 
 
And when we had the reference to Eli Lilly suing the Canadian 
government for $500 million, it’s through this kind of a process. 
And so what happens is that this chapter’s quite long because it 
tries to go through all of the different rules about how to set 
some of these or how to resolve some of these issues, but it has 
many things. 
 
So the chapter’s titled “Investment,” so it defines the term 
investment. And it . . . 
 

investment means every asset that an investor owns or 
controls, directly or indirectly, that has the characteristics 
of an investment, including such characteristics as the 
commitment of capital or other resources, the expectation 
of gain or profit, or the assumption of risk. Forms that an 
investment may take include: 
 
an enterprise; 
 
shares, stock and other forms of equity participation in an 
enterprise; 
 
bonds . . . [debts], other debt instruments and loans; 
 
futures, options and other derivatives; 
 
turnkey, construction, management, production, 
concession, revenue-sharing and other similar contracts; 
 
intellectual property rights; 
 
licences, authorisations, permits and similar rights 
conferred pursuant to the Party’s [the country’s] law; and 
 
other tangible or intangible, movable or immovable 
property, and related property rights, such as leases, 
mortgages, liens and pledges. 

 
So one of my old favourites, covered bonds, I think they’re 
covered in the futures options and other derivatives, or they’re 
sort of halfway with the bonds and debentures. 
 
[21:00] 
 
But I think our Minister of SaskBuilds, some of his favourites 
are all under this topic: “turnkey, construction, management, 
production, concession, revenue-sharing and other similar 
contracts.” So investment is a very broad term. 
 
And then it goes on. One thing it says investment is not, an 
investment is not “. . . an order or judgment entered in a judicial 
or administrative action.” In other words, you can’t use this 
procedure to enforce a judgment that you’re getting on 
somebody. 
 
Investment agreement then is the next defined term, and this is 
“a written agreement.” And then it goes to say: 
 



November 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7815 

For greater certainty, a written agreement that is concluded 
and takes effect after the entry into force of this 
Agreement does not include the renewal or extension of an 
agreement in accordance with the provisions of the 
original agreement, and on the same or substantially the 
same terms and conditions as the original agreement, 
which has been concluded and entered in force prior to the 
entry into force of this Agreement. 

 
So basically they’re saying that this whole thing has to be going 
through all the processes, and everything’s in force and you 
can’t try to get an old agreement that you’ve got and rewrite it 
and somehow get it included so it’s under this new TPP [Trans-
Pacific Partnership] because you like some of the ways of 
enforcing that agreement under the TPP. And so it’s a clause 
saying that this is a prospective kind of thing. And the reason 
I’m sure for that, from reading this but also from looking at 
commentary from lawyers, is that there are some pretty 
substantial rights that are being given in this TPP, and we all 
need to understand how and why these rights are given and how 
and where they will be enforced. And so anyway, the 
investment agreement states clearly it has to be written. They’re 
not going to be enforcing any deals that are handshake deals. 
 
But then it goes on to talk about the party and all of these kinds 
of issues. And it deals with things like, you know, natural 
resource agreements. So that’s all of the natural resources. It 
deals with supply of services. Actually I think it’s worth taking 
a closer look at this because it says: 
 

. . . means a written agreement that is concluded and takes 
effect after the date of entry into force of this Agreement 
[and so this is] between an authority at the central level of 
a government of a Party and a covered investment or an 
investor of another Party and that creates an exchange of 
rights and obligations . . . 

 
So basically it’s a government or an authority owned by one 
country and they make a deal with an investor from another 
country. Then this whole clause is going to kick into effect. And 
obviously this is a kind of clause to try to protect large amounts 
of capital that go into oil and gas projects, mining projects. So 
you look at the description. So it says: 
 

with respect to natural resources that a national authority 
controls, such as oil, natural gas, rare earth . . . [metals], 
timber, gold, iron ore and other similar resources, 
including for their exploration, extraction, refining, 
transportation, distribution or sale; 
 
[or] to supply services on behalf of the Party for 
consumption by the general public for: power generation 
or distribution, water treatment or distribution, 
telecommunications, or other similar services supplied on 
behalf of the Party for consumption by the general public; 
or 
 
to undertake infrastructure projects such as the 
construction of roads [and we refer right back to question 
period today], bridges, canals, dams or pipelines or other 
similar projects; provided, however, that the infrastructure 
is not for the exclusive or predominant use and benefit of 
the government. 

So anyways, this whole clause in this ICSID agreement . . . And 
there’s arbitration rules. There’s all kinds of things that are 
involved in here, and effectively it’s these . . . This is the area 
that many commentators are concerned because it’s not entirely 
clear what the limits are on the claims that are available against 
countries. And Canada, as I say, has been subject to some of 
these kinds of claims over a number of years. And what that 
does is that it puts at risk, you know, our country and our 
taxpayers’ money, but it also gives sort of a leg up to some of 
these international suppliers. 
 
And I mean this clause and this area is of big concern to us here 
in Saskatchewan because the present Government of 
Saskatchewan has been entering into agreements with 
multi-country organizations. And so there’s usually some 
component from Canada, but we’ve got components from 
France. We’ve got other parts around the world. And so the 
question becomes is, if there are problems, do some of these 
rules here step in and override whatever kinds of protections are 
in the contracts that have been negotiated? And we don’t know 
that because we don’t necessarily get to see some of those kinds 
of clauses in the contracts that we have. 
 
And this is the area where Canadians are concerned generally 
about how some of this work is done. And obviously the reason 
to put these kinds of clauses in contracts is to provide assurance 
to large sources of capital that they can invest that capital and 
get a return on the money that’s there. But at the same time, 
there’s also concern that all of these things are done properly. 
 
For those people at home, I have not returned to Agribition — I 
think Agribition’s closed — it’s just some of the general 
bleating that we have from the government side during evening 
discussions. 
 
But anyway, I will continue to talk about this particular area, 
and I know that there are concerns that arise by many people as 
they look at this. And practically some of the concerns that have 
come relate to the litigation that arises, then how long it takes to 
sort out some of these kinds of issues. 
 
But this chapter is made for the lawyers. I think it will create 
lots of legal work for many younger lawyers, and it’s the kind 
of case that sometimes will be a career-making one. In other 
words, you’ll be working on it for 35 years and still not be 
totally resolving it. 
 
But how that works or how that provides protection, I think 
what we have to do is once again step back and say, why would 
a clause like this be in this type of agreement? And clearly it’s 
about protection of capital. It’s about protection of people who 
put money at risk. And the question we have is whether the 
protection is too strong or it’s too weighted in favour of one 
side, or if in fact there’s more that should be done to provide 
some kind of a balance. 
 
The countries that are involved in the Trans-Pacific Partnership 
at this time, many of them now do have, you know, fairly 
substantial legal systems and protections for contracts, but this 
adds another layer of protection if you’re an investor. So the 
goal obviously is to understand how that works. 
 
And so the ICSID rules and how they all apply is all laid out in 



7816 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2015 

this legislation. It has the arbitration clauses. It has various 
appeals that are available, and it has a number of the kinds of 
things that ultimately will result in resolution of issues. But 
once again, when you’ve gone through the 34 pages of the 
various rules, then you get into some of the annexes. Once 
again it’s the annexes where you can identify issues that may be 
of concern. 
 
And the first annex in this section is called “Customary 
International Law,” and this says that: 
 

The Parties [so all 12 nations] confirm their shared 
understanding that “customary international law” 
generally and as specifically referenced in Article 9.6 
(Minimum Standard of Treatment) results from a general 
and consistent practice of States that they follow from a 
sense of legal obligation. The customary international law 
minimum standard of treatment of aliens refers to all 
customary international law principles that protect the 
investments of aliens. 

 
And all I will say as a lawyer is that every word in there is put 
in there very carefully and has substantial I think protections. 
But it’s about making sure that you get all 12 nations signing on 
the dotted line that there is a minimum standard of treatment, 
and then the rules are there about how you get to understanding 
that. 
 
The next annex to chapter 9 is annex 9-B, and this is about 
expropriation. And that’s an interesting one. Sometimes 
discussions arise in a country. I think it, you know, happened 
fairly recently that there’s some discussion about expropriation 
of a mine in South America. And the question then becomes, 
well what’s the exact compensation? We know there have been 
some similar issues in I think Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan 
related to some mining properties. And clearly mining is a good 
example of where expropriation is the only remedy, or the 
expropriation process, which also includes compensation. And 
so practically what is done here is it says that, you know: 
 

The Parties [in other words, the 12 nations] confirm their 
shared understanding that: 
 
An action or a series of actions by a [country] . . . cannot 
constitute an expropriation unless it interferes with 
tangible or intangible property right or property interest in 
an investment. 

 
So in other words, it’s trying to define what kinds of things will 
constitute expropriation and then goes into international law 
around compensation. 
 
So the next annex is annex 9-C, and this one relates to 
expropriation relating to land. So the first one was expropriation 
just of property located in a country. The second one is land that 
may be owned by a company. And who knows? This kind of a 
clause may apply to some land in Saskatchewan that, if the laws 
are changed such that people are no longer qualified to be 
owners of land in Saskatchewan, that you’d end up having to 
have some dispute that arises under this. And once again, the 
Minister of Agriculture and officials there may want to see how 
this affects some of the sale of land that’s been contemplated 
recently. 

The next annex is an interesting one, but it’s basically pretty 
stand forward. And it sets out, if there are lawsuits that are 
started or procedures that are started under this legislation, it 
sets out who is served with the documents to start the dispute. 
And for Canada, I’m pleased to see it’s the office of the Deputy 
Attorney General of Canada at the Justice Building in Ottawa. 
And every country has its designated official in the document, 
and that’s good. 
 
Then we go on. Annex 9-E, and this is transfers, and so this is a 
specific clause related to Chile. And they reserve the right to do 
some transfers of their . . . I guess reserves the right of the 
Central Bank of Chile to maintain or adopt measures in 
conformity with their Chilean laws in order to ensure currency 
stability. And so in other words, they had some concerns that 
some of these rules would affect their ability to deal with their 
own financial issues in Chile, and they put in a special 
arrangement — which is what the annexes are. 
 
[21:15] 
 
Chile has also put in an annex 9-F, and it also, I think, deals 
with their foreign investment statutes and making sure that they 
continue in force. And I think a lot of those do relate to some of 
the things that have happened in the mining industry over many 
decades, and they want to protect the kinds of rules that they 
have set up which may actually be in conflict with some of the 
things that are in this agreement. 
 
The next annex is 9-G, and that relates to public debt. And this 
says that all of the countries signing this agreement recognize 
that the purchase of debt issued by a country entails commercial 
risk. And so effectively it says that public debt cannot be 
enforced through some of these procedures, because somebody 
buying the debt of another country presumably is a 
sophisticated investor and knows that there’s risk involved in 
buying debt from a country, and that’s just how it goes. So 
that’s why Canadian-US governments will have very good 
credit ratings, because the risk is quite low. But if you buy debt 
from some other countries in the world, you might get higher 
interest rates but you also get yourself into some possible 
messes with higher risk. 
 
The next annex is 9-H, and this relates to certain specific 
decisions. And so practically it exempts I think certain 
decisions, and one of them is in Australia. They have a foreign 
investment policy and some of these rules are protected. In 
Canada we have: 
 

A decision by Canada following a review under the 
Investment Canada Act, with respect to whether or not to 
permit an investment that is subject to review, shall not be 
subject to the dispute settlement provisions under Section 
B or Chapter 28 [of this agreement]. 

 
And that’s effectively protecting our Canadian Investment 
Canada Act rules. And so that’s, I think, a good thing that it’s 
there, but we’ll see where it goes. 
 
Another annex under this — and clearly there are quite a few 
annexes — that we have is 9-I, and this is “Non-Conforming 
Measures Ratchet Mechanism.” So in other words, this is a way 
to protect some of the things going on in Vietnam for a number 



November 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7817 

of years and not allow the provisions of this legislation to take 
effect immediately. Obviously they have some things that have 
been going on in Vietnam that they want to protect. 
 
And so then we go to annex 9-J, and this says that there’re 
certain claims from Chile, Peru, Mexico, and Vietnam that can’t 
go into this whole process. And 9-K relates to some Malaysian 
claims that can’t go into this process. 
 
And then 9-L then deals with arbitration clauses and all the 
different possibilities there are, and describes where some of 
these . . . how these agreements will apply or not apply relating 
to these investment agreements. It also then includes a 
substantial discussion of Mexico’s consent, or lack of consent 
. . . will not consent to the number of disputes that they have 
going through this procedure as well. And also there are further 
exemptions for Canada in this process. 
 
So practically, that whole area of investment has included in it 
once again quite a number of issues that relate to Canada and 
some of our companies that may invest in companies around the 
world. But also it does specifically relate to some of the kinds 
of things that may happen in Canada. And there, powers are 
given to corporations to sue other countries. And it’s 
prospective. It has to be agreements that take place after all of 
the ratification procedures. But we won’t know at this stage 
what kinds of issues may arise for the Canadian government. 
We also know if the Saskatchewan government does something 
that encourages or generates litigation, then it’s the federal 
government that pays for that — although I’m assuming they 
have ways of getting their money back. 
 
So the next chapter, as I said before, it relates to cross-border 
trade in services. And this is a bit of an interesting one because 
it affects all of us in some fairly direct ways. And the reason I 
say that is when you look at what they’re talking about as 
services, it appears the main services relate to travelling by air. 
And so it’s the computer reservation system services and how 
they interact between countries. It’s the ground-handling 
services at an airport and how those are organized and who 
manages those. It’s the selling and marketing of air transport 
services, so in other words, airlines involved with services and 
then specialty air services. And effectively what this I think is 
trying to do is set up some ease of travel between these 12 
countries and also, I suppose, ease of transport of goods by air. 
It looks like all of the descriptions here are involving air 
transport and doing it in a way that is enhancing of trade. 
 
And so what are the issues they’re looking at? Well the first one 
is obviously “the production, distribution, marketing, sale or 
delivery of a service.” So it’s first the service. 
 
Then it goes into “the purchase or use of, or payment for, a 
service.” So in other words, the banking or the financial 
systems that pay for the actual services. 
 
And the third area is “the access to and the use of [these] 
distribution, transport or telecommunications networks and 
services in connection with the supply of a service.” In other 
words, one country that has a dominant role in all of these 
services can’t basically use that as a way to make sure their 
products are dominating in trade in a particular area. 
 

And then the fourth area is “the presence in the Party’s territory 
of a service supplier of another Party.” So I suppose that would 
be having Delta Airlines in Regina. That’s the kind of example 
that they’re talking about. 
 
And then finally, “the provision of a bond or other form of 
financial security as a condition for the supply of a service.” So 
what they’re trying to get at is that any one of these kinds of 
services in the 12 countries, there’s an assumption that we 
would be accepting of them all working and using the services 
without provision of bond. And that is obviously a substantial 
benefit for all countries, but probably more importantly some of 
the smaller countries. But also it can become another way of 
restricting the transportation of goods into a company by 
saying, well yes, you can sell all the goods you want here, but 
we want, you know, a $5 million bond for any possible 
damages you may cause in our country with your product, and 
that’s the only way you’re going to sell things in our country. 
And this is obviously trying to get around some of that kind of 
issue. 
 
But effectively this whole chapter, at least the first part, is 
dealing with protection of air services and recognizing the 
importance of having common rules and common ways of 
dealing with that in the long term. And so once again the word 
is transparency. These rules have to be there so that people or 
companies from other countries will know what the rule is in a 
particular country so they can sell their products or do their 
business or provide their service. And so that becomes then an 
issue of importance. 
 
There is also a whole area which in some other areas is called 
equivalence, but here it’s called recognition. And I think what 
this relates to is something that we quite often see in 
Saskatchewan. We actually had some discussion of this at 
breakfast this morning when dealing with Sask Polytechnic, and 
that’s the recognition of the licensing or certification of service 
suppliers and also of people. And so if you remember, this 
morning they were talking about how they were able to 
acknowledge and accept some of the certifications that were 
coming, I think, from India and from Vietnam. And what that 
meant was then that people were able to come to Moose Jaw 
and then work and/or study there for a while, and then enter into 
some other levels of training without having great disruption in 
their training. 
 
Part of what this part of this Trans-Pacific agreement relates to 
is recognition of some of the standards, some of the 
certifications, and some of the services that are provided by 
people. And once again, it’s an important factor to include. And 
so the chapter itself is maybe a little shorter than some of the 
other ones we’ve seen.  
 
Once again then we go to the annexes to chapter 10, and I think 
maybe there’s just one annex — no, there’s two annexes. The 
first annex to chapter 10 is chapter 10-A, and it’s related to 
professional services. And effectively what it’s trying to do is, I 
think, what we’ve been trying to do in Canada for many years 
which is have the recognition of professional qualifications, 
licensing, and registration valid across provincial and territorial 
jurisdictions. This is saying here that they want to do the same 
thing across national boundaries. And I think it’s an admirable 
goal. It’s going to take awhile to do it because, once again, it’s a 



7818 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2015 

restriction of a practice or a restriction of trade kind of issue. 
But here, given the way engineers work and architects, right off 
the top it’s engineering and architectural services, and so 
temporary licensing and registration of engineers. 
 
Then it goes into legal services. And in fact the legal services 
issue has actually moved quite quickly with the development of 
international law firms, and rules have been developed that are I 
think quite effective in allowing people to provide legal services 
across borders. So this is affirming that. 
 
And then once again, because there are problems that arise in 
this whole area of professional services, there’s a development 
of a working group where each country will get representative, 
and they will work through a lot of these activities and see what 
kinds of things they can do to make sure, at least try to ease 
some of the issues that arise between jurisdictions around 
professional qualifications. So that was 10-A. 
 
[21:30] 
 
And then 10-B is one called “Express Delivery Services,” and 
so what happens is that this deals with express delivery issues. 
And it didn’t used to be an issue in the world when everything 
was under, I think it was called the International Postal Union. I 
think that’s the right term, IPU. As an old stamp collector, 
you’d see this once in a while. 
 
But now with so many commercial operations and many 
countries have turned over their commercial or their post offices 
to private corporations in whole or in part, this clause is there to 
make sure that delivery of material or delivery of packages and 
other kinds of things will be facilitated without much difficulty. 
 
So anyway I’m pleased to continue, and I guess we end up 
having many ghosts. I looked around. I didn’t see one of my 
fellow tall members of the legislature who is no longer here 
officially, but we’ll welcome him tomorrow I’m sure when he 
comes to the legislature; that’s Mr. Tim McMillan from the 
Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers. And who 
knows? We might even be at chapter 15 by the time he gets 
here tomorrow. 
 
But anyway we’re moving into some, once again, some of these 
fascinating issues where we don’t think . . . You know, I mean 
when you first glance, you look at it and you think, what does 
this have to do with Saskatchewan? But then you realize that 
it’s directly related to our businesses and what happens in this 
province. 
 
So chapter 11 is “Financial Services.” And so basically the 
financial services, it’s got a good definition: “any service of a 
financial nature.” And so it’s insurance, insurance-related 
services, banking, financial services, and then all of the 
different activities that are involved in finances. And actually 
there are pages and pages, and if anybody’s . . . I could read all 
of them. I don’t think we’ve got . . . Derivative products, I think 
they’re using some of the same terms we’ve already been 
talking about. But I think the point is that it’s a broad-based 
definition, and it’s that way for a good reason. 
 
And what everybody knows who’s involved in trade is that if 
you can’t get paid for what you sell, you won’t do it. And so 

rules that will protect the banking systems or the financial 
systems are absolutely crucial for a trade agreement, which this 
is, and it’s more than that as well. And so what we have then is 
clear rules that obviously have been developed with lawyers 
from the financial institutions and from financial institutions 
from all of the 12 countries. 
 
One of the interesting things that I know in this area is that . . . 
I’m a graduate of the University of British Columbia law 
school. And when I attended at the UBC [University of British 
Columbia] law school, we knew, you know, there were . . . I 
think there might have been one course called Asian law 
because there’s a fair bit of trade out of Vancouver. But if you 
go now and look at the curriculum or the curricula at University 
of British Columbia law school, they have professors in 
Japanese law, Chinese law, Korean law, Taiwanese law, 
Vietnamese law, Indonesian law and, you know, obviously 
Australian and New Zealand. 
 
But much of the teaching at the school involves this interesting 
combination of learning an Asian language and then learning 
the laws, and then working back and forth to facilitate the kind 
of trade that this agreement is talking about. And I know when I 
was out there — well I guess it’s 10 years ago now — for the 
50th anniversary of the law school, there was a recognition that 
we needed to train Canadians to be well versed in the law of our 
Pacific partners because that was where much of the increased 
trade that would be part of Canada is going to come. And so 
practically I think there are probably big chunks of this 
agreement that come from some of the lawyers that have been 
trained through that system, who work with that system, and 
that’s a good thing. 
 
Now the issues that arise when it comes to financial services are 
similar to the issues that arise when you’re dealing with 
agricultural products or other products, and it’s how do you 
protect your local institutions. So in other words, national 
treatment versus how to be nice to your best friends; so your 
most-favoured-nation treatment, and then everybody else. And 
so a number of the clauses in this section of the TPP relate to 
those kinds of issues. 
 
In Canada, we all know that we weathered some of the storms 
in our financial institutions in a little better fashion than what 
happens in the United States because of some of the rules that 
were put in place or kept in place by Mr. Paul Martin when he 
was the Finance minister, and Prime Minister Chrétien. They 
did that on the basis of a report of one of our prominent Regina 
citizens, Mr. Harold MacKay. And the MacKay commission, 
which he wrote after doing a lot of work, ended up providing 
some very clear guidelines about how our Canadian system 
should work as it related to the interplay between banks, 
insurance companies, and other agencies. 
 
And as a result, when you look at this type of agreement and it 
talks about national treatment of financial services, we’re 
reminded that, you know, the biggest parties to this partnership 
agreement is the United States. And clearly we need to ask 
questions about whether, if this agreement had been in place in 
1997 or ’98 or ’99, some of those years, would we have been 
able to keep a different system of financial services and protect 
some of the conflict of interest or put in rules against conflict of 
interest that sort of disappeared for a while in the United States 



November 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7819 

in light of having this agreement here. 
 
And I don’t know that answer just from the agreement that 
we’ve been looking at now, but I think clearly there are some 
pretty substantial pushes from the US regulatory authorities as 
to how the banking should be done we need to understand. And 
I think, you know, as we get in here a little later, we’ll see once 
the again the annexes where we’ll have some protection for 
some of the things we’re specifically doing in Canada. 
 
But especially in this area of financial services, we need to be 
vigilant because there were a lot of headaches that we didn’t 
have in Canada because of some of the rules that we had in 
place. And if this limits our ability to have some separate rules 
from some of our partners in this agreement, then we need to 
ask some hard questions. 
 
This whole section also, you know, deals with the whole 
cross-border trade issue of financial services, and so we need to 
look at that. The first annex is actually headed “Cross-Border 
Trade,” and in those areas, once again different countries will 
set out basically exemptions of rules that they have that they 
want to keep. 
 
And so every country . . . It looks like Australia is protecting 
some of their insurance and insurance-related services, banking 
services. Brunei Darussalam is looking at both of the protection 
of those kind of services. Then here we get to Canada and some 
of the rules here will, you know, it sets out what the specific 
rules are in Canada. One thing that Canada says is that Canada 
requires that a cross-border financial services supplier maintain 
a local agent and records in Canada. And I’m not sure if that is 
a result of some of the things that happened in 2007-2008, but I 
think the protections that Canada asked for do relate to our 
experience over and against what happened in the United 
States. 
 
Chile once again has got a number of things that they want to 
protect, and it looks like every country pretty well is adding 
some protection. The same with Japan although, you know, 
they’ve been in a situation for a number of years now where 
their banking institutions, which used to be the leading ones in 
the world, have been having to retool and reorganize. And then 
it goes the same with Malaysia and Mexico. 
 
So I think probably every country has some concerns about 
protecting how they do their local financial services. New 
Zealand and Peru and then Singapore as well, I haven’t seen 
them make too many comments. And then United States has 
also got some things that they want to protect, and then finally 
Vietnam. So basically the protections that countries want or 
exemptions that countries want are right across the board. Every 
one of the parties is involved, I think. 
 
But then the next annex is 11-B, and this relates to portfolio 
management. It’s basically saying that the ability of a business 
to operate across the borders of these 12 countries is in some 
way going to be facilitated, but once again there are countries 
that will set in specific concerns about how this is done. I know 
that each of these countries has their own specific things that 
they end up being concerned about. One thing we know about 
Brunei is that it’s a country with not a large population, but it 
has an incredible amount of money in their oil fund. I think it’s 

a toss-up between Norway and Brunei as to the highest per 
capita income and assets in the world. And as a result I know 
Brunei uses that ability to make sure that even though they’re a 
smaller country they have top-notch financial services in their 
country. And so I think some of the protections here from that 
country relate to that as well. 
 
So then as we . . . Well once again there’s issues around the 
postal insurance business, and we don’t really have that 
business in Canada but quite a few countries do have postal 
insurance rules. And there’s also then the electronic payment 
card services. And this is what I was talking about earlier, is 
that the banks have agreements between themselves and in 
many ways, so I think what this TPP tries to do then is to layer 
overtop of what the banks have been doing, and make sure that 
the various definitions in various countries and the services that 
are available in different countries are not dramatically affected 
by this. 
 
[21:45] 
 
But once again, by including all of this in this agreement, the 
rules for disputes are I think triggered in a lot of ways. And we 
need to watch and see what that means for our financial 
institutions. And once again the whole issue comes up of 
transparency, making sure all of the countries have their rules 
very clearly laid out so everybody knows what they are. And 
that makes it such that they can have a discussion about them 
and maybe change some of them if that’s necessary. 
 
And the final, or the annex 11-D sets out who is responsible in 
each country. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. If the members at the back wish to 
carry on, they may leave the Assembly to do so. I recognize the 
member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The final annex to 
chapter 11 is 11-E, and it relates to some very specific issues 
that Brunei Darussalam, Chile, Mexico, and Peru have been 
dealing with. 
 
So the next area that we’re going to deal with is chapter 12, and 
this relates to the temporary entry for business persons. And it’s 
not necessarily a long chapter but I know if you do travel 
around the world, in various countries there are different rules 
around how you can enter to do business. Most of the time 
they’re quite welcoming or hospitable. And I think the goal here 
obviously is to make these 12 countries very hospitable to the 
business travellers from each other’s countries, and I think 
maybe put in some measures that are like our global entry or 
Nexus program between Canada and the United States. Global 
entry obviously for Americans goes to many more countries. 
 
But the net effect of that is to have the borders not be a 
disincentive to encouraging trade. In other words, take your 
information, take your business samples, take your services if 
that’s what you do, and go and for various lengths of time 
provide those services in the other countries involved in the 
TPP. 
 



7820 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2015 

And so this sets out the rules, and once again it sets up another 
committee on temporary entry for business persons. And I’m 
not sure if they’re going to have the same membership on all 
these different committees so that they know what they’re 
talking about because many of them are interrelated. But it’s 
obviously, once this is all in place it might be good business to 
get in, which is to be a committee member in some of these 
areas because clearly it will depend on how, what kind of 
relationships are developed between the representatives of all of 
the different parties, all of the different countries as to make this 
thing run smoothly. 
 
So now we’re on to another area which is clearly a facilitator or 
enhancement for business and that’s the world of 
telecommunications. And as we all know, this kind of chapter 
in a trade agreement is probably quite different than it was even 
five years ago, just because of the nature of the kind of 
information that can be shared worldwide. And so it does 
overlap or connect in with what we were talking about earlier 
about cryptography and encryption services, and it does relate 
back to some of Mr. Balsillie’s comments from Research in 
Motion about how information technology in one country might 
be protected vis-à-vis another country. We’ll see as we get into 
the intellectual property issues a little later in the agreement that 
those also impact back into this telecommunications world as 
well. 
 
So basically once again we take a look, we’ll maybe go back to 
some of the definitions after we see the scope of this chapter. 
And so basically the chapter’s going to apply to “any measure 
relating to access to and use of public telecommunications 
services.” 
 
And then you go and look at what a public telecommunications 
service is. And it’s: 
 

. . . any telecommunications service that a Party requires, 
explicitly or in effect, to be offered to the public generally. 
These services may include telephone and data 
transmission typically involving transmission of 
customer-supplied information between two or more 
defined points without any end-to-end change in the form 
or content of the customer’s information. 

 
So in other words, so it relates to public telecommunications 
and it’s also any measure related to obligations regarding 
suppliers of public telecommunication services, and then the 
third area is any other measure relating to telecommunications 
services. 
 
I think the reason that there’s a discussion between 
telecommunication services and public telecommunication 
services is that there are I think more and more systems that are 
not public, that are separate. And in a way Mr. Balsillie’s 
comments coming as out of the BlackBerry world was that that 
was one of their big advantages is that they had a whole 
separate, or they still have a whole separate system of 
communication that is very valuable, especially when the public 
system has difficulties or goes down. So this chapter I think 
goes right to protecting the public telecommunications, but also 
to making sure that access to telecommunications isn’t used as a 
method of restricting trade or providing special treatment for 
your own local businesses. And so the goal here, in the 12 

countries involved, is to make sure that everybody is on an 
equal footing when it comes to telecommunication. 
 
And so then you look and you see what the topics are, and one 
of them clearly is international mobile roaming, right? And that 
becomes a very major issue when many of the products that you 
provide or services that you trade rely on constant monitoring 
by your electronic systems. And if there’s a way that your 
trading abilities can be disrupted by disrupting your ability to be 
on roaming systems in another country, well then that becomes 
a trade-restricting factor that needs to be dealt with. 
 
I think as far as I know, the 12 parties, the 12 countries involved 
in this agreement right now do have fairly compatible systems 
right across the board, you know, which is a good thing. And so 
practically this agreement is defining the standards and making 
sure that the regulatory roles are there. 
 
And so one of the, you know . . . Some of the issues do relate to 
how do all of the international suppliers of mobile services 
work together. And I think this does set out some rules and tries 
to once again overlay what already exists in this world, but then 
sets some ways where complaints can be dealt with. And so 
when you actually look at, you know, what happens in this 
section, it’s probably the whole set of rules right at the end 
around resolution of telecommunications disputes that becomes 
the crucial part in this telecommunications world. 
 
And I think that this builds on work that’s already been part of 
the international system. It’s often interesting to contemplate, 
thinking about the Pacific Ocean and the ability to communicate 
across the Pacific Ocean. It’s 2015 right now. The first I think 
trans-Pacific cables went across from somewhere along the BC 
[British Columbia] coast, I think between Bella Bella and Bella 
Coola over to Japan, and they were the ones being laid . . . 
They’d already laid them across the Atlantic, so there was a 
connection on the Atlantic side. But then they were doing that 
on the Pacific, and they were telegraph lines, so they were 
trying to get telegraph information across. Canada was 
obviously quite involved in that because we had a huge distance 
to cover. 
 
Those kinds of ways of communicating were then replaced by 
satellites, and once again Canada and I think Saskatoon actually 
had a lot of work done around the technology for satellites to do 
the communication. 
 
Now there’s a combination of the satellite connection and then 
the fibre optics, the light travelling through glass, and so once 
again, it’s that combination of providing the 
telecommunications. 
 
And this particular agreement confirms that to have those very 
open communications and communications at a capacity that 
everybody can do trade requires some very specific agreements 
and trusting of each other when you set that up. And I know 
that we often forget about the history. I sometimes also think 
about probably 100 years or less before that first telegraph cable 
across the Pacific, the main supply line to Hong Kong from 
London was across Saskatchewan because they brought the 
goods to I think Montreal, and put them into the voyageurs. 
They took them across the river system, through The Pas and 
then up into the Churchill system and then across to the Methye 



November 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7821 

Portage, and then into British Columbia and then down to the 
mouth of the Columbia River. And then they put it on boats and 
took it to the Sandwich Islands, which were British islands, 
which is Hawaii, and then from Hawaii over to Hong Kong. 
And then they’d reverse the flow and have things go the other 
direction. That was, you know, probably around 1800. Well 
then by another 75, well 85 years later, 86 years later we had 
the railway doing the same route and then they had the 
Canadian Pacific ships that would take you right across. 
 
And so now we’re talking about a Trans-Pacific Partnership 
agreement that is dealing with the same kinds of issues, and this 
is instantaneous kind of communication that builds on those 
relationships that were there from many, many years ago. And 
once again even though Saskatchewan sometimes seems like 
it’s off on the edge, well much of this comes through our 
territory and we are involved in the intellectual side of 
developing much of this as we proceed. And so the 
telecommunications protections I think build on that history. 
 
[22:00] 
 
And then we go into chapter 14, and it’s about electronic 
commerce. And once again, if you’re a trader, you’re not going 
to sell your product unless you get paid. And this whole chapter 
deals with how you can be assured that you get paid when you 
live in a digital world. And I think once again this is building on 
top of agreements that are already in place between banking 
institutions but it also then deals with the other kinds of ways 
that governments try to get revenues. 
 
I see one of the clauses here is a clause that says there’ll be no 
custom duties on electronic transmissions. And this, you know, 
is an interesting one because there are so many electronic 
transmissions. There have been suggestions that one way to 
finance governments or others is to put a very, very . . . 
one-thousandth of a cent or something on each transmission. 
And oh, it’s not going to cost the business very much to do that 
but, you know, it doesn’t take long to accumulate money for a 
business. But this says no, we’re not going to do that kind of 
thing. And basically it’s a very clear paragraph to say that you 
don’t want to restrict the use of electronic transmissions. 
 
Now it says the parties can do it internally if they want to do it, 
but not, you know . . . So you can charge taxes on your SaskTel 
bill, I guess, if you wanted to, and I think we do. But you can’t 
do it in an international basis. Once again, around the issue of 
restriction of trade. 
 
Clearly from the lawyers looking at this, one of the issues 
always with electronic transfers is protection of the consumers, 
protection of the people who pay the money. One, you want to 
make sure they get whatever they’re paying for or that they’re 
not being charged double or triple for what happens. And so 
once again they’ve got the rules around how people are going to 
be protected. 
 
This one Michael Geist was talking earlier. It’s in some of these 
areas too where he’s raising concerns that the rules that are laid 
out here are the American rules. And we’ve had some slightly 
different ones in Canada that maybe are a bit more protective of 
consumers and protective of privacy. But I think that’s the kind 
of area where we need to listen carefully as this agreement is 

being discussed over the coming months because that’s 
important. 
 
It’s actually worth taking a look at some of the paragraphs in 
this chapter 14. We were just talking about consumer 
protection, but the next paragraph is personal information 
protection. And it’s, you know, there’s lots of good wishes, 
kind of, well we’re going to try to make sure we protect the 
information. But it’s not as tight maybe as some of the things 
we already have in Canada, and so how we do this is going to 
be interesting. 
 
There’s also some principles about who has access to the 
Internet and how, whether you can be restricted. That relates to 
some of the companies that now will put restrictions on the 
amount of access you have to data, or you have to pay more for 
certain things. And so how some of those things are laid out I 
think is . . . It doesn’t say there’s a solution here, but it says that 
that’s an issue. 
 
Also the cross-border transfer of information. This is one that 
we’ve raised in this legislature before around where is the 
health information located, I think. Where is the hunting licence 
information located? And what this appears to say is well, you 
know, maybe that’s not such a big deal. The American rules 
sort of say, well you can bring it to the States; it’s okay. And so 
I think these rules here will end up meaning that much more of 
our information from Canada will be stored other places. Now 
whether there’ll be information from other countries stored in 
Canada as a safe haven for stuff, I’m not sure. 
 
Another chapter relates to the international Internet charge 
connection. And it’s kind of like how much . . . who gets what 
part of the fees that are used in something like that. And you 
know, once again it says you’re going to need some rules about 
that. But how you do it exactly is not entirely there, but it’s 
based on the American system. 
 
Article 14.13 is location of computing facilities. And once 
again, we have some rules about facilities should be in Canada 
or in Saskatchewan. And this is opening it up a bit. 
 
Another section 14.14, deals with spam, what they call 
unsolicited commercial electronic messages. And so it tries to 
set out some rules. 
 
I know that many years ago, as the minister of Justice, we met 
with the Western Canadian and the US attorneys general, who 
were all ministers of consumers affairs, to deal with spam 
because it was kind of a new issue in a way then. And the 
debates went back and forth about whether you should try to 
restrict the providers of the service or go after the people that 
actually put the spam on there, and that’s always the debate. 
 
I think here they basically are very careful not to go after the I 
guess telecommunications companies, if I can put it that way, 
but go after the commercial companies that are using these 
messages if they can get at them. And that’s the traditional way 
that it’s been resolved in Canada and the United States, and it 
means that there’s been an extensive lobby from, you know, the 
telecommunications companies. They’re saying, how can we 
monitor every bit of information that goes through our system? 
 



7822 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2015 

And then the last parts of this chapter relate to co-operation and, 
you know, I think it’s good, but once again it’s aspirational. It’s 
saying, you know, Article 14.15 is kind of interesting. It says: 
 

Recognising the global nature of electronic commerce, the 
Parties shall endeavour to: 
 
work together to assist small and medium enterprise to 
overcome obstacles to its use; 
 
exchange information and share experiences [etc.]. 

 
But it’s that “endeavour to.” You know, it’s not a real strong 
statement, if I can put it that way. But on the other hand it is 
saying that here’s a goal that in this whole world, this 
Trans-Pacific Partnership is going to be part of it. 
 
It also then goes on to talk about cybersecurity matters and the 
fact that everybody has to work together. And source code, and 
this is a bit of an interesting one, and this is what Michael Geist 
was talking about earlier as well. This is Article 14.17: 
 

No Party [in other words, no country] shall require the 
transfer of, or access to, source code of software owned by 
a person of another [country] . . . as a condition for the 
import, distribution, sale or use of such software, or of 
products containing such software, in its territory. 

 
And this is the point that, you know, you can’t prevent some 
kind of software coming into your country that might have 
damaging material on it or that you want to basically deal with 
some malware or something else. And the country doesn’t have 
the ability to restrict that stuff coming into the country but, you 
know, it once again says, well hey, we’re going to endeavour to 
deal with some of this. 
 
And then finally with, around dispute settlement, there’s a 
couple of countries like Malaysia and Vietnam who don’t want 
the dispute resolution clauses that are here, at least for the short 
term, so that makes sense. 
 
So we have then sort of the telecommunications, the electronic 
commerce. We’re going through a number of the areas where 
restrictions on trade can take place if the use of the services are 
not monitored properly. And so I think it’s important that we 
understand what’s here, and that what we look at and do is 
related to that. 
 
And so the next chapter brings us right back to question period 
today and yesterday, and probably every day. And it’s called 
“Government Procurement.” And the first definition, which — 
as you know I like to look at these definitions — is called, 
“build-operate-transfer contract and public works concession 
contract.” So what’s the definition of that? Well this means: 
 

a contractual arrangement the primary purpose of which is 
to provide for the construction or rehabilitation of physical 
infrastructure, plants, buildings, facilities or other 
government-owned works and under which, as 
consideration for a supplier’s execution of a contractual 
arrangement, a procuring entity grants to the supplier, for a 
specified period of time, temporary ownership or a right to 
control and operate, and demand payment for the use of 

those works for the duration of the contract. 
 
Now this is a little different than our highway bypass, because 
there aren’t enough people to pay tolls to actually pay for it, so 
the government’s just putting some money in. We don’t know 
exactly how much it is, but it’s the same kind of contract that’s 
there. 
 
And so this whole section, which is the government 
procurement section, says that it applies to any measure 
regarding covered procurement. And the term “covered 
procurement” obviously is procurement that’s under this 
particular chapter. And so basically . . . So activities that aren’t 
covered in here are acquisition or rental of land, non-contractual 
agreements, or procurement or acquisition of fiscal agency or 
deposit services. 
 
Public employment contracts aren’t included in government 
procurement here, and procurement that’s conducted for the 
specific purpose of providing international assistance, like 
development aid. 
 
But otherwise, it’s quite broad and it covers a whole number of 
issues that are part of the kinds of issues we’ve been discussing 
in our question period. And so the general treatment, the 
general principles that are involved, I think are general 
principles probably that apply to all procurement. And I think 
sort of the ways that it’s done and how it’s done are important, 
but basically it says that general principles: 
 

With respect to any measure regarding covered 
procurement, each Party, including its procuring entities, 
shall accord immediately and unconditionally to the goods 
and services of any other Party and to the suppliers of any 
other Party, treatment no less favourable than the 
treatment that the Party, including its procurement entities, 
accords to: 
 
(a) domestic goods, services and suppliers; and 
(b) goods, services and suppliers of any other Party. 

 
So in other words, you have to be fair. You have to treat 
everybody in the same way. “For greater certainty, this 
obligation refers only to the treatment accorded by a Party to 
any good, service or supplier of any other Party under this 
Agreement.” And then, I mean, it goes on and talks about 
procurement methods. And one of the issues once again is 
things we’ve been talking about all through the agreement is the 
rules of origin; in other words, where do these goods that are 
being used in the contract come from and how does that fit, and 
basically dealing with some of that. 
 
[22:15] 
 
There are a number of transitional measures, and so this is, I 
think, a bit interesting for us because it talks about what’s called 
a developing country party. And I think there are some 
advantages or disadvantages, no matter how you put it, that 
relate to certain of the countries that are parties to this 
agreement; they have a status that gives them a slightly 
different preference rate. They don’t have to open up their 
government procurement quite maybe as wide as some of the 
other countries. And I’m fairly certain that Canada’s not 



November 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7823 

included as a developing country. 
 
So we end up having these rules that protect some of the 
smaller countries. And I mean, I’m not sure I have anything to 
say positive or negative about that, but it does raise the question 
of what kind of negotiations that were here that resulted in some 
countries getting a different status in the ultimate rules around 
government procurement. 
 
When you go through the rules that are here, once again it’s this 
issue of transparency, making sure that everybody knows that 
the rules are fair; if there are open discrimination or changes, 
that at least they’re out there. I mean they’re out so everybody 
can see what they are and deal with them that way. Also the 
issue of making sure everybody follows the rules, it has all of 
these rules there and then the appeals.  
 
But I think practically this is an area where they have identified 
an issue as being part of this agreement. I think there’s a lot of 
work to be done around how the government procurement will 
work in this world. We know we have a tough enough time in 
Canada between the provinces and territories, and to have a 
similar kind of discussion between 12 countries and all the 
jurisdictions is going to be quite interesting. And so I think 
practically we need to understand that some of these chapters 
and some of these issues they’re dealing with here are, as I said 
earlier, aspirational. They’re good wishes. There’s an attempt to 
put in writing some of the concerns that are there. 
 
So the next chapter is chapter 16 on competition policy. And 
basically this is put in place to make sure that each country has 
adopted, or will maintain, national competition laws that 
proscribe, in other words, prohibit anti-competitive business 
conduct. And this kind of rules, it’s interesting to put it in the 
Trans-Pacific Partnership. I’m sure different countries have 
different standards in a way in how to try to pull all this 
together in a format that is one that will move towards having 
common standards around procedural fairness. It’s important 
and practically this will involve a huge amount of discussion, 
co-operation, consultation, and transparency. In other words, a 
lot can be accomplished if the unwritten rules are written down, 
the extra ways that things happen are explained to all of the 
partners in the operation. 
 
I suspect over the years this will be the area where every party 
to this Trans-Pacific Partnership will learn about what kinds of 
things they can still do that have been sort of traditionally done 
in their community versus those things which others perceive as 
unfair. And how we deal with that, I think, will be a good part 
of how this agreement ends up being implemented. 
 
But once again, there doesn’t appear to be any kind of wild 
cards in some of this because it really is building on our Canada 
and US experience. So what we need to watch is that somehow 
it doesn’t develop into another way of restricting trade or 
causing difficulties in trade. 
 
Now the next chapter is one that I think is specifically important 
for Saskatchewan. And I think I’ll start on this, but I suspect I 
might have to continue tomorrow about it because this is the 
whole area of state-owned enterprises and designated 
monopolies is how they put it. It’s a little different language 
than what we use, but it’s very much related to many of the 

kinds of things we do in Canada, whether it’s the Alberta 
treasury branches, or it’s ISC [Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan] in Saskatchewan, or SaskPower, 
or Ontario Hydro, or all of these different kinds of state-owned 
enterprises. 
 
But the interesting thing to look at in this is that, I think a 
state-owned enterprise — I have to get to the definition. — is 
defined this way. It says: 
 

state-owned enterprise means an enterprise: 
that is principally engaged in commercial activities; and 
 
in which a Party [a country]: 
 

(i) directly owns more than 50 percent of the share 
capital; 
(ii) controls, through ownership interests, the exercise 
of more than 50 percent of the voting rights; or 
(iii) holds the power to appoint a majority of members 
of the board of directors or any other equivalent 
management body. 

 
And so this definition captures I think pretty well all of the 
Crowns that we have in Saskatchewan; probably Alberta, BC, 
Manitoba, Ontario. 
 
The interesting one is the third one, which is “holds the power 
to appoint a majority of members of the board of directors or 
any other equivalent management body.” There are quite a 
number of state-owned enterprises that maybe are owned 40 per 
cent of shared capital, that trade on the New York Stock 
Exchange or London Stock Exchange or other places. But they 
probably will be caught under this clause because the 
government, even though they own less than 50 per cent, still 
control who’s on the board. 
 
But this whole section of this Trans-Pacific Partnership 
arrangement, the TPP arrangement I think is instructive for us 
here in Saskatchewan, to say that there are various versions of 
what we see as our Crown corporations in Saskatchewan that 
are operating very well through all of the parties, the 12 nations 
that are involved in this Trans-Pacific Partnership agreement; 
that they are providing services in, you know, positive ways; 
and they are protected and encouraged as part of the mixed 
economy that’s part of all of the 12 nations that are included. 
 
That includes the United States because we know that virtually 
every state has some kind of a state-owned enterprise, whether 
it’s Nebraska’s power system or, you know, North Dakota. I 
think they sold their pasta plant probably, but they do still have 
their bank, I think, just like Alberta. And so there’s a 
recognition that the co-operative effort involving taxpayers and 
citizens of a state or a province can own commercial activities 
and that there are some very clear models of how to do that. 
And we have some of the best here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And so then the rules in here though, you know, we need to end 
up looking at them quite carefully because the kinds of things 
that other nations or other parties want to put in to deal with 
some of these state-owned enterprises relate to any kind of an 
advantage — perceived or, you know, whether it’s there or not, 
there wants to be an attack. And we just have to remind 



7824 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2015 

ourselves of what happened to the Wheat Board. The Wheat 
Board isn’t there anymore, but the kinds of perceptions about 
how that operated versus the reality was a very difficult 
political issue on a whole number of levels. 
 
And we can see certain things that happen to Crown or 
state-owned corporations in Canada. We know Alberta was able 
. . . They sold off a number of their state-owned utilities 
because they were able to get some very favourable federal tax 
treatment in those sales. A lot of times people don’t know that 
history, but what it meant was that they were able to sell the 
businesses and the favourable tax ruling so that the shareholders 
that bought the businesses got sort of a double advantage. When 
there were other discussions from other provinces about that, it 
was always, oh well, that happened then and it’s not going to 
happen again. 
 
And sometimes some of these kinds of rules and some of these 
examinations of advantages and disadvantages identify where 
some of the challenges are in operating state-owned enterprises. 
Just to look, you see chapter 17.6 is Non-commercial 
Assistance, and so you end up saying, well what is 
non-commercial assistance to a state-owned company? Well it 
can be an unwritten monopoly. It can be some of the things that 
relate to how and who are the customers. Customers may be 
required to use certain aspects of that, and we have corporations 
in Saskatchewan that do that. And so all of those kinds of 
concerns end up being factors in how we look at what effect 
this agreement will have on the state-owned enterprises that are 
here in our province. 
 
Now one of the factors involved is whether it only applies to 
national state-owned enterprises. I think that if we look at it 
carefully, it’ll apply back to all entities within state-owned 
enterprises that are owned by citizens. So we can’t say that this 
does not apply to what we are seeing here. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this motion around the signature of this 
agreement I think is premature. We’re not at a point where it 
can be authorized. We’ve, as one of the commentators said, 
we’re still at the dating stage. We haven’t actually signed, sort 
of confirming that they’re going steady. That may happen in 
February or March or April. And then after that we’ll end up 
with the consultation and discussion, and then maybe ultimately 
the marriage. 
 
But I think by going through much of the information that we 
have here, we have been able to identify issues that apply to 
Saskatchewan, identify other issues which are obviously good 
for our traders, our people who sell goods right across this 
globe. It’s a very interesting discussion. 
 
The Speaker: — It now being after the hour of 10:30, this 
House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 Trans-Pacific Partnership 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7801 
 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


