
























































Hansard: November 18, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 85A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 18, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Hon. Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7707 
 November 18, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
request leave to make an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to 
members for the leave. 
 
April 15th was a momentous day in the life of our province and 
our country as regards to the relationship that we value with the 
people of India. On that day, Mr. Speaker, in Ottawa, Prime 
Minister Modi of India and Prime Minister Harper, then Prime 
Minister Harper of Canada, with a delegation from our 
province, I had the honour of being a part of signing an 
agreement for the sale of 7 million pounds of Saskatchewan 
uranium to India for their very strong and robust civilian 
nuclear program that they have under way in their country as 
they seek to create energy security for their country and clean 
energy security for their country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was a great day in the life of the relationship 
between India and Saskatchewan. And it’s my pleasure today to 
introduce to you and through you to my honourable colleagues, 
someone who was there that day, someone who is the brand 
new High Commissioner from India to Canada, His Excellency 
Vishnu Prakash. Accompanying the High Commissioner is his 
wife, Neelam Prakash, and joining them from the Vancouver 
consulate office, the consul general of India in Vancouver, Mr. 
Rajiv K. Chander. 
 
Also joining them is someone that’s no stranger here to the 
province of Saskatchewan, especially with respect to this file, is 
our friend G.V. Shankar who is a Saskatoon-based consultant 
that we engaged that has helped us mightily and greatly on the 
file. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I have a few more remarks, but I invite all 
members to welcome this delegation to the Assembly today. 
Mr. Speaker, very briefly, this is the first official visit of His 
Excellency to the province of Saskatchewan. I think, I hope it 
will be the first of many. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that the High Commissioner and his 
wife are interested in golf. We had a bit of a chat about that 
today. I want to assure them both that it may not look like it 
today in Saskatchewan, but we have wonderful golf courses 
here in the province, and we hope that they’ll be able to return 

perhaps and enjoy some of them or at least one of them on a 
return trip. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the relationship between Saskatchewan and India 
is well known, and there’ll be a member statement a little bit 
later on from government members highlighting the importance 
of that relationship. But let it be known here again that almost 
40 per cent of all Canadian imports to India come from the 
province of Saskatchewan. This is a very, very important 
relationship for us and for Canada. Seventy-five per cent of 
India’s lentil exports, 79 per cent of India’s pea exports are met 
by, well, the work of about 18,000 Saskatchewan pulse growers 
who provide for that market. 
 
There’s also a relationship in fertilizer and now in uranium. 
And we know His Excellency toured the McArthur River 
uranium mine yesterday. You had a first-hand look at that 
incredible resource, at that facility up and running, that will 
contribute to India’s plans for energy security. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s worth noting as well that this is a mutual 
relationship, that exports from India to our province have 
increased 170 per cent since 2007. The scale’s not quite there in 
terms of what we’re able to provide for the people of India, but 
the directions are all pointed up in terms of increased exports on 
both sides. 
 
We also have a strong research relationship and a strong 
relationship forged by our people — so many new residents 
have come from India — and Saskatchewan’s connection to 
that country as well. I would just say to His Excellency in this 
welcome, we really cannot overstate how appreciative we are of 
the relationship we have with the government, with the people, 
with the companies, with the co-operatives of India. 
 
We will never, ever take the relationship for granted. We’ve 
been there twice on trade missions; I plan to go back. It’s an 
essential part of the relationship. And we welcome His 
Excellency again here to the Assembly today and to the 
delegation that’s joined us, and we ask him to pass along our 
gratitude to the people of India for the relationship that we 
have. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, I would like to join with the Premier in 
welcoming His Excellency Mr. Prakash and his wife along as 
well, as well as Mr. Shankar and the entire delegation. 
 
You know, the Premier is correct in pointing out the importance 
of trade relationships and the significance between 
Saskatchewan and India. That’s absolutely correct. But people 
in Saskatchewan also know that the presence and the 
contributions of Indians to our province is one that goes back 
generations. And I guess it goes back in the areas of business 
most certainly, but we think of the areas of education on our 
campuses here in the province. We think of in health care, with 
many physicians and other health care practitioners throughout 
the province of Indian descent. The contributions have been 
immense. 
 



7708 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2015 

And so when I think about the example that India provides, Mr. 
Speaker, I think it’s quite fitting. There might be a few words in 
a few moments about multiculturalism. We also think about the 
importance that India provides as a model, as an incredibly 
diverse country when we look at languages and people groups, 
and that’s something that we can’t forget as well when we think 
about the relationship between these two places. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I thank them for their presence, wish them all the best 
with their visit, and I would ask all members to welcome them 
to the Assembly. And I have one more introduction to make, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, would like to 
introduce an individual seated in your gallery and that’s Dr. 
Kathleen O’Reilly. Not a stranger to many here in the province, 
she obtained her Master of Education from the U of R 
[University of Regina] and went on to complete a Ph.D. [Doctor 
of Philosophy] from McGill University, also studied at the 
famous Sorbonne University in Paris. She’s currently a 
professor at the First Nations University of Canada, has also 
worked as a senior policy adviser to the Government of 
Saskatchewan, has a best-selling book titled Tales Out of 
School, and also gives back to the area of education as an 
elected trustee to Regina Public Schools. 
 
And on top of all that, Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud to say that 
she is our candidate for the New Democratic Party in Regina 
Northeast, and I know we all look forward to her contributions 
after the election as a member of this Assembly. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to join with the Leader of the Opposition in welcoming 
Dr. O’Reilly to her Legislative Assembly. And I’m assuming 
that’s your son; I didn’t hear if the Leader of the Opposition 
said . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . It’s not your son? Okay, I’m 
sorry. I’m not sure of the young man who joined you. Anyway I 
would like to welcome you to the Legislative Assembly. I look 
forward to seeing you on the campaign trail, and I wish you all 
the best. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Immigration. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
honour of Saskatchewan Multicultural Week, I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to the other members of the 
Assembly, some guests who work tirelessly to promote 
diversity and multiculturalism here in Saskatchewan. 
 
In our province we’re encouraged today to be proud of our 
cultural heritage and to share what makes it unique with each 
other. This year’s theme is strength and diversity, strung 
directly from our provincial motto “from many peoples, 
strength.” 
 
In your gallery today is Rhonda Rosenberg, the executive 
director of the Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan. Seated 
with Rhonda are two exceptional volunteers who are 
representative of the many who are working to make 
Saskatchewan stronger. Muna De Ciman. Muna lives in Regina 
with her family and is a Government of Saskatchewan 

employee working as youth counsellor at the Paul Dojak Youth 
Centre. In addition to MCOS [Multicultural Council of 
Saskatchewan], Muna serves on the boards of a number of other 
cultural organizations. Neeraj Saroj. Neeraj lives in Regina. He 
works as a senior engineer with the city of Regina. He is 
currently finishing his executive M.B.A. [Master of Business 
Administration] from the Kenneth Levene School of Business 
at the U of R. Neeraj is an active volunteer for a variety of 
causes in the true Saskatchewan spirit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you know so well, diversity is a cornerstone for 
the building of a stronger Saskatchewan for all of our people. In 
recognition of their contributions to the province, I ask that all 
members please join me welcoming these very special guests to 
our Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And on behalf of the 
official opposition, I would like to join with the minister 
opposite to welcome these individuals here from the 
multicultural association of Saskatchewan. Certainly, Rhonda, 
in your work as ED [executive director], I know you work hard 
every day to bring these issues home to the people that live 
here. And certainly with Neeraj and Muna, your contributions at 
a political level are also appreciated greatly, and we know how 
important the work you do is, especially in these times, and so 
it’s ever more important. We all have ties to immigrant 
communities, no matter what our story is. And so you are 
bringing those stories alive here in Saskatchewan now at this 
very important time. So thank you very much for the work you 
do, and welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you to all members of the Assembly, I am 
pleased to introduce three guests that are seated in the west 
gallery. With us today is Eugene Paquin, the government 
relations Chair of the MS Society. And joining Eugene is Jackie 
Pilon, advocate and Saskatchewan division board director, as 
well as Bonnie Grove who is manager of government relations 
as well as stakeholder support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these three individuals obviously are very 
involved in the field of MS [multiple sclerosis] in our province 
and in this country. And we know that the goal of the MS 
Society is not only to help in the fight for a cure for MS, but 
along the way to help enhance the quality of life for those 
individuals in our province and in our country that have been 
diagnosed with MS. And they do a tremendous job for the 
people of this province and for this country, and I would ask all 
members to join with me in welcoming these three guests from 
the MS Society here to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
join with the minister in welcoming these three individuals from 
the MS Society. Of course, Eugene Paquin and Jackie Pilon and 
Bonnie Grove, welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 



November 18, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7709 

On behalf of the opposition, thank you for all that you do when 
it comes to advocacy and education and support for those living 
with MS and their families. As the minister said, you do 
tremendous work on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, so 
thank you for that. 
 
And I just want to note that Mr. Paquin has a connection to 
Holiday Park, which is my community, the community that my 
family has lived in for almost 60 years. His mother-in-law 
actually has lived in that community for quite some time. So 
Holiday Park is a great part of Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
But with that, thank you again to the MS Society for all that you 
do. And I’d ask all members to join with me too in welcoming 
these guests to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 
 
Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
you and through you to all members of the Assembly, it’s my 
great pleasure today to welcome, sitting in the west gallery, a 
wonderful group of students from Grant Road School right here 
in Regina. Give us a wave, kids. Excellent. Now we can see 
where you are. There’s 48 of them, Mr. Speaker. They’re all 
grade 5 students. That’s a great wave, yes. They’re 
accompanied today by their teachers, Daina Seymour and 
Kristine Stephenson, and educational assistants, Janet Davies 
and Shelley Foster. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they’re here to see how we do our business 
today, and right after question period I’m going to be leaving 
the Chamber to join for a very own, one-on-one question 
period. And I’m looking forward to their questions very much. 
With that in mind, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Indeed. And I invite all members to help us welcome them to 
their Assembly today. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Requesting leave for an extended 
introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Rosemont has 
requested leave for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly I 
welcome all of these esteemed guests to their Assembly here 
today. But I want to focus on one very special young man, a 
very bright student leader who’s joined us here today, who is 
shadowing myself as an MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] here today, and his name is Tyan Cherepuschak 
that’s here with us today. Tyan, give us a wave. 
 
Tyan is a grade 7 student, and I have to say, in the time we’ve 
had together here today and his engagement in the issues and 
the discussion and what he cares about, he’s a remarkable 
young man. He has in fact prepared some member statements 
completely on his own. He has prepared questions, Mr. 
Speaker. I suspect members opposite would suggest that those 

questions are probably better than the ones I put to government 
on a daily basis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Tyan’s parents are also incredible educators in Regina. Rob is 
over at Martin Academy. His mom, Natasha, is at Johnson. His 
dad, Rob, was a coach of the Regina Red Sox, exceptional 
hockey and baseball player himself, and involved still with 
player personnel. It’s been a pleasure to have him join me here 
early for a Public Accounts meeting. 
 
He’s had the honour of meeting the Provincial Auditor of 
Saskatchewan, the Premier of Saskatchewan in the hallway, the 
Leader of the Opposition, the . . . Who else have we met here 
today? We’ve met Mr. Speaker himself as well. And we also 
had a good conversation with Emma Graney of the 
Leader-Post. So I ask all members of this Assembly to welcome 
this very bright student leader to his Assembly, and I suspect in 
a few more years we might hear more from this guy. Thanks, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
[13:45] 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition calling for greater support of GSAs 
[gender and sexuality alliance] in Saskatchewan schools. And 
we know that this province lags behind others in securing the 
rights of gender- and sexually diverse students, and this 
government’s not doing enough to create safe spaces in our 
schools for sexually diverse students. There are students who 
are bullied because of their sexual identity or sexual orientation. 
This government must act so students have simple, 
easy-to-understand information about GSAs in their schools, 
how to form them, and who they should talk to in order to form 
a GSA. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on this 
government to take immediate and meaningful action to 
pass The Respect for Diversity — Student Bill of Rights Act 
and enshrine in legislation the right of Saskatchewan 
students to form GSAs within their schools in order to 
foster caring, accepting, inclusive environments and 
deliver equal opportunities for all students to reach their 
full potential. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people presenting this petition come from the 
city of Prince Albert. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present the 
petition asking for this government to support a new long-term 
care facility for Creighton and Denare Beach. Mr. Speaker, 
seniors have done their part to build this province, and northern 
Saskatchewan is no exception. According to the 2009 Croft 



7710 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2015 

report, long-term care stats of our health region is at a code red 
level. Seniors from northern communities need immediate 
attention from this government and many residents cannot 
afford private care homes. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 
the Saskatchewan government to treat northern 
Saskatchewan’s senior citizens with respect and dignity 
and immediately invest in a new long-term care facility in 
the Creighton and Denare Beach area. 

 
And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by many good people of Creighton and Denare Beach. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again I rise and present a petition as it relates to cellphone 
coverage in northwestern Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

To cause the provincial government to improve cell 
service coverage for northern communities like St. 
George’s Hill, Dillon, Michel Village, Dore Lake, Michel 
Point, and Sled Lake to provide similar quality of cell 
coverage as southern communities currently enjoy. This 
would provide support to our northern industries as well as 
mitigate safety concerns associated with living in the 
remote North. 

 
And as I say day in, day out, Mr. Speaker, the people that have 
signed this petition have come from all throughout 
Saskatchewan and on this particular page they came from Dore 
Lake and Michel Point. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition in support of better seniors’ 
care here in this province. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out 
that the government, this government has removed regulations 
requiring a minimum quality of care which has led to neglect in 
our long-term care homes because of short-staffing, chronic 
short-staffing across the province, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the provincial 
government to immediately undertake meaningful steps to 
improve the quality of seniors’ care, including more 
spaces and more choices for seniors; ensuring higher 
standards of care in public facilities, private facilities, and 
home care; ensuring appropriate staffing levels in seniors’ 
care facilities; restoring regulations that provide minimum 
standards of care; and providing more support to help 
seniors remain independent in their own homes for as long 
as they desire. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Regina and 
White City. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A 
pleasure to join and to present a petition for undersigned 
residents in the province of Saskatchewan who are concerned 
about the high cost of post-secondary education in this 
province, a concern that is growing more pressing all the time 
under this government’s watch, Mr. Speaker. In the prayer that 
reads as follows: 
 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 
cause the provincial government to immediately increase 
the funding for post-secondary education in this province, 
with a legislated provision that this increase in funding be 
used to lower tuition rates. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by individuals 
from Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition in support of better schools. And the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
call on this government to immediately stop ignoring 
schools and start prioritizing students by capping 
classroom sizes, increasing support for students, and 
developing a transparent plan to build and repair our 
schools. 

 
These petitions are signed by residents of Saskatoon. I so 
submit. Thank you. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

University of Regina Researchers Win Physics Prize 
 
Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just last week the 
University of Regina proved once again that it is a top 
contender among Canadian universities when it comes to 
high-achieving researchers. Physics researchers from the 
University of Regina were a part of a team that won the 2016 
Breakthrough Prize in Fundamental Physics for their discovery 
of neutrino oscillations — definition quiz to follow — that are 
helping us increase our understanding of how the universe was 
formed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the project was a collaboration of approximately 
500 leading researchers from around the world. The U of R 
team leader, Mauricio Barbi, emphasized how significant this 
achievement is in demonstrating our local research capacity. 
Other team members from the U of R included adjunct 
professor Roman Tacik, post-doctoral fellow Nick Hastings, 



November 18, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7711 

former graduate student Caio Licciardi, current graduate 
students Spencer Giffin and Anezka Kolaceke. 
 
The $3 million prize was divided by all 500 team members, but 
for the Regina researchers and I’m sure for all of us, it’s the 
recognition that counts. This innovation work will hopefully 
lead scientists to learn more about the origins of our universe. 
 
I would ask all members to join with me in congratulating the 
University of Regina physics team for their innovative research 
and recent accomplishment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Council Promotes Multiculturalism in Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, we’re joined here today by many 
members of the Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan. These 
folks do phenomenal work each and every day to promote and 
strengthen multiculturalism in Saskatchewan. 
 
The list of events and initiatives that MCOS supports here in 
Saskatchewan is long and impressive: Black History Month, 
Heritage Week, anti-racism workshops, International Women’s 
Day, International Day for the Elimination of Racial 
Discrimination, Hispanic Heritage Month, Asian Heritage 
Month, Aboriginal History Month, Canada’s Multiculturalism 
Day, Culture Days, Regina’s Mosaic festival, Saskatoon’s Folk 
Fest, and many, many more. 
 
But MCOS does more than help with great events in our 
province. During the federal election, they helped raise the 
profile of the importance of multicultural values to our 
democracy and encouraged their members and supporters to 
raise these issues with their local candidates. 
 
We know that the last federal campaign was particularly 
divisive, and MCOS was just one of many organizations calling 
for a more collaborative and respectful approach. MCOS has 
also led the way in calling for reconciliation with 
Saskatchewan’s indigenous peoples. The treaty relationship 
binds all of us together: First Nations, recent immigrants, and 
the children and grandchildren of immigrants alike. And MCOS 
has been a strong voice for strengthening our communities by 
strengthening the treaty relationship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking the 
leaders at MCOS for all the work they do today and the work 
they’ve done over the last 41 years to help our province realize 
the full potential of its motto “from many peoples, strength.” 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 

Opening of Canora Health and Wellness Centre 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
tomorrow will be an exciting day for the people of Canora and 
surrounding communities. I will have the honour of attending 
the grand opening of the Canora Health and Wellness Centre in 
its newly renovated space at the Canora Hospital. This facility 
hosts Canora’s collaborative emergency centre, the CEC. This 
CEC has been providing extended hours of primary care and 

24/7 emergency care since July 2014 in two separate locations. 
Now it’s all done under one roof at the health and wellness 
centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new CEC is a great achievement for the 
community and an excellent example of patient-centred care. It 
ensures reliable, timely access to care around the clock. I’m 
proud to say that there have been no emergency service 
interruptions in Canora since the CEC opened. This is another 
example of how our government is contributing to better health 
care for Saskatchewan people. Our government contributed 
$775,000 to the renovation of the new space and will provide 
financial support of $375,000 for the operation of the CEC. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were many dedicated partners who have 
helped make the CEC and the new centre a reality. I would like 
to thank a few of them: the Sunrise Health Region, the town of 
Canora and surrounding municipalities, the local health 
foundation, front-line health care providers and managers, and 
STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society]. Please join me in 
congratulating the community of Canora and district. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Sharing a Student’s Member’s Statement 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I have an inspiring and 
impressive student shadowing me as an MLA today. His name 
is Tyan Cherepuschak, and he’s in grade 7. All on his own, 
without any help, he has prepared impressive member’s 
statements today. Frankly they’re better than the one that I had 
prepared, so I’m going to share his here today: 
 

Mr. Speaker, as being a student attending Pilot Butte 
School I go there every day to get an education and learn. 
We have teachers and educational assistants to help us 
learn and grow strong.  
 
However, Mr. Speaker, when we don’t have enough 
teachers or too many students in a classroom, it makes it 
harder to learn. Last year in my class we had over 35 
students in our classroom. That is way too many kids in 
one room. Having less students gives us more one-on-one 
time with our teachers, which is important, which is what 
lots of us need. 
 
So I ask, Mr. Speaker, that there is a limit of students in 
one room because it is just not acceptable to have so many 
students in one classroom. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 
He goes on as well to have written some questions, and I’ll 
share one question. “Mr. Speaker, I ask to the Minister of 
Education: why does he think it’s okay to have so many kids in 
one classroom?” 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are questions prepared entirely by Tyan in a 
statement entirely on his own. I ask all members to certainly 
show respect for this strong, young leader within Saskatchewan. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 



7712 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2015 

Grant Provides Financial Resources for Students 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to recognize November 
15th to 21st as Education Savings Week. Education Savings 
Week is a nationally recognized week aiming at increasing 
financial literacy and encouraging people to save for their 
children’s education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government wants to ensure that as many 
students as possible have the financial resources they need to 
attend a complete post-secondary education. That’s why we 
launched the Saskatchewan advantage grant for education 
savings — SAGES — program in 2014. SAGES provides 
incentives for a family to save for their children’s education. 
 
Under the program, the Government of Saskatchewan provides 
a grant for 10 per cent per year on contributions made to 
registered education savings plans, to a maximum of $250 per 
child. Over 30,000 Saskatchewan children have received more 
than $8.5 million under the program today. That’s direct money 
going into our children’s dreams of becoming doctors, 
firefighters, teachers, tradespeople, just to name a few. 
 
This is a prime example of how this government supports 
post-secondary education. Mr. Speaker, I encourage all 
Saskatchewan families to save for their children’s education 
through the Saskatchewan advantage grant for education 
savings. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 

Trade Relationship With India 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is an 
honour to join with the Premier in welcoming the High 
Commissioner, Vishnu Prakash, of the republic of India. 
 
Saskatchewan enjoys a long trading history with India, and it’s 
a relationship that has seen significant growth in the last decade. 
Since 2007 there has been an increase of 86 per cent in yearly 
trade to India, from $591 million to $1.1 billion, from peas, 
lentils, and mustard, to fertilizer products. 
 
The benefits of this relationship are significant to both India and 
Saskatchewan. In addition to the strength of the already existing 
trade relationship, there is a willingness to grow that 
relationship. A great example of this is when earlier this year 
the Premier witnessed a historic agreement with India’s Prime 
Minister Modi, making way for India to purchase uranium from 
Saskatchewan mines. This diverse trade relationship and the 
cultural contribution that India makes towards our towns, our 
cities make India a very close friend to Saskatchewan. 
 
I ask all members to join with me in both welcoming the High 
Commissioner to the Legislative Assembly and acknowledge 
the importance of this trading relationship that we all share. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 

Statements by Opposition Member 
 
Mr. Steinley: — On Monday, the NDP’s [New Democratic 
Party] Education critic mounted his soapbox to stoke fears 
about maintenance on the 18 new schools our government is 
building and attack another long-serving business in 
Saskatchewan. Looking at the NDP’s record, it’s no surprise 
they don’t understand school maintenance because they didn’t 
do any; in fact they closed 176 schools. 
 
But the next part is even more worrying — the member from 
Rosemont’s continual, unfounded attacks on businesses. Only a 
few months ago, he was forced to apologize after making a false 
claim about a local company in this very Chamber. Then only a 
few weeks ago, that same member had to apologize to the 
Saskatchewan Heavy Construction Association for not 
understanding how infrastructure projects worked. Now he’s at 
it again. Johnson Controls is the most recent target of the 
NDP’s politics, a business that employs over 50 Saskatchewan 
people in not one but two Saskatchewan offices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here is the reality of the company the NDP so 
readily attacks. They have been working on K to 12 
[kindergarten to grade 12] schools in Saskatchewan for over 50 
years. They worked on this very Legislative Building when it 
was first constructed. In fact they’re at work right now in every 
public and Catholic school in Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, when 
will the member from Rosemont learn his drive-by smears on 
businesses just show how out of touch he is with Saskatchewan 
people? 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Carbon Capture and Storage Project 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, next week the Premier will have a 
chance to hear from top climate scientists in Ottawa. Now I 
think that’s a really good thing, Mr. Speaker, because we’ve 
heard some really concerning messages from his team on this 
issue. In fact one of the messages they’ve given is that climate 
change is a “myth” based on “witchcraft reasoning.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier has never denounced that 
statement. I think it would be wise for him to do so before he 
goes to meet with the other premiers and before he goes to the 
UN [United Nations] climate change conference. So a simple 
question to the Premier: does he believe that climate change is a 
myth based on witchcraft reasoning, as a member of his team 
said, or does he denounce that statement for the backwards and 
out-of-touch statement that it is? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — I thank the member for his question, Mr. 
Speaker. The government obviously believes in the impacts of 
man-made climate change. Were it not the case, we wouldn’t be 
making the largest single public sector investment in North 
America to deal with the problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the last number of months or weeks, I should 
say, the Leader of the Opposition has been attacking and calling 



November 18, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7713 

for, I think, the end of the carbon capture and sequestration 
project in southeast Saskatchewan. Well he wants to talk now. 
He’s asked a question. I hope you’d give it a chance further to 
be an answer that’s heard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this project represents the largest per capita 
investment, public sector investment that we’re aware of, not 
just in North America but around the world, to try to mitigate 
the impact of CO2 on the climate of the world. Mr. Speaker, 
moreover we have outlined a number of initiatives across 
government to deal with this particular issue, to help us meet 
the challenge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a lot to overcome in the province. We 
have high emissions per capita and we have taken over from a 
government, an NDP government that, like so many other 
issues, talks a lot about an issue, talks a lot about CO2, but on 
their watch, emissions went up 70 per cent, Mr. Speaker. We 
have a lot of work to do. We’re committed to doing the work. 
That’s why we’re investing in carbon capture sequestration 
technology. I hope he’ll join us in support of that effort. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I didn’t hear the member 
denounce the statement made by his candidate about climate 
change. You know, it’s not just backwards statements coming 
from someone on the team about witchcraft-inspired myths, Mr. 
Speaker, as they believe. When the new Environment minister, 
when he was appointed back in May, he wouldn’t even say 
whether or not he believed that climate change was real. When 
pushed repeatedly, he finally said that well he’d need to talk to 
his officials first to see where the science was on that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
You might think that that sort of issue, believing in climate 
change, would be sort of important when appointing the 
Environment minister. You know, go along with questions like, 
do you believe that the earth is round? Do you acknowledge 
that gravity exists? Do you recognize that climate change is 
real? You know, that kind of thing. So it’s odd that, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Environment minister could not answer that. 
And it calls into question, it calls concern about what the 
Premier actually believes. 
 
Once again I say to the Premier: will he denounce the statement 
made by his candidate that said climate change is a myth based 
on witchcraft reasoning? Yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the government’s 
commitment to help with the fight against climate change is 
pretty clear. We have invested more per capita than anywhere 
else in North America in technology that’ll help solve the 
problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hon. member will know that Canada’s 
emissions account for about two and half per cent, maybe 
sometimes closer to 3 per cent of world emissions. And so we 
must do better for Canadians and better by this issue 
environmentally, but we also need to be worried about the fact 
that in China they’re building a coal plant, one every 13 days. 

In India they have a number of coal plants on the books as well. 
And we need to be investing in technology that will actually 
reduce emissions in those parts of the world. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s why we’ve made carbon capture and 
sequestration a priority. 
 
I will denounce something though, Mr. Speaker. I’ll denounce 
the record of the members opposite. The record of the members 
opposite . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well he doesn’t seem to 
care about the record of the members opposite. You know, he 
doesn’t want to hear about it, Mr. Speaker, because under the 
NDP’s watch, they talked a lot about the environment just like 
they talked a lot about health care, just like they talked a lot 
about helping people with intellectual disabilities. 
 
They would talk about the environment, and their record under 
the NDP: 70 per cent increase in GHG [greenhouse gas] 
emissions. That’s the problem that we’re going to deal with, 
Mr. Speaker, going forward, with investments in technology, 
with our own greenhouse gas legislation that we passed on this 
side of the House, Mr. Speaker, while they were inactive for 16 
long years. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s embarrassing for the province 
of Saskatchewan that we have the only Premier going to the 
conference, Mr. Speaker, with such a backwards team when it 
comes to this. We have an Environment minister that waffles. 
We have the Premier continuing to denounce, a completely 
ridiculous statement by one of his candidates. But it shouldn’t 
be surprising because if we look at the actions of this Premier, 
we will see that this is not an issue that he takes seriously one 
bit. The Highways minister is talking about actions, and this is a 
real problem here when it comes to climate change because we 
have seen cuts by this Premier to the Go Green and EnerGuide. 
We have seen him . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you. I’ll be able to hear the question 
now. I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — We have seen him refuse to implement his 
promise for a technology fund, and he doesn’t even mention 
climate change in the new Environmental Code. And this year 
he gave just $100,000, just $100,000 to climate change 
programming, and every cent of that was connected to the 
carbon capture project. He has put every climate change egg in 
one basket and look how that’s turned out, Mr. Speaker. The 
project is not working. But even if it worked perfectly, Mr. 
Speaker, it would cut our emissions by about 1 per cent. So 
when the Premier meets with the other premiers, when he talks 
at the UN climate conference, what on earth is he going to talk 
about now that his marquee project is a disaster? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the hyperbole’s been ramped 
up in the last few days, certainly in the last 24 hours. Maybe it’s 
connected to the fact that that Leader of the Opposition has led 
his party to 25 per cent in the polls, down from Mr. 
Lingenfelter. I was wrong yesterday — I said he had taken the 



7714 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2015 

NDP Party down six points from the days of Mr. Lingenfelter, 
those halcyon days for New Democrats. I was actually wrong. 
They’re down 7 per cent from the days. So now they’re getting 
a little desperate and there’s more hyperbole. Sometimes it’s 
anger and sometimes it’s hyperbole. The bottom line . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we will proudly go to Ottawa 
and we will note for all of the other Premiers and anyone else 
that’s interested that the province and the people of 
Saskatchewan, through their electrical utility, are investing 
more in the issue of CO2 mitigation than any other jurisdiction 
in the Dominion of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when we do that, notwithstanding the impact on 
Saskatchewan emissions, we’ll be able to speak to a global 
issue. The world’s continuing to burn coal. China’s building 
coal plants, I say to my hon. friend. India is building coal . . . 
Japan’s reanimating their coal industry. Germany’s opened up 
coal plants. So, Mr. Speaker, we need to find the solution to 
reduce the CO2 emissions around coal, Mr. Speaker. That’s part 
of this government’s plan for leadership on the issue. We will 
proudly go to Ottawa and note this leadership. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when . . . And I would say to my hon. friend 
that the plant has been restarted, that even through the problems 
it captured 400 000 tonnes of CO2, about 400 000 more tonnes 
than the opposite members captured. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
restart is going very well. And I would caution, I would counsel 
him to be a bit circumspect about pronouncing disaster on the 
project because I have a feeling he’ll be eating those words very 
soon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The opposition seems to want to have five or 
six people talking at the same time. Please make up your mind 
who’s going to ask the questions. And that goes for the 
government as well. I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it was Senator 
Manchin, the coal-loving senator from Western Virginia, Mr. 
Speaker, who talked about hyperbole and marketing spin. And 
do you know when he talked about that, Mr. Speaker? It was 
after learning the truth about what is happening with this 
Premier’s carbon capture project and his frustration with what 
he was told by this Premier and the fact that it is not actually 
rooted and grounded in what are the facts and the truth of the 
matter, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, I wish the Premier would see that we’re missing out 
on an incredible opportunity as a province to create good jobs 
— thousands of them — by tackling climate change, by 
wrapping up renewable energy and investing in energy 
efficiency. But the Premier, we saw it again today, Mr. Speaker. 
He is happy to keep all of his eggs in the carbon capture basket. 
 
In his presentation in Saudi Arabia, this government’s head of 
carbon capture said the $1.5 billion project has proven the 
economics of CCS [carbon capture and storage]. Mr. Speaker, 
that cannot be possibly true in any way. Leaked documents 
clearly show this: “The economics for BD3 ICCS was 

developed around the 1 million tonnes being sold at a starting 
price of $25 per tonne, escalating by 2 per cent per year.” 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we know that’s not even close to happening 
with this project. So to the Premier: why is the government 
saying that the economics are proven when we haven’t even 
come close to selling 1 million tonnes a year? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this is arguably the largest 
research and development innovation project undertaken in the 
province’s history, larger even than the synchrotron, which was 
an important project and also had challenges in its 
commissioning year. Mr. Speaker, even with the challenges in 
the commissioning year for BD3 [Boundary dam 3], we have 
captured 400 000 tonnes of CO2. Mr. Speaker, I would also 
point out for members that the restart so far is going well. 
There’s a lot more work to do, Mr. Speaker, but very early on, 
very early on there’s a good deal of optimism around the 
challenges, around the fact that challenges at the plant have 
been met, with more work to be done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I do encourage the member to plan for the day when he 
might have to, might have to kind of walk back some of the 
remarks about this project being a disaster, Mr. Speaker, as 
SaskPower engineers have proven to be very innovative. 
SaskPower engineers have proven to be very, very formidable, 
Mr. Speaker, in overcoming the problems. And we have a 
confidence that they’re going to do that again. 
 
With respect to the whole file, Mr. Speaker, I hope that we have 
the support of members opposite when early next week we will 
be announcing through SaskPower the objective that by 2050 
we will rely 50 per cent on renewable energy for our electricity 
supply in the province of Saskatchewan — 50 per cent by 2050 
— and a huge ramping up of solar, Mr. Speaker, of wind, and 
possibly geothermal. We look forward to the support, the 
hyperbolic support of the member opposite when that 
announcement is made. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this project better end up 
working; we have sunk $1.5 billion into it. Ratepayers in the 
province should expect absolutely nothing less. The catch is 
though, Mr. Speaker, they’re going around the world saying the 
economics of this project are proven when, by the Premier’s 
own admission, they’re not meeting the targets that internal 
documents say need to be met in order to have an economic 
case for this project. 
 
Let’s look at the facts, Mr. Speaker. The government’s $1.5 
billion project captured 114 000 tonnes in 2014. That’s a 46 per 
cent capture rate. And it captured just 304 000 tonnes in 2015, a 
37 per cent capture rate. But the economics of this project 
require a 90 per cent capture rate and 1 million tonnes of CO2 
being sold to Cenovus. The economics of this project certainly 
don’t allow for tens of millions of dollars in penalties being 
paid to Cenovus. We know the Sask Party is already signing big 
cheques to this Alberta oil company. Now they say that of 
course this . . . Well we think it’s unexpected. They say it was 
expected and that actually now they think that it would take 



November 18, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7715 

years to reach that 1 million tonnes a year. Completely not 
believable, Mr. Speaker, and very puzzling why they would 
enter into such a contract. 
 
But again to the Premier: how can the Premier possibly claim 
that the economics of this project are proven? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, there have been a number of 
people who have weighed in on this subject, most recently 
Carolyn Preston, the renowned expert in this area who holds a 
Ph.D. and degrees in engineering and chemistry. She has said 
something that I think is very important: 
 

I’m wholly supportive of the project, and I believe that 
SaskPower made the right decision for Saskatchewan when 
it undertook the planning, design, and construction of the 
power plant retrofit to incorporate carbon capture and 
storage to assure environmental sustainability of coal-fire 
generation [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
She is a renowned expert in this area. She certainly believes that 
SaskPower made the right choice in this, Mr. Speaker, because 
she knows that there is about 2 to 300 years of coal supply 
down in the southeast part of our province, and if we’re going 
to continue to use it for baseload generation here in 
Saskatchewan, we have to have the carbon capture and storage 
associated with it, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why the 
Government of Saskatchewan made that decision, and that’s 
why we’re getting the kind of support from international experts 
that we are. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we see once again another 
example of being a salesman, talking about the fact that the 
economics of this project are proven. And then when I ask, Mr. 
Speaker, how they can make that claim based on the fact that 
they’re not anywhere close to reaching 1 million tonnes a year, 
as the economics dictate according to internal documents — 
nothing. The Premier just sits there, hands it off to the minister, 
and we get an answer that’s not even related to the economic 
fundamentals of this project. And they’re joking about it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Independent analysis of this project show that Saskatchewan 
will lose, Saskatchewan . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Independent analysis of this project show that 
Saskatchewan people will lose at least $1 billion as a result of 
this project. It could be as high as a $2 billion loss. And that 
analysis, Mr. Speaker, is based on the notion of selling 1 
million tonnes of CO2 to Cenovus every single year, which we 
know is not happening in any way. The financial losses for the 
people of Saskatchewan could be even greater if this 
government is jetting around the world making claims, Mr. 

Speaker, that the economics are proven. 
 
To the Premier, I’ll give him another opportunity to answer this 
question: when will the campaign, when will the campaign of 
misinformation finally end, and when will we start to see 
accountability and transparency? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the economics around this 
facility are this, that the sale of electricity from this facility is an 
important part of it. That’s a part of the sale of the electricity. 
But otherwise this facility would likely have to be shut down 
because it doesn’t meet the standards going forward. So there’s 
that to begin with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s a sale of 1 million tonnes of CO2 and 400 000 tonnes so 
far in the past year, Mr. Speaker. We are expecting, and I think 
SaskPower engineers are certainly working very hard and 
diligent to make sure that we get towards our target of 1 million 
tonnes in the future, Mr. Speaker. There’s that as well. 
 
And then in addition to that, Mr. Speaker, the sale of the CO2 
will be used in enhanced oil recovery . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker, then of course the sale of the CO2 
will be used in enhanced oil recovery, Mr. Speaker, which of 
course the province of Saskatchewan gets royalties from as 
well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So there’s a number of areas that are important in this project, 
Mr. Speaker, the least of which of course . . . or the most 
important of course is the fact that we are going to be capturing 
400 000 tonnes over the last year and we’re working towards 1 
million tonnes. That’s something that’s very, very important in 
terms of climate change initiatives from this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Changes to Liquor Retailing 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party inherited a fortune 
and they raked in record revenues, but they’ve blown through 
all that money, racked up a mountain of debt, and now they’re 
putting up a bunch of for sale signs. This government’s own 
survey shows that Saskatchewan people want our current hybrid 
liquor system fixed, but we don’t want to sell over half of our 
public liquor stores. And that’s what this government is doing 
because they’re broke. 
 
The minister admits that 99 per cent of liquor prices won’t 
change, even though that’s one of the things that Saskatchewan 
people want to see. So to the minister: why not just fix our 
current hybrid system and deliver better prices for 
Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 
Investments and SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority]. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a privilege to finally stand in this House and 
answer a question again. What I want to say is that starting 



7716 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2015 

about a year ago, in November, we started a consultation 
process that saw 6,600 people across the province answer the 
survey. Over 3,000 people have written submissions into the 
consultation process. That ended in January, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today, I was very pleased to announce a new retail system — if 
we are so chosen to be government after the next provincial 
election — that the people and consumers are asking for in this 
province. They’re asking for more choice. They’re asking for 
convenience, and they’re asking for price competitiveness, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what this system will do moving forward. 
We’ve seen it with the introduction of four private stores. 
Consumers are marching with their feet to those stores because 
of convenience, because of selection, and also because of 
competitiveness. That’s why we’re expanding the private 
system with 12 new stores and also conversion of 40 existing 
stores, Mr. Speaker, to follow what the general public are 
asking for, Mr. Speaker. They want to go back to the ’90s, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan have moved 
way past that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — This minister and this party don’t want to fix 
anything. Their answer to everything is privatize, privatize, 
privatize. We could easily improve public stores to deal with 
more choice, more convenience, more competitive pricing. We 
can improve what we have. We can improve selection. We can 
improve more fridges. We can have growler stations and 
promote local craft brewers. We could put liquor kiosks in 
grocery stores. And we don’t need for sale . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — We know we don’t need for sale signs to do 
any of the things that the minister’s talking about. So again to 
the minister: why won’t you take meaningful steps to actually 
fix our current hybrid system? That’s what people want. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, the 
consultation is very clear around choice and convenience and 
competitive pricing, as well as levelling the playing fields, Mr. 
Speaker, so that all retailers across the province have the same 
opportunity buying alcohol at the same price. Whether it’s 
franchisees, Mr. Speaker — 190 — some had beer sales; some 
didn’t. We’re levelling the playing field so franchisees, 
off-sales, private stores, government stores will all be operating 
on the same level, Mr. Speaker, adding competitiveness and 
competitive pricing to the piece. That’s what people are asking 
for; that’s what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And she says why don’t we do certain other things? And that 
certainly could have been done. It could have been done when 
they were in government. They failed to do it. They say that we 

shouldn’t be converting any stores. Under the NDP, Mr. 
Speaker, they converted stores in Estevan and Radville, Mr. 
Speaker. Under their government, they did the same thing that 
we are doing, but for some reason because we’re going a little 
bit further, Mr. Speaker, it’s not okay. Mr. Speaker, because I 
believe the general public want us to go further, Mr. Speaker, 
and I think we’ll find out the NDP are still living in the ’90s. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, we already have a lot of private 
sector involvement in liquor retailing. We have 643 private 
outlets compared to 75 public stores. But if the Sask Party has 
their way, 40 public stores will be sold off and that won’t mean 
better prices for Saskatchewan people. But do you know what it 
will mean? It will mean less money to fix roads, to put 
resources in our kids’ classrooms, to reduce ER [emergency 
room] waits and pay for more specialists. We’ll have less 
money for that because the profits, the profits from these stores 
will be flowing to private corporations, many from out of 
province. Why do you think they want to buy them, Mr. 
Speaker? So to the minister: setting aside his ideological desire 
to privatize everything, how can you justify that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, one other thing that was 
very clear through the consultation process, not only the choice 
of convenience and the competitive pricing, was also the fact 
that the government would remain revenue neutral through the 
new system. That is being accomplished. No matter what they 
say or what they tweet, Mr. Speaker, I would ask them to follow 
through with the backgrounder, Mr. Speaker, as well as the 
information that was provided in the consultation process, Mr. 
Speaker, because what they’re saying, what they’re saying . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member asked the question. She should 
perhaps listen to the response, including the two members at the 
far end who have been talking virtually the whole time. I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this system moving 
forward would be revenue neutral because the revenue that 
government generates to fix roads, to fix hospitals, to put into 
education comes from the wholesale piece, Mr. Speaker, not 
much from the retail at all. It comes from the wholesale piece, 
Mr. Speaker. We still control that. We’ll still generate the 
revenue we need, Mr. Speaker, because on this side of the 
government, this side of the floor, Mr. Speaker, this government 
would rather put money into hospitals and rather put money 
into education, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We saw what they did under NDP. They built a brand new 
liquor store in Riversdale, Mr. Speaker. They built a brand new 
liquor store in Moose Jaw. They built liquor stores all over, Mr. 
Speaker, while our hospitals suffered. That will not happen 
under this government. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
 



November 18, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7717 

Government’s Fiscal Management 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s become clear that the 
dominant theme of this session of the legislature is that we just 
can’t trust what we’re hearing from that government and that 
Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last week, a reporter asked the Finance minister: “So you 
haven’t made any cuts at all that you personally know of?” The 
Finance minister said, “No.” And then the Finance minister 
said: “Have we pulled operational dollars from third parties? 
Not to my knowledge.”  
 
But now the truth is starting to trickle out and it’s been learned 
that the Sask Party has actually pulled $11.5 million back in 
post-secondary funding, Mr. Speaker. So either the Finance 
minister is mismanaging and not paying any attention to big 
financial decisions, or he’s not being honest. To the Finance 
minister: which is it? Why won’t he come clean with 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Regina Rosemont knows he 
cannot use that terminology in the House. Will you please rise, 
withdraw that remark, and apologize. I recognize the member 
for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Withdraw and apologize. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, every single day in this 
legislature those members come into this House, every single 
one of them, and demand that the government spend more 
money. They demand that the government spend more money 
in health care. They demand that the government spend more 
money in education. They demand that the government spend 
more money in highways and infrastructure, even cellular 
towers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The people of this province are pragmatic. They understand 
when oil is at $40 a barrel that you have to do things on the 
expenditure side. 
 
We can follow the NDP way. We can follow the NDP way and 
have the citizens of Saskatchewan languishing on the longest 
wait times for surgical procedures . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, we can follow the NDP 
lead during economic challenging times. We could jack up 
property taxes to the point where there’s a tax revolt in rural 
Saskatchewan. We can go and rip up GRIP [gross revenue 
insurance program] contracts with farmers, Mr. Speaker, and 
tell the people in rural Saskatchewan to fix their own highways 
to balance the budget. Or, Mr. Speaker, perhaps most 
egregiously, we could sit on our hands while thousands and 
thousands of our young people leave the province, and have the 
unmitigated gall to say, well, there’s more for the rest of us here 
now, Mr. Speaker. 
 

We’re not going to follow the NDP plan. We’re going to take a 
pragmatic and prudent approach to balancing the budget. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 

Proposed Changes to Liquor Retail System 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, today I was pleased to announce our government’s 
intent to expand opportunities in private liquor retailing sales in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The new retailing model is our response to consumers’ and 
stakeholders’ feedback collected throughout a comprehensive 
review of liquor retailing in the province. The consultations 
concluded on January 30th, 2015, with more than 6,600 people 
completing a survey and more than 3,000 people posting 
comments. Respondents indicated that increased product 
selection and cost competitiveness were important 
considerations in any changes to the future of retailing of liquor 
in Saskatchewan, as was maintaining current levels of revenue. 
 
Planned changes called on the conversion of 40 SLGA stores 
that currently do not meet targets of efficiency and will need 
significant capital expenditures. We will look to the private 
sector to provide liquor retailing services in those communities. 
We will also identify 12 other communities . . . or have already 
identified 12 other communities that are currently underserved. 
This means 52 new opportunities for business owners to be 
selected by a transparent RFP, request for proposal, process. 
 
We’re also going to create a level playing field for all liquor 
retailers, whether they are SLGA stores, rural franchises, 
off-sale outlets, or private stores. Soon there’ll be one set of 
rules for all these different stores, replacing 70 years of inequity 
amongst the retailers. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Under this model, Saskatchewan residents will see more choice, 
more convenience, and more competitive pricing. Another 
change will allow commercial permittees like restaurants, sports 
facilities, and convention centres to purchase products from any 
liquor retailer. Under the current requirements they purchase 
exclusively from SLGA stores and franchises. 
 
For the 39 communities where existing government stores are 
being converted, consumers will still be able to purchase 
alcohol through a private retailer once the transition takes place. 
Converting stores has happened both under previous 
governments and by this government. We’ve seen recent 
successes in regards to this over the past year in Ituna, 
Kerrobert, Langenburg, and Ponteix, all now home of 
successful privately operated franchises. 
 
Government will not implement the new expanded private retail 
system until it has had a mandate from the people of 
Saskatchewan following the next provincial election. We 
believe these changes will produce a better alcohol retailing 
system in Saskatchewan while preserving an important source 



7718 Saskatchewan Hansard November 18, 2015 

of revenue for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We believe we’re taking the right steps towards a system that is 
fair to retailers and beneficial to the consumer while protecting 
revenues for the government priorities like health care, 
education, and infrastructure. It’s about the consumer, Mr. 
Speaker — more choice, more convenience, and competitive 
pricing. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party government has 
obviously ignored the results of its own survey, refusing once 
again to listen to Saskatchewan people. Retail SLGA stores are 
very profitable. They bring in hundreds of millions of dollars 
that help fund health care and education, and when the stores 
are gone, that income is gone. That’s not what Saskatchewan 
people want. 
 
The loss of that revenue, the money that pays for roads, for 
surgeries, and for teachers, the loss of that revenue is not a 
welcome change. This government says it can’t make 
meaningful progress in ER wait times. It doesn’t have the 
resources to fix overcrowding in our kids’ classrooms. It isn’t 
even trying to address the seniors’ care crisis. And it can’t get 
the job done when it comes to the budget, since it has a deficit 
of about $1 billion this fiscal year. 
 
Selling off hugely profitable retail SLGA stores is not going to 
help those problems. It’s going to cut millions in retail profits 
out of the province’s coffers. The minister was clear this 
morning that the retail prices for consumers won’t change in 99 
per cent of cases. The retail prices will be the same. If the price 
stays the same and a portion of the profits goes to a private 
retailer, Mr. Speaker, that means taxpayers are getting much, 
much less. The answer to SLGA not serving its customers well 
enough is to fix SLGA retail outlets. Privatization is now this 
government’s answer for everything. And I think instead of 
privatization, we should look to modernization. 
 
SLGA stores need better hours. They need better selection. 
They need more flexible pricing. They need growler stations 
and promotion for local craft beer and liquor, more cold beer. 
And why not SLGA kiosks in grocery stores? In short, SLGA 
stores need to be run like a business, something that this 
government refuses to do because instead of modernizing, they 
are privatizing. Instead of putting Saskatchewan families first, 
they’re putting other corporations first. 
 
One point I want to make is this: this government is dropping 
the ball in a big way when it comes to things that really matter 
— wait times in ERs, specialists, the overcrowding in our 
children’s classrooms, the deficit both taxpayers today and 
taxpayers of the next generation will be paying for. I’d 
encourage this government to focus more on things that really 
matter to Saskatchewan people. NDP supports a hybrid system 
for liquor retailing as we currently have now. What we don’t 
support is selling 40 profitable retail stores out from under the 
people of Saskatchewan who own them. 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Economy 
Committee. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 187, 
The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 2015 
without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration of Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill be now read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has requested 
leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 
No. 187, The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 
2015 and that the bill be now read the third time. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed with third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 187 — The Saskatchewan Farm Security 
Amendment Act, 2015 

 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Agriculture that Bill No. 187, The Saskatchewan Farm Security 
Amendment Act, 2015 be now read the third time and passed 
under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. To facilitate the work of committees, I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
 



November 18, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7719 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 10 
a.m. tomorrow morning. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:37.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7707 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7707 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7708 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7708 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7708 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7708 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7708 
  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 7709 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7709 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7709 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7709 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7710 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7710 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7710 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7710 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 University of Regina Researchers Win Physics Prize 
  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7710 
 Council Promotes Multiculturalism in Saskatchewan 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7711 
 Opening of Canora Health and Wellness Centre 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7711 
 Sharing a Student’s Member’s Statement 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7711 
 Grant Provides Financial Resources for Students 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7712 
 Trade Relationship With India 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7712 
 Statements by Opposition Member 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7712 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Carbon Capture and Storage Project 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7712 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7712 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7715 
 Changes to Liquor Retailing 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7715 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7715 
 Government’s Fiscal Management 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7717 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7717 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Proposed Changes to Liquor Retail System 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7717 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7718 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 7718 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 187 — The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 2015 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7718 
 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


