
























































Hansard: October 19, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 69A  MONDAY, OCTOBER 19, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Hon. Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7351 
 October 19, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
introduce to you and through you and to all members of this 
legislature, Rod Donison. Rod is sitting in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, and he’s the only one there with a police uniform on 
so he’s not hard to find. 
 
Rod Donison was commissioned a chaplain with the Regina 
Police Service this past Sunday. I had the honour of speaking at 
the event and attending with my colleague from Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley who will share more information later on 
this afternoon. Mr. Speaker, I would like all members of the 
House to welcome Rod Donison to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition I would also like to welcome him to the 
legislature and thank him for his many years of service and 
leadership in a very important part of our Saskatchewan society. 
So thank you very much. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition calling for greater support for GSAs 
[gender and sexuality alliance] in Saskatchewan schools. We 
know that this province lags behind others in securing the rights 
of gender- and sexually diverse students. This government’s not 
doing enough to create safe spaces in our schools for sexually 
diverse students or students bullied because of their sexual 
identity or sexual orientation, and that gender- and sexually 
diverse students are four times more likely than their 
heterosexual peers to attempt suicide. We know this 
government must act so that under no circumstances are 
gender- and sexually diverse students denied the right to form 
GSAs within their schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on this 
government to take immediate and meaningful action to 
pass The Respect for Diversity — Student Bill of Rights Act 
and enshrine in legislation the right of Saskatchewan 
students to form GSAs within their schools in order to 
foster caring, accepting, inclusive environments and 
deliver equal opportunities for all students to reach their 
full potential. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
Regina and Moose Jaw. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition from petitioners concerned with the high cost 
of post-secondary education in the province of Saskatchewan, 
and they wish to bring to the Chamber’s attention the following: 
the fact that the average Canadian student in 2014 graduated 
with debt of over $27,000, not including credit card and other 
private debt. In the prayer that reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 
cause the provincial government to immediately increase 
the funding for post-secondary education in this province, 
with a legislated provision that this increase in funding be 
used to lower tuition fees. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals including 
from the city of Regina and Moose Jaw. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition in support of better schools. These residents of 
Saskatchewan wish to bring attention that there’s far too many 
classrooms that are overcrowded, that there’s been hundreds of 
educational assistants eliminated, the positions for those roles. 
Students are not getting the attention they require. Conditions of 
our schools are run down, and there’s plans to rent schools from 
private corporations in an expensive and reckless fashion. So: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on this 
government to immediately stop ignoring schools and start 
prioritizing students by capping classroom sizes, increasing 
support for students, and developing a transparent plan to 
build and repair our schools. 

 
And these petitions are signed by residents of the city of 
Regina. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition in support of better seniors’ care. And the individuals 
who have signed this petition wish to bring to our attention the 
following: many seniors are unable to find spaces in care 
facilities in their communities or with their partners or near 
their family; many seniors are having to wait in hospital beds 
due to the lack of spaces in care facilities; and that the 
Provincial Auditor found that many seniors’ care facilities do 
not have high enough standards of care. I’ll just read the prayer. 
They: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 
provincial government to immediately undertake 



7352 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 2015 

meaningful steps to improve the quality of seniors’ care, 
including creating more spaces and more choices for 
seniors; ensuring higher standards of care in public 
facilities, private facilities, and home care; ensuring 
appropriate staffing levels in seniors’ care facilities; 
restoring regulations that provide minimum standards of 
care; and providing more support to help seniors remain 
independent in their own homes for as long as they desire. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by individuals from La Ronge. 
I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to return to 
introduction of guests to introduce a school group. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave to introduce 
guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognized the member for Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce a group of 25 grade 7 students from Ethel Milliken 
elementary school in Regina. They’re seated in the east gallery, 
and they’re accompanied by their teacher, Ms. Jenaya Giblett. 
And they are here to see how this part of democracy works, and 
I know it’s a great day to be here on the day of a federal 
election. So they’ve been hearing lots about politics, and I think 
we’ll show them a little more of how it works here in 
Saskatchewan. So thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 

Accreditation Restored to College of Medicine 
 
Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In case you didn’t 
listen to the news last Friday, the University of Saskatchewan 
medical school has come off probation. Mr. Speaker, the 
College of Medicine has worked hard with the committee on 
accreditation of Canadian medical schools to make appropriate 
changes to ensure they are able to meet the high standards we 
expect in medical education. This committee was able to see the 
combination of stable university leadership, more doctors 
teaching, and a new study and lounge space for medical 
students correct many of the concerns that were brought up in 
the 2013 review. 
 
This government has always been proud to work as a partner 
with the College of Medicine. This includes our almost $165 
million investment into the College of Medicine to reach 
accreditation. The Health Sciences Building at the University of 
Saskatchewan is also a large part of this commitment, with our 
government providing almost $230 million for the 
state-of-the-art addition to an already impressive campus. 

Mr. Speaker, we are proud of the hard work already done by the 
College of Medicine and, Mr. Speaker, we are confident that the 
U of S [University of Saskatchewan] will continue to work hard 
to achieve the highest possible standards and outcomes for its 
students. I would ask all members to join me in thanking the 
leadership team at the University of Saskatchewan as well as 
congratulating the College of Medicine on this big step forward. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Anniversary of “Famous Five” Privy Council Decision 
 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday marked the 86th 
anniversary of the legal recognition of women as persons here 
in Canada. For that victory, we owe a debt of gratitude to the 
deep convictions and tremendous perseverance of five 
extraordinary Alberta women: Emily Murphy, Irene Parlby, 
Nellie McClung, Louise McKinney, and Henrietta Edwards. 
 
The Famous Five took their case to the Supreme Court of 
Canada, which ruled that the word “persons” in The British 
North America Act did not include women. Undaunted by the 
Supreme Court’s decision, the Famous Five took their case a 
step further to the Privy Council of Great Britain, which was 
then Canada’s highest court. On October 18th, 1929, the Privy 
Council ruled “that the exclusion of women from all public 
office is a relic of days more barbarous than ours.” 
 
Much progress has been made over the last 86 years, but there 
is still so much work to do to ensure equality in all areas of 
politics, law, and life. This is poignantly demonstrated through 
the current federal election. Today when people go to vote, in 
97 ridings there will be no women candidates on the ballot for 
the three major parties, and overall only 33 per cent of ballot 
choices are women. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, there is still a lot of 
work to do. 
 
To quote from Nellie McClung, we as women must “Never 
retract, never explain, never apologize — get things done and 
let them howl.” 
 
To all those who’ve struggled to advance the cause of equality 
and all those who continue to struggle to ensure that women 
have the same opportunity to participate in every sphere of 
society, we say thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 

Dr. F.H. Wigmore Regional Hospital 
Opens in Moose Jaw 

 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. It’s a proud day for 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, as the new Dr. F.H. Wigmore 
Regional Hospital in Moose Jaw begins serving patients today. 
 
This is a hospital like no other in the province or in the nation, 
as a matter of fact. Using the wisdom and experience of 
patients, family members, staff members, and health care 
providers, a multidisciplinary team developed the design of a 
patient- and family-centred health facility. Gone are the days of 
patients wandering the halls, going to multiple departments for 



October 19, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7353 

tests and procedures. The innovation layout developed using 
lean mythology allows health care teams to bring most services 
directly to the patient in a treatment room or a patient’s private 
room. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure to see this $99.5 million 
hospital open and serving patients. All services will be 
operational as of Wednesday, October the 21st. Soon southern 
Saskatchewan’s first MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] in a 
regional hospital will begin service, along with the continued 
use of the hyperbaric oxygen therapy. Mr. Speaker, I look 
forward to the grand opening ceremony on November the 6th, 
when the family of the late Dr. Frederick H. Wigmore will take 
part in the official naming of this wonderful new facility. 
 
The generosity of the community in supporting the Moose Jaw 
Health Foundation’s capital campaign has been tremendous, 
and because of local support this hospital is equipped with state 
of the art equipment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

World Refugee Day 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to bring 
attention to World Refugee Day. This day is recognized by the 
United Nations on June 20th, and this year I was delighted to 
attend the occasion at the Saskatoon Open Door office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Secretary-General of the UN [United Nations] 
states, and I quote: 
 

Refugees are people like anyone else. Like you and me, 
they led ordinary lives before becoming displaced, and 
their biggest dream is to be able to live normally again. 
Let us recall our common humanity, celebrate tolerance 
and diversity, and open our hearts to refugees everywhere. 

 
The United Nations High Commission on Refugees estimate 
that more than 4 million people have fled conflicts in Syria, and 
already in 2015 more than 300,000 people have made the 
treacherous crossing of the Mediterranean. These numbers 
continue to increase as more people seek refuge after fleeing 
their homeland to escape violence and unrest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal government has set a target to bring 
more than 11,000 Syrian refugees, but so far only 2,000 have 
been successfully processed. Mr. Speaker, many Saskatchewan 
residents are calling on the provincial and federal governments 
to urgently welcome refugees. In September, rallies were held 
in both Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
I want to thank the efforts of those in our province advocating 
for refugees. I also want to thank the Regina and Saskatoon 
Open Door Societies, the Saskatchewan Intercultural 
Association, and the Saskatoon Refugee Coalition for their 
tireless work. Mr. Speaker, we must continue to offer 
compassion and assistance to refugees in their time of need. 
Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 

Commissioning Service for Regina Police Service Chaplain 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On Sunday, 
October the 18th, the Minister Responsible for Corrections and 
Policing and I had the opportunity of attending the 
commissioning service for Rod Donison as chaplain for the 
Regina Police Service. Held at the Harvest City Church, the 
commissioning service highlighted Rod’s new leadership role 
as a chaplain for Regina Police Service. 
 
Born and raised in Regina, Saskatchewan, Rod Donison is a 
leader in this city and in this province. Rod is an active member 
in the community and he is involved in numerous organizations. 
One of those organizations is Athletes in Action. It is through 
this program that Rod has served as the chaplain for the 
Saskatchewan Roughriders for the past two years. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a spiritual kinship that connects every 
individual who puts on a police uniform. This connection exists 
because of a duty and a commitment to something larger than 
oneself. Rod understands this commitment and that is why we 
know that the Regina Police Service is in capable hands of a 
real Saskatchewan leader. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I welcome all members to join me in thanking 
Rod for his leadership and his commitment to this province. 
Congratulations, Rod. We know you will do this job humbly 
and with dedication and with great passion. Thank you very 
much, Rod. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Education Week 
 
Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am delighted and 
honoured to acknowledge Education Week in Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, October 18th to 24th has been proclaimed 
Education Week. This year’s theme, Celebrating Each Student, 
is meant to celebrate and recognize the hard work and success 
of both teachers and students across the province. 
 
I’d like to highlight two of the many successful programs being 
delivered in our schools: first, Help Me Tell My Story and 
secondly, Saskatchewan Reads. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Help Me Tell My Story began in 2010 by Ministry 
of Education staff to help improve understanding of First 
Nations and Métis early learners, to help set them up for future 
success. With the help of an engaging turtle puppet and an 
innovative iPad app, the program uses an interactive, 
comprehensive approach rooted in First Nations and Métis 
learning perspectives to assess oral language development for 
pre-kindergarten and kindergarten children. Students can listen 
to the stories in English, Cree, Dene, and Michif. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Reads was developed by the 
provincial reading team in order to help achieve a 
province-wide goal of having 80 per cent of students reading at 
or above grade level by 2020. It’s used to complement existing 
curricula for grades 1, 2, and 3, and it also provides guidance 



7354 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 2015 

for school divisions to build their own reading initiatives to 
meet the needs of their unique student population. 
 
These two programs, Mr. Speaker, highlight the theme of this 
year’s Education Week, Celebrating Each Student. In closing, 
I’d like to again thank our teachers, educational professionals 
and, most importantly, our students for all the hard work they 
put into achieving their success. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Parks, Culture 
and Sport. 
 

Regina Teacher Receives Governor General’s Award 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
to rise today to recognize Kim Sadowsky who received the 
Governor General’s History Award for excellence in teaching in 
recognition of her Native studies class at Thom Collegiate, a 
school in my constituency. She’s one of six recipients this year 
and the only recipient from Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Kim’s class focuses on key historical events in 
relation to the treaty process in Canada. Students gain an 
in-depth perspective as they take on the roles of indigenous and 
non-indigenous people and act out key historical events and 
policies. 
 
As the course nears its end, students explore the effects of 
intergenerational trauma and current social issues. Students 
discover how the past has influenced their understanding of the 
present and as a result they create hopeful possibilities for the 
future through a final inquiry project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the student groups in this course decided to 
engage their school board to raise the Treaty 4 flag. Their group 
was successful and the flag now flies beside the Canadian flag 
of the school division office. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating Kim on receiving 
this great honour and in thanking her for engaging her class in a 
way that drives interest and education on such an important 
topic. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Review of Domestic Violence Deaths 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you. On Thursday the government 
launched an awareness campaign to stop sexual violence 
against women and girls. Though I know there are some 
legitimate concerns about lack of Aboriginal representation in 
the campaign, I’m sure all members agree that this is definitely 
a step in the right direction, and I sincerely thank the 
government for that. 
 
But I think that we need to go a lot further because the sad 
reality is, is that our province has the worst rate of murders by 
intimate partners. So my question is for the Premier: what is his 
government doing to address domestic violence deaths? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I want to thank the member for this 
question. It is a very, very important one. The member is quite 
right. We have the dubious distinction in Saskatchewan in 
leading in this particular category in terms of murder of 
intimate partners. We have the distinction of leading in a 
number of other categories, as the member will know as well, 
when it comes to domestic abuse and sexual abuse or certainly 
assaults, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so the program that was launched last week is just one part 
of the government’s effort in this regard. There is about $11.3 
million in this current budget that’s aimed at initiatives across 
the spectrum. Mr. Speaker, this particular area where lives are 
lost is very, very close to people across the province and 
certainly, for reasons of our political family, for members on 
this side of the House. And so we are reaching out to the 
community-based organizations and stakeholders for their 
advice through the Ministry of Justice in terms of this particular 
issue but the general campaign as well, how it can be improved 
not only by awareness but by public policy and by resources of 
government. 
 
And I’d make the same extension, the same offer to members 
opposite if they have some suggestions, some ideas on how 
Saskatchewan can do much better. Because we must do much 
better for women in this province, for the people of the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I do offer my 
sincere condolences to the Premier and Sask Party members and 
the Sask Party family, as I know this issue has touched them in 
a very personal way, and I extend my sincere condolences. And 
we know sadly this is an issue that has touched many families 
throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
We do have one of the worst . . . We do have the worst rate of 
murders when it comes to domestic violence here in Canada, 
and the sad reality is that it appears to be getting worse. Our 
chief coroner had this to say just a few months ago: “We have 
not seen this level of violence in Saskatchewan — I mean, 
deaths — in my history here. It is certainly a wake-up call.” 
 
Unlike other provinces, Saskatchewan has not had a coroner’s 
inquest or a formal review of these domestic violence deaths. 
And I think that’s something that needs to change. I want 
Saskatchewan to follow the lead of other provinces in formally 
reviewing domestic violence deaths. Is the Premier open to 
that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — I thank the Leader of the Opposition for his 
question, and the short answer is yes. We’re certainly open to 
such a review. Mr. Speaker, even last session members of the 
House will know the government introduced amendments to the 
victims of domestic violence Act. Those were bills 144 and 
152. They were intended to enhance the ability of the police and 
the justice system to offer protection to victims. But I think it is 
fair to say that this sort of special review of these kinds of 
deaths is something that could certainly help, could help inform 
the government’s actions going forward, and we’re open to it as 



October 19, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7355 

well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also need to work harder as a group in terms of this 
particular room, the Legislative Assembly as a government, to 
ensure that there are proper transition and safe shelter resources 
in the province. Part of the help that’s provided by government 
includes support for the 12 transition houses in the province 
today. I’m happy to inform the members that notwithstanding a 
tragic fire of a newly built transition house, the first in a very 
long time in the province’s history in Melfort, the rebuilding is 
under way. And we’re hoping very soon to have those facilities 
available, that help available to the people of Melfort and area 
with the recognition that more needs to be done. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — There are indeed many individual steps that 
need to take place through agencies, through partners in the 
community, through police services in order to ensure that these 
murders are prevented whenever possible, Mr. Speaker. We 
know a formal review component is something that other 
provinces have adopted. New Brunswick, Ontario, Manitoba, 
and Alberta have formal committees that review domestic 
violence deaths and then make formal public recommendations 
to prevent them in the future. 
 
The government’s very own expert in the Ministry of Justice 
acknowledges that it is best practice to review these murders, to 
learn from them, and to take action to prevent future deaths, and 
our chief coroner has recognized that this needs to serve as a 
wake-up call to us. I think we need to listen to that. 
 
So specifically around the idea of formal review processes other 
provinces have followed, this is something that I believe we 
can’t wait on, something that we can move on in short order. 
Would the Premier be willing to move this along in a quick 
way? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for the 
question. And I’m happy to inform members of the House that 
within a matter of weeks, I think it was going to be next week, 
the ministers of Justice were going to be announcing such a 
process and such a review. And so we can certainly make that 
announcement here today that that is forthcoming. 
 
I do think there are and there will be other ideas and other 
measures that members on both sides of the House will be able 
to offer up. And we really need to be canvassing all such ideas 
because, to be leading as we are in these areas, in these 
statistics, of course means that we’re leading when it comes to 
loss of women. We’re leading in murders and we’re leading in 
violence against the people whom we represent in this 
Chamber. It’s obviously actually much more than just a 
statistical report that we get on an annual basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also take this, and I thank the Leader of 
the Opposition for this chance and this platform, to encourage 
anybody that might be watching proceedings today to share that 
video because we do have to start with education and 
awareness. That video will be played in movie theatres. It’s 
available on social media, on platforms of access to young 

people. I think we all agree that young people, especially young 
men, boys need to see this particular video and become much 
more aware of this particular issue. And so I thank the member 
for the platform to raise the Who Will You Help program here 
in this House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The willingness to 
have a formal review committee is indeed an important step, 
and I’m glad to hear that this is something that is planned. 
There’s been a different approach in different provinces. For 
some it’s an ongoing review, so every murder is investigated 
with individual recommendations. Some other provinces have 
taken an approach where it’s a one-time review. My question to 
the Premier: will this review committee that has been set up, 
will it be a one-time review or will this be an ongoing review 
for, tragically, what we hope not to be more victims here in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank the 
Leader of the Opposition again for the question. There are a 
number of options in terms of sort of the ongoing general 
overview for these, for murders. There is the chance for a much 
more specific review after each case, and hopefully there’ll be 
no need for any. But, Mr. Speaker, in reality there will be. And 
I think that the Minister of Justice and the Minister of 
Corrections and Policing are open to either. 
 
The general initiative was to be announced in about a week. 
And I think there’s the opportunity through consultation with 
yourself and your colleagues, but also CBOs [community-based 
organization] and others interested, we can make sure we get 
this particular special review right so that it serves the purpose 
that you’ve quite rightly highlighted, can actually be helpful in 
informing government on how we can end this completely. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Cost of Regina Bypass 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, can the Minister of 
Highways please explain how the Regina bypass has literally 
skyrocketed through the roof by way of cost? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it gives me great 
pleasure to be able to answer this question. You know, the 
member opposite’s entitled to his opinion, Mr. Speaker, but 
he’s not entitled to make up the facts. In the fall of 2013, Mr. 
Speaker, the estimated cost to build this bypass was $1.2 
billion. Mr. Speaker, with the addition of an overpass at Hill 
Avenue and 9th Avenue, Mr. Speaker, the cost to build this 
bypass is $1.2 billion today, Mr. Speaker. Those are the facts, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know what the record of the opposition is when it comes to 
the maintenance of infrastructure in this province. This 
program, the development of the bypass, will also include 34 



7356 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 2015 

years of maintenance on a project, Mr. Speaker, so that at the 
end of that time, when the maintenance of the project becomes 
the responsibility of the government, Mr. Speaker, this project 
will be as if it was new. So, Mr. Speaker, those are the facts. 
I’m waiting for the next question so we can continue to set the 
record straight. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the story just keeps 
changing with this government on this front. Of course the 
bypass was originally estimated by that government at $400 
million, then it went to $800 million, then $1.2 billion, Mr. 
Speaker. Now $2 billion, and it doesn’t even include the land 
costs. That’s five times more than the original plan of that 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now in a one-hour tech briefing several days ago, I had a lot of 
questions and, you know, the Minister of Highways’ answers 
just weren’t there. There was no adequate answers, Mr. 
Speaker. All I was told, and we hear it today, is that two 
overpasses were added at about $30 million apiece, and the rest 
of the cost increases are largely a result of the P3 
[public-private partnership] rent-a-road scheme with this 
conglomerate from France. 
 
Saskatchewan people deserve way more transparency and way 
better answers than that. So again this time, can the Highways 
minister please explain to Saskatchewan people why the bypass 
costs have skyrocketed to $2 billion, not even including the land 
costs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I just get to continue to 
correct the record that the opposition continues to put, continues 
to try to mislead the public with respect to this project, Mr. 
Speaker. This is a publicly owned facility, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve said that the project costs will be $1.2 billion, 
Mr. Speaker. Those are the costs. Those are the costs of 
building this project. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The original estimates, certainly the project has grown in scope 
from the original estimates, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re talking about the safety of the public. Mr. Speaker, we’re 
talking about economic development. I’m not sure what costs 
they would put on building this bypass, Mr. Speaker, but we’re 
very comfortable with $1.2 billion. The difference, Mr. 
Speaker, has to do with the transfer of risk. Mr. Speaker, it has 
to do with ensuring that this project is maintained for the period 
of time under the contract. So I’m really not sure what the 
member doesn’t get. 
 
We have offered that member a technical briefing, Mr. Speaker, 
with respect to the Swift Current long-term care facility. He has 
refused and neglected to take a technical briefing from us so 
that he understands the process. At least he has the obligation, 
Mr. Speaker, of understanding what P3s are all about before he 
stands and asks these questions in the House. 
 

The Speaker: — I’d just like to caution members on both sides 
to choose their words with care. I recognize the member for 
Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, of course from the 
minister and that government that’s unwilling to have an 
independent audit of this actual deal before taxpayers are put on 
the hook. You would think that, if they had nothing to hide, 
they’d have no trouble having an independent audit, something 
that government voted against and something that government 
won’t allow. And Saskatchewan people deserve better answers 
than tired spin on that. They deserve transparency especially on 
such a massive project. 
 
When a project goes from $400 million to over $2 billion in just 
a couple of years, clearly something isn’t right. Saskatchewan 
people have a right to know the breakdown of costs, how much 
construction will be, how much the ongoing maintenance costs 
will be, where all the money is going. And why it makes one 
ounce of sense to have provincially owned snowplows and 
mowers stop plowing and mowing once they reach the bypass 
so that a French conglomerate can make a profit off of it is 
beyond me, Mr. Speaker. What’s the minister’s answers to 
these questions? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice, Attorney 
General, and SaskBuilds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — There was talk about transparency, and 
we’ll talk about accountability. The Saskatchewan auditor, Mr. 
Speaker, has said we have effective processes for evaluating 
P3s, Mr. Speaker. And in terms of transparency, Mr. Speaker, 
there’ll be a fairness opinion, Mr. Speaker, a conflict of interest 
opinion. The value for money in the contract documents are all 
made public, Mr. Speaker. So when the auditor has an 
opportunity to look at our processes and say that they’re 
effective in determining valuing risk, Mr. Speaker, valuing all 
the elements that go into the contract, we take that at face value, 
Mr. Speaker. And we’ll take the opinion of the auditor any time 
over the opinion of that member. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the minister knows that 
they voted against any independent audit in advance of this 
government signing taxpayers on to deal with this Paris 
snowplow company. With costs skyrocketing so badly and with 
so little transparency from this government, it’s clear that 
Saskatchewan people aren’t getting a good deal. 
 
Now while government should be separating out and building 
as urgently as possible the needed overpasses on Highway No. 
1 East, clearly the other aspects of this project should be 
evaluated. We need to get the safest route possible, the most 
efficient route possible at the most affordable cost, and assure 
some actual accountability and transparency to the public. With 
the Sask Party, we’re clearly not getting that. And it’s shaping 
up to be a multi-billion-dollar bypass boondoggle, one that will 
put taxpayers on the hook and they’ll be paying through the 
nose for generations, Mr. Speaker. To the minister: why is the 
Sask Party being so reckless on this front? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 



October 19, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7357 

Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve heard the plan from the opposition, and we know that 
their plan with respect to the bypass would cost $1 billion more 
and be delayed by over four years, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to 
have this project built faster. We’re going to have it built on 
time and on budget, Mr. Speaker, and sooner than it could be 
built using a traditional method, Mr. Speaker. We’re building it 
because of safety. We’re building it because of economic 
development, Mr. Speaker, something that that member and 
those people didn’t have to worry about when they were in 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an integrated project. To simply build it . . . 
This is an integrated project, Mr. Speaker. To build it piecemeal 
doesn’t serve the ends of the people that use that roadway and it 
certainly doesn’t serve the ends of the taxpayer, Mr. Speaker. 
So this road will be built on time. It will be built on budget. It 
will save lives and it will enhance the economic opportunities 
that people have in this province, Mr. Speaker. That’s why 
we’re doing it, and we stand by our numbers. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 

Review of Firefighting Efforts 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, there’s still a lot of anger about 
the way the Sask Party government has handled the forest fire 
season, about the deep cuts to firefighting resources, about the 
policies that are too rigid, and about the lack of co-operation 
with First Nation northern leaders and about poor 
communication. Will the Premier admit that these are areas 
where his government’s response was very poor? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to recognize the extraordinary work that was 
done by both officials in various ministries across government 
and also outside agencies such as the Red Cross who did just a 
commendable amount of work under very difficult 
circumstances this past summer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should also note that today there was a news 
release that government is about to conduct and is in the middle 
of conducting a review of how we handled the wildfire 
situation, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I said, I think a very 
commendable job was done. We should point out that no lives 
were lost. Minimal amounts of property were lost, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But having said that, I think we should always bear in mind in a 
situation like this, which had large-scale evacuations unlike 
anything ever seen in this province before, Mr. Speaker, in 
excess of 13,000 people evacuated from their homes, we always 
need to take a step back, do a review, and decide whether or not 
we can do a better job in the future, Mr. Speaker. That’s what 
this review is all about. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — This is the Premier that chose to repeatedly 

drive past Montreal Lake Cree Nation and didn’t even bother to 
call Chief Henderson until it was publicly . . . until he was 
publicly pressured to do so, even though Montreal Lake 
community members lost many homes to the fire. That is poor 
leadership. This is the government that refused to co-operate 
with First Nations that wanted to set up evacuation centres. That 
too is poor leadership. 
 
Why did the Premier refuse to work co-operatively with First 
Nation leaders and communities during the forest fires? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Government 
Relations, First Nations, Métis and Northern Affairs. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, what utter nonsense. I 
travelled to many communities across northern Saskatchewan, 
along with a number of other colleagues, including the Premier, 
Mr. Speaker. We met with leaders across the North. What the 
member’s doing opposite is just simply playing politics, as he 
did through the entire event. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that does a disservice to the firefighters who 
worked very hard. That does a disservice to the northern 
leaders, to the First Nations leaders, to the municipal leaders. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s ridiculous. That member has done nothing but 
play politics from the start with this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for example, on social media in the middle of the 
fire season, that member’s on social media supposedly helping 
behind the scenes with manning firehoses, Mr. Speaker. He’s 
standing there in his Florsheims and his Tommy Bahama shirt 
— not outfitted appropriately, Mr. Speaker, doing nothing but 
playing politics. Mr. Speaker, I hope he asks another question 
because I’d like to follow up. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — We called for a full, independent review to 
ensure that the appropriate lessons are learned from this 
experience and to deliver a much better approach to forest fires 
in the future. The Sask Party refused to do that. Instead they are 
just doing their own review with an online form. To the 
Premier: why does he not want a proper, independent review? 
What is he so afraid of? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, as was announced today, 
there is going to be a thorough review done. The internal part of 
the review amongst the individual ministries has already started. 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to have officials from the various 
effected ministries, from the Ministry of Government Relations, 
from the Ministry of Health, Ministry of Social Services, 
Ministry of the Environment. We’re going to have a facilitator 
from the Ministry of Justice to help us with that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to give anybody in this province an 
opportunity to do a submission online or written. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re going to hear from everybody and we’re going to be very 
transparent with it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve been very transparent with this from the 



7358 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 2015 

start. The Premier ensured that regular updates were given to 
the Leader of the Opposition’s office on this as the event 
ensued, Mr. Speaker, but the members opposite right from the 
start insisted on playing politics with this, something this side 
would have never done. Mr. Speaker, there’s certain things that 
go beyond partisan politics, and the fact that when there’s 
people and property at risk, that’s certainly one of them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what that member’s doing is absolutely 
deplorable. He should sit tight, wait for the review, and see 
what it comes up with. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Climate Change and Environmental Protection 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, when the new Environment 
minister was asked if he believes climate change is real, he 
couldn’t answer the question. When pushed repeatedly, he said, 
“Those are the kinds of things that I want to talk to my officials 
about and find out where we’re at as far as the science goes.” 
 
Has the Environment minister been briefed of yet on the science 
of climate change, and is he finally willing to admit that it’s 
real? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
be able to stand today and talk about what this government is 
doing in order to balance our economic growth in this province 
and as well as maintain our environmental protection. 
 
In recent years, we’ve seen unprecedented economic growth in 
this province as well as great population growth. But, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re also a national leader in job creation, in exports. 
We supply the nation with a lot of things that’s required. But 
I’m also happy to report, Mr. Speaker, that during that period of 
time, we’ve seen a 24 per cent increase in our GDP [gross 
domestic product]. We have also seen a 12 per cent decrease in 
our greenhouse gas intensity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our GHG [greenhouse gas] emissions are down 
per capita by 4.55 tonnes per capita in this province since 2013 
to 2007. From 2007-12, we have established that our 
greenhouse gas emissions during a period of, you know, 
enormous growth, have stabilized. And we will continue to 
work towards doing that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — I guess, Mr. Speaker, he’s still being briefed 
by his staff on the question of whether or not climate change is 
real. In fact this party has a candidate in Saskatoon who says 
that climate change is a myth based on “witchcraft reasoning.” 
Neither the Premier nor the Environment minister have 
denounced those comments. That’s how out of touch and 
backward the Sask Party really is. No wonder they have slashed 
climate change funding by 85 per cent. To the minister: when 
can we expect the Sask Party to get serious about climate 
change? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This government 
and this environment is certainly serious about climate change. 
And I think what we’re concentrating on, Mr. Speaker, is the 
effect that man’s efforts, man’s activities may have on that 
climate change. And that’s why Saskatchewan has developed a 
program where we are investing in innovation and technology 
in this province. 
 
Since 2007, Mr. Speaker, there’s been $5 billion invested in 
private, provincial, and federal investment in carbon 
technologies. Twenty-five per cent of SaskPower’s energy is 
now produced from renewables, and that’s very important. 
 
We are a leader in innovation and technology in this province, 
in this country. And not only here in Saskatchewan are we 
recognized for that, Mr. Speaker, but right across the world. 
We’re respected for what we’re doing in Boundary dam 3 with 
our carbon capture, reducing 90 per cent of the CO2 that’s going 
into the atmosphere. That plant is now working at four times 
cleaner than what a natural gas plant would and 10 times 
cleaner than what it was on conventional coal. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[14:15] 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 184 — The Automobile Accident Insurance 
(Motorcycles) Amendment Act, 2015 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move that Bill No. 184, The Automobile Accident 
Insurance (Motorcycles) Amendment Act, 2015 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved first reading of Bill 
No. 184, The Automobile Accident Insurance (Motorcycles) 
Amendment Act, 2015. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Bill No. 185 — The Traffic Safety 
(Miscellaneous Measures) Amendment Act, 2015 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 
185, The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous Measures) Amendment 



October 19, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7359 

Act, 2015 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Premier that 
the first reading of Bill No. 185, The Traffic Safety 
(Miscellaneous Measures) Amendment Act, 2015 be now read 
the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall it be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 186 — The Municipal Conflict of Interest 
Amendment Act, 2015 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 186, 
The Municipal Conflict of Interest Amendment Act, 2015 be 
now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister for Government Relations has 
moved that Bill No. 186, The Municipal Conflict of Interest 
Amendment Act, 2015 be read for the first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. McCall: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Please state your point of order. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. During 
question period the exchange with the Minister for SaskBuilds, 
he used the expression “continues to try to mislead.” Mr. 
Speaker, that clearly speaks to intent and has been repeatedly 
ruled unparliamentary. I’d ask you to rule on that use of that 
language by that minister. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. To respond to the point of order, certainly I heard the 
comments as well. I think it’s very important that we examine 
the context in which it was said. But certainly I know . . . I also 
heard Mr. Speaker ask both members of the exchange to be 
very careful in their comments, and I feel that that has dealt 
with it adequately. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — As I as well heard the comment by the 
minister — I was listening carefully — and intent is one of the 
criteria. But the words are generally associated with deliberately 
mislead, and that was not the case here. Therefore your point of 
order is not well taken. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 183 — The Saskatchewan Employment 
(Essential Services) Amendment Act, 2015 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise in the House today to speak on Bill No. 183, The 
Saskatchewan Employment (Essential Services) Amendment 
Act, 2015 which amends part VII of The Saskatchewan 
Employment Act covering essential services. 
 
In January of this year, the Supreme Court of Canada brought 
down a precedent-setting decision on essential services that will 
likely have an impact on all jurisdictions in Canada. Following 
that decision, we took the time we needed to analyze the 
decision and consider how it may affect our current essential 
services legislation and the amendments that we made in Bill 
128 which was passed last year, but not proclaimed. 
 
We committed to working with public sector employers and the 
unions that represent their workers to find common ground so 
that our legislation not only addresses constitutional 
obligations, but also ensures the provisions of essential services 
for Saskatchewan people. 
 
In May of 2015, consultations commenced on how to address 
the Supreme Court’s decision. Over 135 public sector 
employers and unions were asked to provide feedback on a new 
process for ensuring essential services while allowing 
employees to take job action. These consultations concluded on 
September 30th, 2015. 
 
These amendments will enable Saskatchewan essential services 
legislation to address the concerns of the Supreme Court 
decision which recognized that essential services must be 
maintained while respecting workers’ right to take job action. 
 
I want to use this opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to thank each 
individual and organization in the province who took the time 
to provide feedback on this pivotal piece of legislation. 
Consultations played an integral role in the development of the 
new essential services legislation by involving stakeholders in 
the process. These amendments are largely based on the effort 



7360 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 2015 

of a working group comprised of public sector employers, the 
unions that represent their workers, and government 
representatives working co-operatively to develop a new 
essential services process that will meet the needs of the 
Saskatchewan public. 
 
I want to personally thank each of the members of the working 
group. They are Hugh Wagner of the Grain Services Union; Jim 
Holmes, Canadian Union of Public Employees; Ronni Nordal, 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses; Doug Forseth, Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations; Susan Amrud, Q.C. 
[Queen’s Counsel], Ministry of Justice; and Pat Parenteau, 
Ministry of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety. These 
individuals worked hard to develop this innovative new process 
and are responsible for getting us where we are today. I can’t 
thank them enough. 
 
I also want to thank SFL [Saskatchewan Federation of Labour] 
president, Larry Hubich. He was instrumental in putting this 
group together and providing valuable feedback. I know that we 
don’t always see eye to eye, but I want to thank him for helping 
to accomplish something that I believe will work for all of the 
citizens of the province. 
 
After the working group initially developed proposed changes 
to the legislation, the Ministry of Labour Relations and 
Workplace Safety undertook consultations with affected 
stakeholders. We received 17 submissions and met with 19 
stakeholders across the province. 
 
The key changes in the proposed legislation are, first, removing 
the definition of essential services. The parties will now 
determine what services are essential for their respective 
organization. Secondly, establish an essential services tribunal, 
which is an independent third party dispute resolution body that 
will render decisions on what are essential services, as well as 
whether an essential services agreement substantially interferes 
in the exercise of a strike or lockout. The tribunal will be 
comprised of the Chair or Vice-Chair of the Labour Relations 
Board and a representative appointed by each of the parties. 
 
Next, providing for binding mediation-arbitration to conclude 
the terms and conditions of the collective agreement when an 
essential services agreement is found to substantially interfere 
in the exercise of a strike or lockout. The mediation-arbitration 
will be conducted by a three-person panel unless the parties 
agree to a single mediator-arbitrator, requiring the parties to 
include in the notice of impasse whether there are essential 
services to be maintained in the strike or lockout. Also, 
changing the cooling-off period from 14 days to 7 days in cases 
where essential services are identified by the parties. 
 
Next, establishing a maximum time period of 60 days for a 
mandatory mediation conciliation under section 6-33, except 
where the parties mutually agree to a different time period. 
 
The new essential services legislation meets the constitutional 
requirements set out by the Supreme Court while ensuring 
essential services are maintained for Saskatchewan people. It 
will ensure that Saskatchewan continues to be an innovative and 
economic leader in Canada while ensuring that the rights of 
workers are maintained. 
 

There is also one other small piece to this amendment and it has 
to do with occupational health and safety. It is an amendment to 
adopt the national standard for a workplace hazardous materials 
information system. This is something that every jurisdiction in 
Canada has done or is in the process of doing. This will mean 
that the same labelling and training requirements for 
transporting and handling of hazardous materials will exist in 
each province and eliminate the requirement to relabel products 
when chemicals are moved between jurisdictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my privilege to move second reading of this 
bill. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 
Bill No. 183, The Saskatchewan Employment (Essential 
Services) Amendment Act, 2015. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
indeed it’s my honour to be able to rise today to speak to the 
second reading of this particular bill. It’s certainly a bill that has 
a long and colourful history and one I think that will go down in 
the history books in Saskatchewan for a number of reasons, and 
some of which are particularly concerning, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Just to review a little bit about how we got to where we are 
today, we know that this bill was introduced I believe in 
December of 2007, 19th of December, 2007, proclaimed in law 
May 14th, 2008. So anyone who’s following Saskatchewan 
politics at all would know that that’s right away when this Sask 
Party government first took over in government in 2008 and 
2007. 
 
So it was obvious that this is something that’s very important to 
the Sask Party, and I think it’s very clear on all accounts that 
there was absolutely no consultation done with the people it 
was going to affect the most. And certainly that’s been a source 
of a lot of the problem that the Sask Party has found itself in 
and certainly I think a main reason for the horrific costs that 
have been dumped on the taxpayers because of the Sask Party’s 
stubborn approach to essential services legislation and basically 
getting it wrong and having to go through a lot of motions to 
finally get to this point today where they are trying to fix some 
of those previous actions. 
 
One of the first issues that arises in my mind, Mr. Speaker, and 
that is, what did this actually cost the taxpayer? And we don’t 
have any numbers from the government and certainly we’re still 
looking for what the total costs would be, but I think there’s a 
lot of things that need to be factored in here. First of all, what 
did this government spend on getting this bill drafted? Did they 
hire outside counsel? Definitely outside counsel are not cheap 
and I think there’d be a very large, hefty bill just getting the bill 
drafted in the first place on their instructions. And obviously, 
given what we know now, it was a faulty bill right from the 
get-go. But we know that professionals were hired to draft it, 
and so what was the cost associated with that? 
 
What were the costs associated with the amount of time public 
servants spent implementing their government’s direction at the 
direction of the government? There’d be a number of officials 
within two ministries for sure, Labour and Justice, who would 
have spent a considerable amount of time working on these 



October 19, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7361 

files. And I know, Mr. Speaker, when I actually worked for the 
federal Department of Justice, we had to predict the amount of 
time we were going to spend on particular files as part of our 
planning and budget planning for a go-forward basis for the 
future. And so I’m pretty sure the Minister of Justice would 
have access to those types of numbers, and we would like to 
know that. I think if the government’s going to be really 
transparent here, we need to know how much this mistake has 
cost Saskatchewan taxpayers. So obviously there’d be other 
staff involved. There’d be staff from the Executive Council, all 
the communications time that has gone into defending this 
faulty bill. 
 
And then that’s not even talking yet about the court costs and 
all the effort that went into defending this bill all the way 
through several levels of court when at any point in time the 
Sask Party government could have said, you know what? We 
made a mistake. They’re familiar with saying that. We know 
that, Mr. Speaker. But in this case it took, sadly, the Supreme 
Court of Canada to tell them that they had to admit they made a 
mistake. 
 
So if you look at even the ILO [International Labour 
Organization] defence that was presented, like that’s the 
International Labour Organization case that went . . . I believe 
the decision came in March of 2010. The complaint was in June 
of 2008. So this is two years right there of a number of people 
involved. We’d have lawyers. We’d have policy experts. We’d 
have policy analysts. We’d have communications people. We’d 
have governmental staff. We’d have ministerial staff. There was 
people who put a lot of time and energy on the taxpayers’ dime 
to defending this flawed bill. And so that’s a lot of money that 
really the public deserves an accounting for that to begin with. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Secondly of course, we have our own internal court system 
where this went through the trial at the Court of Queen’s Bench. 
It went through the Court of Appeal here in Saskatchewan, and 
ultimately the SFL was forced to take it forward to the Supreme 
Court of Canada. 
 
So it’s not just the costs of the government staff, the 
government time, the experts and third party consultants that 
the government would have engaged to advise them — all of 
those have to be factored in — but also the amount of time that 
was taken up on the part of labour supporters and people who 
support workers’ rights here in Saskatchewan. I mean that cost 
alone . . . We know that the Supreme Court awarded costs 
against the government for the actual court case itself, but 
there’s no way that would take into account all the energy and 
effort that went on in various levels through various labour 
organizations in Saskatchewan and people who support 
workers’ rights and the amount of money it took just to raise a 
defence to this. 
 
It’s alarming and it’s a concern, and I think this is something 
that it’s maybe a story that will never be told. We might not 
hear the tail end of where this really went wrong and how it was 
that the government was wrong on so many levels and yet 
stubbornly insisted on fighting this to the bitter end. 
 
I know there’s . . . I will be sharing later with you some of the 

comments from some of the unions and the people who fought 
really hard to get this struck down, but certainly the amount of 
time that they put into it was considerable. 
 
I think the one quote I wanted to share at this point in time was 
from Bob Bymoen who is the SGEU [Saskatchewan 
Government and General Employees’ Union] president. And in 
his press release last week, October 15th, from the 
Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ Union, he 
says the following: “The government had to be forced by the 
Supreme Court of Canada to treat workers fairly.” He goes on 
to say in the quote, “Working families lost the ability to engage 
in meaningful collective bargaining as a result of the now 
illegal public service essential services Act.” 
 
And then he went on to say in the next quote, “Tremendous 
effort and resources had to be marshalled by unions to counter 
this attack on public service workers. No group of citizens 
should be forced to go to such lengths to protect their basic 
constitutional rights.” And I’ll end the quote there. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I mean it’s really a shame when you have not 
just outside forces attacking people’s constitutional rights but 
the government itself. And when we have hard-working people 
who are just trying to do their job, and then they have to all of a 
sudden rally, marshal their forces together to actually defend an 
attack on their constitutional rights which is forced all the way 
to the Supreme Court, I think there’s a lot of reasons for 
concern in this government’s approach and the amount of costs, 
the amount of time, and the amount of hardship it’s caused for a 
lot of people. 
 
So I think that’s the first layer of this particular debate that 
we’re embarking in today after . . . when this was introduced, 
December . . . What did I say? December 19th I believe of 
2007. So we’re coming up pretty much eight years total now on 
this ill-advised, illogical, and ideological attack on working 
people that we saw introduced by this government. 
 
It’s ironic though, Mr. Speaker, because in the end I think 
working people of Canada owe the Sask Party government a 
tremendous debt of gratitude. And that’s because, because of 
the way they handled this case, we now have it confirmed at the 
highest level of court in Canada that there is a constitutional 
right to strike under our Charter of Rights and Freedoms, the 
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. And that is probably 
the single most important decision on labour law that has come 
out of the court probably in decades. It’s radically changed I 
think the approach of many governments. 
 
Now I’m not sure if their Conservative counterparts would be 
thankful for this change, but I think working people across 
Canada are certainly going to benefit from the stubbornness of 
the Sask Party government in pushing this item forward through 
the courts. And now we finally have confirmation from the 
highest level of the law in Canada that confirms that indeed the 
freedom of association that’s found in section 4 of the Charter 
also includes the freedom or the right to strike as an organized 
unit. So I think that’s probably the silver lining in all of this, 
Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that it cost so much for 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. And I think also the time and probably 
the effect it would have had on workers who are passionate 
about these types of rights, there would have been a lot of 



7362 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 2015 

dismay and alarm. 
 
I remember, certainly remember the furor when the bill was 
introduced. And I wasn’t sitting in the Assembly at that time, 
but it did have a serious impact across the labour movement in 
Saskatchewan. And as you know, Mr. Speaker, that’s an 
important part of who we are as Saskatchewan people. And I 
mean, they’re the backbone of our industries, and they certainly 
have a lot invested in ensuring that their rights are protected. 
And I think it benefits everyone. It benefits our middle class. It 
benefits our families. It benefits our children. And it certainly 
benefits the taxes that we’re able to raise through the workers in 
Saskatchewan because they are actually doing the work and 
participating in the democracy. 
 
So in that sense, although it was a long and expensive struggle, 
I think the end result is one that’s actually advanced labour law 
in Canada, not just in Saskatchewan. So there is a silver lining 
here to this rather dark cloud that the Sask Party has pulled us 
through in the last eight years . . . seven years. 
 
The other thing that I want to touch a little bit on, and I will be 
talking about the actual changes within the legislation itself, but 
we know that there’s been a few changes also in terms of 
occupational health and safety in the details, which I will get 
involved in a little bit later. But I just want to talk generally 
about this government’s approach to occupational health and 
safety. And we know that in Saskatchewan, our workforce has 
definitely increased in the last few years, from 300,000 to 
400,000. There’s a lot more people working out there. And so 
we know there’s a lot more people that are being put at risk in 
terms of safety and that we would expect, in that kind of 
circumstance, that the people in charge of occupational health 
and safety would be given the tools they need to actually ensure 
that these extra workers that are here are being protected and 
the ones that were here to begin with are still being protected. 
 
So back in, I think it was March of 2015, we had a story come 
from CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] news about the 
changes to OH & S [occupational health and safety] that a 
former officer said is putting workers at risk. And what he said 
is that Saskatchewan workers could be at risk because the Sask 
Party government has virtually halted random inspections and 
dramatically scaled back enforcement. So in a time when we 
have more people doing dangerous work in Saskatchewan, we 
have a government that is halting random inspections almost 
entirely and then dramatically scaling back the actual 
enforcement of our occupational health and safety laws. 
 
And I know one young gentleman that I know actually left the 
province. He was working for occupational health and safety 
and was so frustrated at his inability to do what he thought was 
his job. It was really disturbing to him, and he actually just quit 
his job and got a job in British Columbia because it was so 
frustrating for him. He just didn’t feel like he could actually do 
his job. And part of that was because of the halting of the 
random inspections and then scaling back of the enforcement. 
He was a good guy, and I’m sorry we lost him. But you know, I 
understand why he had to make that decision. I certainly respect 
it. 
 
The report that came out in March said that for the 12 years that 
this gentleman was working at occupational health and safety, 

they would on average write out about 600 notices of 
contravention per month. But since 2013, with the major policy 
change, they are only writing 33 such notices a month, when 
averaged over the past year. 
 
Now that’s got to give you cause for alarm, Mr. Speaker. When 
we know that in the professional opinion of occupational health 
and safety officers there were on average 600 violations per 
month based on the work they were doing, to reduce it to 33 per 
month simply because of a policy change really is something 
that I think workers in this province need to be alarmed about, 
and employers and families and everyone that’s affected by 
health and safety in the workplace. Basically the math, if you 
want to figure it out, it’s 94 per cent fewer notices. These are 
just notices of contravention that were being issued. 
 
And this gentleman said he thought that it’s disgusting, and 
that’s the word he used, in terms of the dramatic change in 
occupational health and safety inspections. He says he’s, 
because of the changes, he spent most of his time in his office 
rather than inspecting oil rigs and construction sites as he had 
done for years. And I think he just felt like he wasn’t able to do 
his job. 
 
So there’s no surprise in anything I’m saying here right now. 
This came out in March of this year. But I think the story we 
see is it goes further than that. The story is described in the 
article quite thoroughly from March 4th on CBC news. 
 
But there was another gentleman who also spoke to the reporter 
at the time and what he talked about . . . He’s a Saskatchewan 
safety consultant and he’s gone around the province for more 
than a decade teaching safety in the province. He’s noticed a 
growing number of safety violations. And what he said, Mr. 
Speaker, and this is a quote. He said: 
 

I think that if I was to take you for a drive through a 
construction area in Saskatoon today you would see 
between 400 and 500 violations. And is it going to get 
better? Are the roofers all wearing their fall protection? 
No. Who’s going to catch them? The ground. The ground 
is going to catch them. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s concerning that we know the violations are 
out there. We know that occupational health and safety officers 
have been told to sit at their desks rather than conduct these 
inspections. And this fellow actually says, rather than going the 
way, the direction this government is going, they should restore 
the random inspections and increase enforcement before the 
death toll rises. 
 
And he would say the government should go even further and 
start issuing stiff fines to workers and their employers. He said 
they’ve, and this is a quote: “They’ve tried the carrot and the 
stick without a stick for the last 75 years. Maybe it’s time to hit 
somebody with a stick.” Now that’s putting it quite bluntly, Mr. 
Speaker. But I think when we know that that number of 
violations are occurring, why even bother having the 
regulations in place if you’re not going to inspect and if you’re 
not going to enforce? It’s a sham. And I think that’s what we’re 
seeing happening right now. 
 
So within that framework where we see significant policy 



October 19, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7363 

changes on the part of this government to reduce the number of 
inspections, to take away the random inspections, and only go 
in when there’s a complaint or a concern that’s been raised, 
that’s again just like putting the fox in charge of the chicken 
house. And it’s not fair, I don’t think, to the workers. It’s not 
fair to the employers because there needs to be that kind of 
oversight. And that’s the role of a strong and healthy 
occupational health and safety section in the Department of 
Labour. 
 
One of the things that the gentleman said is . . . It was Mr. 
Bowers. He said, without inspectors visible in the field, safety 
compliance is going to plummet. And he said: 
 

People comply because they see you driving around, same 
as police. You’re not going to rob a bank on Broadway 
Avenue if police are driving up there two or three times a 
day. 

 
And I think that’s just . . . We’ve talked about it in other 
contexts with liquor laws, and we’ve talked about it in terms of 
speeding laws. And I mean — and this is the same thing — 
people need to be encouraged to comply, and enforcement is 
certainly a very useful way of encouraging people to comply. 
But when you have results-based approach, this is something 
that goes by the wayside. So it’s concerning for sure. 
 
Now that’s the context we’re talking about. We have a serious 
reduction in the number of inspections. We have a clawback on 
the number of random inspections. And so we now have a 
workforce that’s gone up 25 per cent in the last few years, fewer 
officers doing the work. We don’t know whether even 
vacancies are being filled. And that’s certainly a question that 
should be asked is, are these positions even being filled as they 
become vacant in the occupational health and safety realm? 
 
And what we have to put this, juxtapose this beside now is 
what’s happening at the workmen’s compensation board, 
because what we’ve seen is that they now have a surplus. 
There’s I think somewhere around $140 million in surplus right 
now with the workmen’s compensation board. 
 
So what would a prudent and practical government do? Well 
you’d think they would take a look at that surplus and say, 
where’s the best place that we could apply it? Oh geez, we’re 
really short on our occupational health and safety. Perhaps we 
should try and make sure that we have the best occupational 
health and safety regime in Canada. We have this extra money. 
It could be used. It could be applied and put to good work. We 
could be innovative. It could be state of the art. And we have a 
committee of review that I believe is sitting down today that 
could actually review what could be a good use for that surplus 
that has come about with workmen’s compensation board, 
keeping in mind that that board is in place for injuries that 
workers suffer. So that’s what the workmen’s compensation 
board is all about. 
 
[14:45] 
 
How could we put that money to good use? Well that’s not 
what this government has done, Mr. Speaker. Instead they 
think, oh I guess we should just give those employers that 
money back because we like them. Yes, I think we all like 

employers. There’s no problem there. But that $80 million was 
paid in good faith, and it could be used to actually improve 
what’s going on. But instead it’s just being refunded without 
any further thought, without any regard for what the committee 
of review might be saying. Maybe the committee of review 
would come up with a good plan for that extra. Even, even we 
know right now the occupational health and safety budget is $9 
million. They have $140 million surplus. You could double the 
occupational health and safety budget, ramp up inspections, 
ensure that there’s enforcement, that fines are being issued 
when appropriate. That would get it up to 18 to $20 million. 
You would still have $130 million surplus in the workmen’s 
compensation board. 
 
So you’ve got to ask, why is this money going where it’s going 
when the committee of review hasn’t even done its work yet? 
And that’s really disappointing, Mr. Speaker. Again I think it’s 
an opportunity that has presented itself to this government, and 
they have just turned their back. They’ve squandered it, and 
they’re just refunding it without any further thought in terms of 
how to make it better, how to improve the situation, rather than 
have people leave the province because they don’t feel they can 
do their job as an occupational health and safety inspector. 
 
We know they’re spending lots of money on bad TV ads, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s one place they could have maybe considered 
having the committee review take a look, because certainly we 
don’t need to see any of that on television, and the waste of 
money that goes in there is a little bit concerning. But you 
know, if you’re coming from an ideological place like this 
government has, when we see what’s happened with the 
workers’ right-to-strike law, then I guess it kind of explains 
itself, doesn’t it? 
 
Just a couple comments on the minister’s opening remarks 
today, and I certainly appreciate that he took the time to share 
them with us before he made his comments. There’s one point 
he made that I found the irony is overwhelming, and I can’t 
believe that he is boasting about the consultation that they had 
with the workers on this particular bill because, if you put it in 
context, if they had consulted in the first place, then none of this 
would have happened. And I just find it really rich that he’s 
kind of boasting about how the consultations happened in 2015 
when we know in hindsight that it’s only because this 
government refused to consult. 
 
They introduced the bill shortly after they got elected and even 
the ILO criticizes government for its failure to consult with the 
people that are affected by the bill. So for him to sort of outline 
how wonderful the consultation process was in 2015, I think 
really speaks volumes to the blinders that this minister has put 
on in terms of how we got to this situation in the first place. 
 
You know, he says: we’re committed to working with public 
sector employees in the unions that represent their workers to 
find common ground. So why is he saying that now? And why 
wasn’t the government saying that in 2008? It’s almost 
shocking that he says this with such ease at this point in the 
proceedings. 
 
We know why the government went back to the drawing board 
here. It’s because they had to, because at every level they were 
being told that they were wrong and they needed to fix it. This 



7364 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 2015 

isn’t about making apologies and, in fact, there is no apology in 
this at all for all the hassle and the pain and the suffering that 
this government put the workers through to protect their own 
constitutional rights. There’s no apology in here at all. There’s 
just back-patting about how wonderful the consultation process 
was in 2015. 
 
He said the amendments will enable Saskatchewan’s essential 
services legislation to address the concerns of the Supreme 
Court decision which recognized that essential services must be 
maintained while respecting workers’ rights to take job action. 
And he’s absolutely right there, Mr. Speaker. It’s never been 
not that way. But it was the bill that they introduced that 
actually challenged that and brought us to where we are now 
and why we’re looking at this bill. 
 
He did actually take time to thank people who took the time this 
time around to provide information and discussion. And I think 
the net result, and we see that from the commentary from 
various people affected, is that people are cautiously optimistic 
about this bill. Obviously there’s still some work to be done in 
terms of actual definitions of essential services, but at least it’s 
not locked into the legislation it was the first time around. 
 
He said he credits the people that were working on this in 2015, 
that it was an effort of a working group, that the representatives 
worked co-operatively together. Yes, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
exactly what was needed in order to get to the right place. And 
sadly again, it took this government seven years to sort of figure 
that out. And plus . . . Not just on their own, of course. They 
had to be encouraged by various levels of . . . well the 
International Labour Organization for one and the Supreme 
Court of Canada for another one. 
 
So I wonder what sort of blinders the minister has put on when 
he thinks that this co-operative effort has just been, you know, 
the best thing, when we know the whole history that forced the 
government into this situation to properly sit down with the 
labour groups and find something that makes sense and that 
isn’t against the rights that these workers have, the 
constitutional rights that they have. 
 
So one of the things he’s highlighted as a key change in this 
proposed legislation is removing the definition of essential 
services. So that’s now taken out of the bill and it will be 
determined on a case-by-case basis, if I understand this 
correctly, in negotiation with the parties. So he said the parties 
will determine what services are essential for their respective 
organizations. So that’s something, Mr. Speaker, that we’re 
certainly going to want to keep a close eye on. We will certainly 
want to consult and hear concerns as these definitions start 
coming in, in relation to the particular organizations. So we’re 
going to look carefully at that. 
 
The second piece, he said, the key change is the establishment 
of an essential services tribunal which is thankfully an 
independent third party. So this party, this third party will 
essentially act as a . . . well a tribunal where the Chair or 
Vice-Chair of the Labour Relations Board will sit as the Chair 
of this tribunal, and then a representative from each party will 
then have an opportunity for mediation-arbitration. And also 
there will be provisions to help establish this tribunal and make 
sure that it’s there as an independent third party. So that’s a 

good piece, we think, and so we’ll be looking for more. You 
know, as we go through the debate in the next few weeks, we’re 
going to take a close look at that and ensure that it is actually 
doing what the minister says it will do. 
 
Another thing he indicated that will be happening is there will 
be a provision of binding mediation and arbitration to conclude 
terms and conditions of collective agreements when an essential 
services agreement is found to substantially interfere in the 
exercise of a strike or lockout, and that again will be a 
three-person panel. 
 
I think one thing that I’ve heard SFL representatives for sure 
and other people involved in the movement over the last few 
years is that there has never been an effort on the part of unions 
to put people in danger, and there’s no example of that ever 
happening. So sometimes I have wondered if this isn’t a 
bogeyman that didn’t exist at all and it was just some sort of 
rhetoric that caught the imagination of the government where 
they decided that this was something that had to be smacked 
down or something. I’m not sure, Mr. Speaker. Because if I 
understand it correctly, services have been provided that are 
essential, and there has never been a denial of that in any strike 
action in the history of this province. So, you know, maybe I 
need to find out if that’s exactly the case or not, but I think that 
it’s been represented to be that way and I don’t see why that 
isn’t acceptable. 
 
There is a number of other smaller changes that the minister 
highlighted that will be included in the bill or that are included 
in the bill. One thing he said is that this new bill meets the 
constitutional requirements set out by the Supreme Court while 
ensuring essential services are maintained for Saskatchewan 
people. Again I don’t think that ever wasn’t happening in 
Saskatchewan, so I’m not really sure what the concern was to 
begin with. Perhaps a desire to come out swinging when you 
form government. It’s not really clear to me what motivated this 
in the first place. 
 
But at least now we have, thankfully, a decision by the Supreme 
Court of Canada that recognizes the right to strike as a 
constitutionally and protected right under the Canadian Charter 
of Rights and Freedoms. And that is something I think that is 
the legacy of this ill-advised decision. But it’s certainly a good 
piece to have for future labour negotiations and for people when 
they’re exercising their constitutional rights. 
 
People don’t take the decision to strike lightly. It’s one that I 
think is the last resort, and certainly people are loath to engage 
in that kind of action because it does have a negative effect. It’s 
not fun. And so it’s important for unions to be able to engage in 
that, but only when necessary, and that’s the way the law has 
evolved over the years. And I think this recognition by the 
Supreme Court of Canada to enshrine and clarify that that right 
does exist and is part of the right of assembly, that is established 
in the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
 
The minister also mentioned the little bit on occupational health 
and safety, and I will get into that in a minute, Mr. Speaker. So 
some of the more picayune aspects of the bill, I’ll talk in a few 
minutes. 
 
I just wanted to highlight, I guess, in terms of where we are in 



October 19, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7365 

the legislative cycle. I did really expect when I got up to speak 
first off in this fall session that I would actually be speaking to a 
Throne Speech, but sadly that isn’t going to be the case. We’re 
not looking forward; we’re looking backwards. And I think 
that’s something we’ve done a lot of in the last four years when 
you look at the way this government has charged ahead on 
something, realized they had a mistake, so they have to go back 
and fix it. 
 
Some of the things that come to mind is, for example, the 
school year, Mr. Speaker. This government came out and they 
were going to fix the school year and they were going to have a 
fixed date and everything was going to be great, and then didn’t 
bother to check where Labour Day actually falls in the calendar, 
and then had to pass a bill to fix that oversight when they 
pushed the legislation through. 
 
I believe when ISC [Information Services Corporation of 
Saskatchewan] was privatized, we also saw another bill where 
certain parts of The Land Titles Act weren’t caught the first time 
around when they charged through and passed the ISC bill. So 
we had another bill come through that was to fix those things 
that were overlooked. 
 
I think people recall the gaming regs flip-flop; to strip or not to 
strip is the question. And we saw this, and we’re still not really 
sure where that’s all shaking down, but that’s another example 
of this government flip-flopping back and forth with liquor and 
gaming rules on stripping clubs. 
 
MRIs, we know that before ’07 when this government, before 
they became government, they promised not to privatize MRIs. 
But we have again a bill that contradicts what this government 
said before. 
 
Farm lands, farm lands . . . Pension’s ability to purchase farm 
land. We’ve known all along there’s a loophole in the Act. And 
this government chose not to act in a timely fashion and 
Assiniboia Farmland was able to capitalize on that and make a 
pretty good deal with the investment board of the Canada 
Pension Plan. They had every opportunity to act in a timely 
fashion and chose not to, and now we’re going to see legislation 
tomorrow. Apparently it’s on the order paper to fix that 
problem, but by the time they got around to it, Assiniboia 
Farmland and the investment board had made the deal. And 
there was certainly enough time to prohibit it before, but no, 
didn’t get their act together, and now the bill’s coming now. 
Well we’ll see what it is tomorrow. We’ll see what’s in there. 
 
Gender identity and Human Rights Code, the government will 
say, oh no, oh no we can’t put that in there. We can’t put that in 
there as a prescribed ground. And then when it became clear 
that they were being stubborn for no reason, then they made the 
decision, okay, well I guess, you know, we’ll agree to put it in 
there. Because it should be there. 
 
Buy-local day, God knows what’s happened to that. We saw 
this government flip and flop on that one in terms of whether or 
not they supported a bill on establishing a buy-local day, and 
God knows where that’s at right now. I guess we’ll find out 
what the government’s intention is there soon enough. 
 
Procurement, are we going to include local knowledge as part 

of the lists of requirements for procurement? Again we’re not 
exactly sure where this government is at on that, but hopefully 
we’ll see some sort of legislation to fix that, or regulations at 
least. 
 
GSAs, there’s a clear example, Mr. Speaker, of a stubborn 
refusal to do what is important and right to help children not be 
bullied, to ensure that they have the protection they need so that 
we don’t see some of the terrible stories that we’ve seen in the 
past that have impacted gay and lesbian youth. And I think 
that’s really important. And I hope, I really hope that we don’t 
have to go to the Supreme Court of Canada on this one, Mr. 
Speaker, that this government will see reason and will ensure 
that those young people’s rights are enshrined and protected 
under a piece of legislation that will go a long ways to helping 
them deal with the prejudice and the racism and the bullying 
that they experience on a day-to-day level. 
 
What else here? I have a big, long list. Traffic lights, the refusal 
to even install traffic lights to protect people’s lives, which is 
. . . I’m afraid the list is a little too long, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 
concerning because we have this stubbornness that keeps 
reflecting itself over and over in the actions of this government. 
And it certainly, I think, is perfectly exemplified in the 
seven-year struggle that working people have had to ensure that 
their rights are protected in a bill like essential services 
legislation. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Just a few other points that I want to reiterate to make sure that 
we get this on the record. We know that this government has 
put Saskatchewan and Saskatchewan workers through eight 
long, expensive years defending a law that ultimately was found 
to be unconstitutional. What we know is that the Sask Party 
refused to listen to stakeholders — they didn’t even consult 
when the bill was first introduced in 2007 — and that they’re 
putting short-term politics and catering to their own advisers 
instead of putting common sense and fairness on the table. 
 
We know that this costs a lot of money, Mr. Speaker, that 
taxpayers’ dollars, including taxpayer-paid lawyers were 
defending . . . to defend an unconstitutional law. It’s a good 
example again of waste on the part of the Sask Party. They 
pushed through this law. They pushed through the defence in 
the courts. And I think, you know, certainly the working people 
had to fight to defend their rights, and that is an additional 
expense that we’ll never see the total tab on for sure on that 
one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think people have to continually remember that this 
apology or this change of heart that we see in this bill was not 
something that this government got to voluntarily. They were 
forced kicking and screaming to this point. And despite what 
pundits are saying about it, you know, as a beautiful example of 
realizing when you’re wrong, no, this government never did 
realize when they were wrong. They were told they were wrong 
all along, and finally because of the way the court system 
works, we had to go all the way to the Supreme Court of 
Canada for them to take the proper action and introduce a bill 
like Bill 183. And I think a good example of why we know this 
is wrong is the way the court actually ordered the government 
to pay the union’s legal fees. And again, who’s paying for that? 



7366 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 2015 

It’s the taxpayer. That’s who’s paying for it. Taxpayers are 
paying money for this government’s mistakes. 
 
Now as far as we can tell, Mr. Speaker, the new bill appears to 
follow the outline provided by the Supreme Court of Canada. 
We will take the opportunity in the next little while to review 
the details closely, and we know that working people 
throughout the province and people who are concerned about 
constitutional rights will do the same. 
 
We’re concerned. We know this government is still far too 
interested in helping their friends and insiders and big business, 
like foreign corporations, even when that’s at the expense of 
everyone else. So those are kind of some of the main points that 
we wanted to raise, and I think he’ll hear that from my 
colleagues as well as we start to engage in the adjourned debate 
on this Bill 183. 
 
In terms of the timeline, we think that, you know, this probably 
came about as a . . . In December of 2006, there were contract 
talks that had stalled, and correction workers and snowplow 
operators went out on strike. We know that the opposition 
leader at the time, who is now the Premier, was publicly 
mulling about essential services legislation as early as January 
in 2007. Then we know that in June of 2007 there was a 
full-scale strike by health care workers. It was looming in June 
of 2007. And as soon as the government formed government, it 
was announced that they would introduce essential services 
legislation to ensure certain services are still provided if public 
sector employees go on strike. So that’s when the bill was 
tabled. And at that time, the SFL commented on it, calling it the 
worst legislation for workers in the country. 
 
On February 7th, 2008, the then Justice minister said that the 
courts — this is a quote — “The courts may make findings on 
our legislation at some point but right now my department 
drafts the legislation.” So you can see that stubbornness from 
the then Justice minister who’s, interestingly enough, now the 
Labour minister. So he was very defensive about the bill at the 
time, refusing to consult before actually drafting the bill. 
 
In 2008, the constitutional challenge began in July of 2008 and 
there were so many issues that were problematic in the bills, so 
in February of 2012 . . . So workers had to fight for four years. 
And the Queen’s Bench ruled that it was unconstitutional, 
although at that point The Trade Union Act amendments were 
upheld. 
 
Then we know that on March 5th of 2012, the provincial 
government decided to appeal, Mr. Speaker. At that point, they 
could have sat down in 2012 and had a look at it and said, you 
know what, this may be the way we should go. But no, they 
decided to appeal. And so a year later, in April of 2013, we got 
the Court of Appeal’s ruling upholding the Sask Party 
government’s Act. So then the SFL was again forced to 
continue the court action which then went on to the Supreme 
Court of Canada. And of course we all know that in January of 
this year they struck down the Act in a five-two ruling, and they 
found that unionized Canadian workers have a constitutionally 
guaranteed right to strike. 
 
And as I said earlier, Mr. Speaker, that’s really the silver lining 
of this cloud is that we now have it enunciated clearly from the 

highest court in the land that unionized workers in Canada have 
a constitutionally guaranteed right to strike. And that is 
certainly the most important piece, I think, of this whole debate. 
And perhaps the struggle, while it was expensive and long, the 
results, the net result is one that will help workers across 
Canada and not just in Saskatchewan. So that’s sort of the 
timeline that we have seen over the years. 
 
Just a few comments that have come from some of the unions. I 
mentioned SGEU’s press release earlier. But also SEIU-West 
[Service Employees International Union West] has also begun 
analyzing the bill. It was released on October 15th and the 
quote here I’d like to share is from Barbara Cape who’s 
president of SEIU-West. And she says: 
 

Although there appears to be some improvement, the devil 
is in the details. We had hoped for a more robust 
consultation process, however, the government did not 
begin to seek our input as a labour stakeholder until late 
August. SEIU-West members believe that taking the time 
to actually read the proposed legislation and consider its 
“real-world” implications is an important step in this 
process. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’re sitting here in October of 2015. We 
don’t have a lot of time to be able to debate this bill properly 
and we know that there will be further comments coming as 
people take . . . I’m sure people are looking through it carefully 
now and analyzing all the different provisions and seeing how 
that might impact their rights. And so there’s going to be a lot 
of activity in the next few weeks on the part of I think labour 
unions and people who feel that the consultation process was 
really not a sufficient amount of time. 
 
You have to wonder. The Supreme Court came down with their 
decision in January and consultations didn’t begin until August. 
So was that eight months where there were no consultations, 
and then the government began its consultation process in 
August, late August, which is not a whole lot of time for people 
who are working, and labour organizations, to be able to have a 
good look at it. 
 
There is satisfaction that the binding arbitration process is there. 
That’s seen as a good thing. But the questions are there about 
accessibility and timeliness of the arbitration process and other 
resolution processes, and of course much of that we’ll have to 
see how it works as the bill makes its way into law and begins 
being used. 
 
Now the whole question I guess is, what is an essential service? 
And we’re still no further ahead now than we were eight years 
ago in terms of what the legal definition of an essential service 
is going to look like. Taking it out of the legislation and putting 
it through the regulatory process is a common approach that we 
see often from this government. So obviously the scrutiny 
changes. Once it’s not a bill and it becomes part of the 
regulation process, there isn’t an opportunity for members 
opposite to actually take, provide comments or enter into any 
kind of debate on regulations. So that’s something that happens 
through Executive Council, and we’ll have to consult with the 
labour groups as these regulations come into effect, and see if 
indeed the definitions are working. 
 



October 19, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7367 

One thing that Barbara Cape did raise in her press release, and 
I’ll share this quote with you, Mr. Speaker, is this. She says: 
 

I think the timing of the introduction of this legislation is 
interesting. Given the fact that we are headed to the polls 
on Monday for a federal election, there may be a limited 
focus on this very important piece of legislation. I hope 
others afford it the scrutiny it really deserves. 

 
And I would have to echo that, Mr. Speaker. This certainly 
needs a lot of scrutiny. It’s not a small, short bill. It’s a fairly 
extensive bill. So those kinds of things really will require 
extensive scrutiny. 
 
And I know there’s a lot of things going on in the political 
landscape right now, including an upcoming election in 
Saskatchewan as well. So we will have to see as it rolls along 
whether this is actually going to be the win that the unions are 
hoping it will be. 
 
And just to share some of the quotes from pundits even in 
today’s paper, we have Murray Mandryk reminding us. He 
says: 
 

Let us not forget, the biggest motivation for amending 
Saskatchewan’s essential services law was the Supreme 
Court of Canada decision striking down the original Bill 5 
as unconstitutional. 

 
And then he goes on to say: 
 

The subsequent Saskatchewan Party government’s law — 
or at least, the regulations that dictated how the law would 
be applied — read like it was written by a bunch of angry, 
vengeful party workers. It allowed the employer to dictate 
how many people could be deemed essential (95 per cent 
in some units), what jobs were essential (music therapists) 
and even what individual (George or Martha) were 
essential. Little wonder that the law was found by both 
Saskatchewan’s Court of Queen’s Bench and then the 
Supreme Court to restrict the fundamental collective 
bargaining [of the] right to strike. 

 
So that’s some of the commentary that we’re seeing coming out 
through the media in this particular . . . once the bill has been 
introduced. It was introduced last week and now the 
commentary is coming forward. 
 
Just a couple of comments, Mr. Speaker, on the Charter itself. 
Now we know that, I think section 2 is the freedom of 
association section in the Charter. Section 33 of the Charter is 
an interesting section as well and particularly section 33(1). It’s 
known throughout Canada as the notwithstanding clause or the 
override power. 
 
And there’s an article in Wikipedia that talks a little bit about 
that. It’s not something that has ever really been used 
successfully, although it has been used as a threat in a number 
of cases. And indeed our own Premier has been now included in 
the Wikipedia page as using it as a bit of a threat when he 
mused out loud in January that he might use the 
notwithstanding clause to protect the province’s ability to force 
essential service employees back to work. 

So I think people need to really think a little bit about when and 
where it would be appropriate for our Premier to actually use 
that clause. I’m pleased to see that he has decided not to go 
ahead and use it. I think it would have been a very dangerous 
and disturbing move if he had gone down that road. The 
override clause or the notwithstanding clause was a particular 
part of the negotiations in 1982 when the Charter was being 
negotiated. Very controversial in many ways. But I think it 
came about as part of the power struggle between the provincial 
governments and the federal government when negotiating the 
rights that were going to be enshrined because many of these 
rights affect provincial governments’ abilities to pass laws. And 
I think this example is a perfect example of that, where section 
2 and the freedom of association has trumped what this 
government saw would be essential services in the event of a 
strike. 
 
So what’s really interesting about this notwithstanding clause is 
that it doesn’t really exist in any other democratic constitution 
that we know of, except maybe Israel. And there’s a quote here 
in the Wikipedia article that says: 
 

Constitutional scholar Peter Hogg has remarked that the 
notwithstanding clause “seems to be a uniquely Canadian 
invention.” The U.S. Constitution gives no such powers to 
the States . . . but Article III, section 2 does authorize the 
Congress to remove jurisdiction from the Federal Courts. 
Not since World War II has Congress mustered the 
requisite majority. 

 
[15:15] 
 
It needs a majority. I’ll carry on with the quote: 
 

However, the concept of the notwithstanding clause was 
not created with the Charter. The presence of the clause 
makes the Charter similar to the Canadian Bill of Rights 
[from] (1960), which, under section 2, states that “an Act 
of Parliament” may declare that a law “shall operate 
notwithstanding the Canadian Bill of Rights.” A primary 
difference is that the Bill of Rights’ notwithstanding clause 
could be used to invalidate any right, not just specified 
clauses as with the Charter. 

 
So I’ll close the quote there, Mr. Speaker. He goes on to note 
that only Israel has added a device similar to the 
notwithstanding clause in 1992. So that was 10 years after our 
Charter was finalized. 
 
So it’s a very interesting piece, a part of our Charter, and I think 
one that was part of the political negotiations of the day. It was 
concerning and alarming when there was thought, the Premier 
expressed thoughts that it might be appropriate to invoke it at 
this point with the essential services law. I think we’ve seen 
reason prevail in that he hasn’t gone forward with that yet, and 
hopefully that will not happen at any point when it comes to 
this important issue of essential services. 
 
So just talking about the bill itself, we know that basically 
there’s three types of changes. The first one is the business 
about workplace hazardous materials information system. So 
that’s division 7 of part III of the existing Saskatchewan 
employment Act. And so again we’re going to need to consult 



7368 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 2015 

with some of our . . . the members of the public and the 
workforce to see whether these changes to workplace safety are 
appropriate and whether they meet the requirements or the 
needs that are being identified here. 
 
The second change that comes in is a new section 6-33, and this 
is a “notice of impasse and mediation or conciliation required 
before strike or lockout.” I believe these are the changes the 
minister spoke about where they’re going to have an 
opportunity to . . . I want to make sure I get this right. Oh, this 
is the essential services tribunal, I believe, where it’s being 
established, and: 
 

No strike is to be commenced and no lockout is to be 
declared: 

unless a labour relations officer or special mediator is 
appointed or a conciliation board is established pursuant 
to subsection (4). 

 
So that’s clause 6-33(7), and I think that’s one that again we’ll 
need to take time and examine that with some of the people 
who are experts in this area. 
 
The big change of course is in part VII where the entire section 
of part VII is repealed and the following is substituted. And this 
is the essential services section, so it’s quite a lengthy change. I 
think we’re looking at, you know, 14, 15 pages of legislation or 
14 pages of legislation. We’re going to have to take time to look 
at this very carefully in the next . . . quickly, in the next few 
weeks to ensure that there’s nothing here that could cause this 
to go back to the Supreme Court again to ensure that workers’ 
rights are protected. And at that point I think, you know, once 
we have an opportunity, more of my colleagues will want to 
have an opportunity to speak to this as well. 
 
So I’m honoured to have been able to get up and speak to this 
today. As I indicated earlier, I thought I would be getting up for 
a Throne Speech, but I guess that’s not going to happen. Sadly, 
we have a government that appears to be looking backwards 
instead of forwards. 
 
We have a government who, you know, was criticizing the ILO 
for getting it wrong back in the day. And I wish they would eat 
crow. The members who expressed those opinions really should 
come forward and apologize for those comments at this point in 
time because I think it’s pretty clear the law of the land now is 
established. There is a constitutional right to strike. It’s 
protected under the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, 
and I guess we have the Sask Party government to thank for 
clarifying that. Unfortunately, it’s cost the taxpayers a whole lot 
of money to get to that point, and I regret that it took that much. 
 
But we continue to see this government fixing its mistakes. I 
know the pundits seem to afford them a lot of leeway in doing 
that, and maybe that’s the way it is. But I think they need to pay 
a little more attention to what the folks in labour are saying. If 
the minister of the day had actually taken the time to consult 
and realize the error of his ways, we wouldn’t be speaking to 
this today in 2015. 
 
So at this point, I’m going to move that we adjourn the debate 
on this bill, Bill 183. And I look forward to hearing what my 
colleagues have to say about the bill as well. Thank you. 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 183, The Saskatchewan Employment 
(Essential Services) Amendment Act, 2015. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 179 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 179 — The MRI 
Facilities Licensing Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to enter debate here this afternoon as it relates to Bill 
No. 179, An Act respecting the Licensing and Operation of 
certain Facilities providing Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
Services and making consequential amendments to other Acts. 
 
We enter this debate at a time where there’s many pressures in 
health care, many created by this government, Mr. Speaker. 
And you know, I think what we see here is, you know, 
government that can’t get the job done in health care where it 
matters on so many fronts, Mr. Speaker. And we see them now 
basically entering off into almost a distraction of sorts from 
their poor record in health care, Mr. Speaker, and entering into 
terrain where they’re driving again that, you know, relentless 
private agenda that we see of this government, in this case 
going after the pocketbooks of families and not fixing a system 
that every Saskatchewan family deserves fair access to, not 
fixing and making sure that we have the capacity to make sure 
that MRIs are available to every Saskatchewan family in a 
timely way. 
 
But a bit of an admission of failure of this government’s 
agenda, Mr. Speaker, and their recognition of their failure to get 
the job done where it matters to Saskatchewan people. And now 
pushing forward an agenda that certainly goes after the 
pocketbooks and credit cards of Saskatchewan people to take 
care of their health care, certainly that’s disappointing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We see as well that this is a government that has, you know, not 
been able to improve wait time for specialists. These wait times 
are alarming and concerning. They’ve gone in the wrong 
directions. We’ve recognized what this government hasn’t been 
able to do when it comes to emergency room waits, Mr. 
Speaker, a government that’s taken those waits in the wrong 
direction, Mr. Speaker, and now entering into a distractive 
agenda that goes after the pocketbooks and credit cards of 
Saskatchewan families instead of fixing access to MRIs and to 
health services and specialists for all Saskatchewan people. And 
you know, we see the deliberate piecemeal privatization of this 
government. It’s certainly short sighted and not in the best 
interests of the public today or over the long term, Mr. Speaker. 



October 19, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7369 

Basically what we’re seeing under the Sask Party is that most 
patients will wait longer so that a few can jump the queue, Mr. 
Speaker. And you know, the government is building a system 
that’s not based on evidence because we look to the experience 
in Alberta, and Alberta went down this path, and it didn’t 
improve access to MRIs there. It actually lengthened wait times, 
Mr. Speaker. They have longer wait times than we have here in 
Saskatchewan with our current system. 
 
And you see a government again defying common sense with 
its plan and pursuing I guess this ideological privatization 
agenda that we see of this government likely trying to distract 
from their failure to get the job done where it really matters in 
emergency rooms and where it matters around access to 
specialists, where it matters with access to surgeries, Mr. 
Speaker, where it matters with access to a doctor. 
 
On many fronts Saskatchewan people know the realities of the 
health care system under this government. They know and can 
recognize the areas that haven’t been addressed. They can 
recognize the mismanagement of this government, Mr. Speaker. 
And I know Saskatchewan people are, you know, concerned by 
this lack of a vision and plan that we see from the Sask Party. 
 
We have to remember that there is multiple steps for folks to 
require an MRI. First a patient would see their doctor or GP 
[general practitioner], their primary care provider. We know 
that many, many people in Saskatchewan are struggling to see 
that GP. We know that this government is presiding over 
inaction when it comes to ensuring that we have family doctors 
in place, that we have primary care teams in place, not just for 
today but over the next number of years. And we see very 
troubling information around the lack of potential continuity of 
service with a pending crisis with access to family doctors and 
primary care in Saskatchewan. 
 
And of course we know that that’s sort of the first step, if you 
will, of going about accessing an MRI, so it’s awfully troubling 
for Saskatchewan people who know the challenges of being 
able to access a family doctor under this government to see the 
lack of action and attention to the pressures on this area. 
 
I know in Regina for example you have many doctors that are 
very close, family doctors that are very close to that retirement 
period in their life. They’re speaking to us, Mr. Speaker, and 
saying this is something that needs to . . . that requires planning 
now, without having a crisis emerge in just a short number of 
years. And of course, you know, everyone would recognize that 
when you’re responding to crisis it’s far less effective than 
responding in a very planned and deliberate way at this point in 
time to address this problem now. And the crisis of course will 
cost families more, cost taxpayers more. It’ll cost people their 
access to those services. 
 
And it’s disappointing, I think, for many Saskatchewan people 
to see a government not move the yardsticks the way that 
families deserve, the way communities deserve, to ensure that 
they have access to primary care and to doctors across 
Saskatchewan, that being the first step of course to moving 
along with getting access to an MRI. 
 
Then of course we also know that another important aspect of 
receiving an MRI and the care that every family and every 

person and every patient deserves is being referred to a 
specialist. And you know, we’ve heard what the Sask Party is 
doing on this front, Mr. Speaker, and its absolute neglect in its 
response to what we should be seeing, is a drastic and dramatic 
shortening of those wait times. Instead we see waits that are in 
excess of 300 days, Mr. Speaker, to access and to meet with that 
specialist. That’s a major problem. 
 
And you know, I think when we look at this bill and sort of its 
lack of addressing really what matters in health care, we see it 
as a costly distraction from what really matters. And it certainly 
doesn’t, it doesn’t allow the system to be improved in the way 
that every single Saskatchewan family and patient deserves. 
 
And if the government continues to preside over, as we’ve seen, 
a record of doing a poor job on ensuring that doctors and 
primary care is in place for all Saskatchewan people across 
Saskatchewan, and then if we see the government continue to 
neglect to make things better by way of ensuring access to a 
specialist, this is more than problematic, Mr. Speaker. And this 
directly connects to the timeliness of care for Saskatchewan 
people, and that should be the focus of this discussion. That 
should be the focus of a vision and a plan from government. 
 
But instead you a see a government I think trying to sort of play 
obviously an ideological game, pursue an ideological agenda 
where they privatize another piece of our health care system. 
And we know that’s what this government has done on so many 
other fronts, and not to the benefit of Saskatchewan people: 
very short-sighted management, but not improving things where 
it matters. 
 
We also know that doctors refer their clients of course for 
diagnostic tests, and this is then where the MRI fits in. And 
often people need to see specialists again or be referred to 
someone else if more consultation is needed prior to their 
treatment, and then they wait for treatment. So that’s how a 
patient typically enters the system and how they access care, 
Mr. Speaker. You’re going to your primary care team. You’re 
going to your doctor. You’re waiting for that specialist. There’s 
an ordering of diagnostics. And then often there’s other consults 
as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:30] 
 
And I think if you sit down, and if the Premier . . . I know he’s 
kind of, you know, lost touch with everyday families and the 
realities there, Mr. Speaker. But if the Premier were willing to 
get a sense of what families and patients are facing on this front, 
he would wake up to the reality that his piecemeal, costly plan 
around one diagnostic component isn’t getting the job done in 
improving the system as a whole and ensuring the timely 
response to care that Saskatchewan people deserve. 
 
And we know of course that with this legislation, we’ll certainly 
see folks that’ll be able to jump the queue, not just for MRI 
tests but also to get other diagnosis or continued follow-up with 
their doctors. And you know, certainly this is one small piece of 
the pie, but it matters, and it’s a costly distraction for a 
government that would be better off focusing its interests into 
where they can make improvements for patients. 
 
We need to fix a lot within health care, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 



7370 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 2015 

seen the neglect under this government, and it’s going to take 
some focused, sustained efforts to repair that system for all, to 
improve that system for all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The just throw your hands up and admit an admission of failure 
that we see from the government opposite, Mr. Speaker, just 
doesn’t cut it for Saskatchewan people. You know, this 
government said they were going to be ambitious about 
emergency room wait times, Mr. Speaker. And we heard the 
bluster and we heard the pomp and we heard the . . . There was 
lots of fanfare around it, Mr. Speaker, but no delivery, Mr. 
Speaker. Just didn’t get the job done. Lots of news releases, lots 
of, sort of, spin around what they were setting out to do, Mr. 
Speaker, but while they were focusing all that energy on the 
communications plan, Mr. Speaker, they forgot to focus in on 
where they could actually make improvements for patients. 
 
So as a result we’ve seen emergency room waits not get better 
but actually get much longer, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve got hour 
after hour that families are waiting at the General Hospital here 
in Regina or the Pasqua Hospital, Mr. Speaker, at a time where 
minutes matter in the lives of patients, and a time where there’s 
great stress on those families. 
 
And I know, I hear the stories actually on a very regular basis. 
They’re the stories that families will share with us around, 
where they go in . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . You know, 
members can shout loudly across the floor, Mr. Speaker, but 
what they’d be better off to recognize is that many, many 
families on a daily basis are going into these emergency rooms 
and they’re wanting and deserving care, Mr. Speaker, at a time 
where they’re stressed and pulled in many different directions, 
Mr. Speaker. And instead of seeing a government make 
improvements the way they had once promised, now we see a 
government, I guess, admit failure, put their hands up, Mr. 
Speaker, and have no plan to make improvements on that front. 
 
We see, as well, this costly . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And 
you know, the Minister of Health is shouting across the floor 
here today. You know, he’d be better off sitting down with 
health providers across Saskatchewan. He’d be better off 
listening to the realities that families are facing. And he’d be 
better off, Mr. Speaker, to not be sitting in the Assembly and 
shouting across the floor, Mr. Speaker, over a distractive, costly 
piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, one that will certainly take 
directly out of the pockets and add to the credit cards of 
Saskatchewan people. But he should be focused on improving 
access to care for all Saskatchewan people and improving 
access not just to the MRIs, Mr. Speaker, but improving the 
system as a whole. 
 
And this is something we just don’t see from this government. I 
think what they’ve decided, you know, we know the Premier is, 
you know, he’s big into kind of polling and he’s big into sort of 
plans around spin, but you know, sort of distractions, Mr. 
Speaker. I think he sees this legislation as something that allows 
him, I guess, to share to his right wingers, Mr. Speaker, that 
he’s able to pursue this ideological agenda of privatization at all 
costs. And it also allows a distraction from the very poor record 
in health care of this Premier and of this government — the 
wait times for specialists that are unfair and far too long and 
going in the wrong directions, and the same thing in emergency 
rooms, Mr. Speaker. 

Now of course any time you have a government in place, 
regardless of who they are, regardless of what party they 
represent, you hope that they are making decisions for the right 
reasons, Mr. Speaker. And you’d hope that the decisions they’re 
making today make sense over the long term, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s just not the case with this government on decision after 
decision after decision. It’s a government that just so often 
defies common sense and pursues its own agenda, pet projects, 
Mr. Speaker, that have cost taxpayers literally billions of 
dollars, Mr. Speaker, of their hard-earned money to be spent in 
wasteful ways on pet projects of this government without the 
needed scrutiny, without the evidence to support it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I heard the bill that was being spoken to just before this. 
That was the essential services legislation. And it’s pretty 
outrageous, Mr. Speaker, that one of the first acts of this 
Premier and this government was to pull a fast one on 
Saskatchewan people after they had committed to a different 
position, Mr. Speaker, and to introduce legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, that was purely ideological, that hadn’t required any 
sort of legal scrutiny, Mr. Speaker, that had no consultation 
with working people, Mr. Speaker, and that has now wasted a 
whole bunch of resources, a whole bunch of money, and many 
years and goodwill in this province, Mr. Speaker, to address 
something that has now . . . a bill, a law that was put forward by 
that Premier recklessly, Mr. Speaker, that in the end has been 
ruled unconstitutional by the Supreme Court, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, that’s what happens with reckless governments. 
That’s what happens with governments that are more focused 
on playing partisan ideological games as opposed to governing 
for Saskatchewan people and doing so with a long view, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I think it’s evident in file after file after file that this 
government really, really manages kind of in the short term but, 
to be honest, they’re not even delivering today, Mr. Speaker. 
They certainly aren’t delivering a plan that makes sense over 
the long term, Mr. Speaker. But they are caught up so often in 
their own political partisan interest, Mr. Speaker, not in the 
public’s interest. Not in the interest of this province today or 
over the long term. 
 
And I think that what Saskatchewan people expect of their 
government is for a government to review the evidence, to 
make decisions that are the right decisions for the right reasons. 
And we just haven’t seen that. And I guess as it relates to the 
MRIs, I would press the government to share where the 
evidence is. I’d urge them to, you know, share with 
Saskatchewan people what evidence may exist to guide this 
short-sighted type discussion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, there is no evidence, Mr. Speaker, that privatization 
of MRIs or a proposed two-for-one deal that they’re bringing 
forward — this costly credit card scheme for MRIs — there is 
no evidence to suggest that this will decrease wait times for 
Saskatchewan people. In fact we know that just next door in 
Alberta, Mr. Speaker, who has private-payer MRIs, that that 
province has the longest wait times in the country to access an 
MRI. And certainly I think we need to be able to look to that 
sort of experience, Mr. Speaker, and I would hope that, from 



October 19, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7371 

looking to that jurisdiction, that this government would be able 
to see I guess some of the light on this matter, Mr. Speaker. 
And you would then hope and urge them to come to a 
conclusion that is in the best interests of the public. 
 
And you know, I think that there’s just not the evidence there 
that you would expect a government to bring forward. And we 
certainly will be, you know, pushing government throughout 
committee processes, throughout the time in this legislature to, I 
guess, to see light on this front, Mr. Speaker, to look to the 
actual evidence and to produce some evidence, Mr. Speaker, as 
to what is guiding this currently misguided decision, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
You know, I think that there’s concerns as well about jumping 
the queue, Mr. Speaker, and people . . . the pressure that places 
on a family, Mr. Speaker. Instead of fixing a system for all and 
ensuring a fair and equitable access to that service, Mr. Speaker, 
we see a government that’s more intent on creating a system 
that allows those to jump the line, and potentially then jumping 
the line for surgery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as we’ve said, and as I’ve said, Mr. Speaker, we see a 
government that, if you look at what’s important to ensuring 
timely response of services, Mr. Speaker, if this government 
were really interested in this discussion, then what we should be 
focusing on are those fronts. We should be making sure primary 
care doctors are available. We should be making sure that the 
access to specialists is improving, not getting worse as we see 
under this government. And we should be making sure, Mr. 
Speaker, that we’re improving MRIs, access to MRIs for all, 
Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I like a witty heckle 
any day in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and that was one. 
 
So really what we see, Mr. Speaker, is a government that’s 
distracting from an agenda that isn’t improving things for 
patients, a government that’s governing very much in the short 
term and seems to have lost touch with Saskatchewan families 
and people, and a government that far too often defies common 
sense and pursues an agenda that doesn’t have the evidence 
behind it, that doesn’t make sense over the long term, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And you know, when we look to Alberta next door, Mr. 
Speaker . . . And you know, this should be a relevant example 
for this government, but you know, in Saskatchewan, we should 
be improving access for all patients to ensure that they’re able 
to receive an MRI in a timely way. Right now, 90 per cent of 
people receive access within 88 days, Mr. Speaker. But in 
Alberta, 90 per cent of people wait up to 247 days, Mr. Speaker. 
You know, that’s certainly . . . In Saskatchewan, it’s not good 
enough, Mr. Speaker. We need to make sure that we do a better 
job in Saskatchewan. 
 
And we have the resources and the ability to do so, Mr. 
Speaker, but it’s not through short-sighted, piecemeal 
privatization with a distractive agenda item like this that allows 
that to happen. In fact it fragments that system and puts a 
competition on the very resources and capacity that’s needed to 
improve the system, and puts various systems in competition 
with one another that allow us not to make the improvements 
that the public deserves. 
 

[15:45] 
 
We also know that the experience in other provinces is that 
professionals will be poached from the public system, like 
technologists, which is certainly an important component of this 
whole discussion. We know that the capacity as a whole won’t 
be increased, the capacity of our system won’t be increased 
with the approach of this government. And you know, it’s one 
that certainly brings complexity and challenge to the 
management of that system over the long term. 
 
So we know that this government isn’t fond of looking to other 
jurisdictions to learn from, Mr. Speaker. We see that really in 
this government’s relentless pursuit of P3s, as another example, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s disappointing that on issue after issue that this 
government is unwilling to learn from the experiences of other 
provinces. 
 
It’s disappointing that this province, when it comes to P3s, isn’t 
willing to recognize the challenges that occurred in Alberta as it 
relates to access to schools. For example, Mr. Speaker, the 
concerns around cookie-cutter schools, Mr. Speaker, as opposed 
to ones that are built to serve communities, that can be utilized 
entirely by communities, or the fact that in Alberta the 
government recognized that there just simply wasn’t the 
competition in the system that they had created with the P3 
bidding process to ensure best value for taxpayers. And what 
we saw in Alberta was a then Conservative government actually 
abandoning that costly P3 process, recognizing the challenges 
that existed. 
 
But not here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. For this 
government, you know, they’re stubborn, and it’s full bore 
ahead, Mr. Speaker. And you know, it’s sort of like full bore 
ahead with their pet projects and their partisan interests but, you 
know, it’s the taxpayers, Mr. Speaker, that are getting taken for 
a ride. 
 
And when we talk about who will be paying for the decisions of 
today and the short-term decisions of today, it’s a generation 
and more of taxpayers, Mr. Speaker, who are going to be on the 
hook for the bad deals that this government continues to push 
taxpayers into, Mr. Speaker, without accountability, without 
transparency. 
 
We recognize as well that this government was unwilling to 
learn from Nova Scotia, Mr. Speaker, that when they scrapped 
the P3s in that jurisdiction, they actually would have saved $2 
million per school. And that’s provided from the independent 
auditor of Nova Scotia, Mr. Speaker, that provided that 
information and recognized that all that money had been wasted 
over the years, that could have been better spent, Mr. Speaker, 
on the priorities that are truly important to the people of their 
jurisdiction. 
 
Or we see basically what auditors are weighing in on in other 
jurisdictions, in British Columbia and in Ontario, where we see 
massive amounts of taxpayers’ money that has been put at risk, 
Mr. Speaker. Where we see out of Ontario, I believe, the 
assessment was that in the initial value-for-money charade that 
governments go through — we see the government doing that 
right now — but through that charade, one that doesn’t have 
independent accountability to it, that in that province the 



7372 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 2015 

governments had inappropriately attributed bogus risk transfer 
numbers, Mr. Speaker. Which I believe, if you look to the 
auditor’s report in Ontario, could have cost taxpayers up to 
about $8 billion in Ontario over a number of those P3 projects, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
You would think that would be of interest to a Finance minister 
or to government opposite. But then you would have to assume, 
Mr. Speaker, that the governing party was actually focused on 
the long term, that they weren’t just pursuing an ideological 
agenda, that they weren’t just distracting from their poor record 
on various fronts, Mr. Speaker. So you would think, Mr. 
Speaker, that the government opposite would learn from other 
jurisdictions as we’ve seen this relentless pursuit of, you know, 
private schemes for infrastructure. But we don’t see that. 
 
We hear the same sort of tired spin and answers from the 
minister here today, Mr. Speaker, who’s unwilling to provide 
the accountability that the taxpayers deserve, and it’s the same 
tired spin. It’s like they took their speaking notes — and I’m 
sure they did, Mr. Speaker — from those other provinces back 
when those governments were still pretending that going down 
these private P3 routes were somehow going to deliver for the 
public. So they’re using those same lines but unfortunately, as 
you let this string play out, the reality is this government’s 
relentless on putting taxpayers on the hook in the same sort of 
way that these governments in other provinces have, and then of 
course subjecting taxpayers to waste, Mr. Speaker, to spending 
that’s not needed when we could be prioritizing those dollars 
into making improvements for everyone in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So we call on this government, you know, to hopefully learn 
from other jurisdictions. It’s getting increasingly frustrating, 
Mr. Speaker, I know for Saskatchewan people to see this 
government just ramming forward with its own agendas, 
defying experiences from other provinces. You know, I used the 
example of P3s, Mr. Speaker, the rent-an-infrastructure 
schemes that we’ve seen in other jurisdictions. 
 
And we see as well the impact on Saskatchewan business, Mr. 
Speaker. And, you know, we’ve got exceptional businesses and 
workers all across Saskatchewan, businesses that have invested 
and built their companies here in this province, businesses that 
have invested in training, workers who have built their lives 
here, paid taxes here. And we see those very companies and 
those very workers now being bypassed by a government who 
is pursuing an agenda that defies common sense, that costs 
taxpayers more, and that bypasses those companies from the 
very important work and the very important projects. 
 
It just doesn’t make sense, Mr. Speaker, to see a government so 
relentless to build a scheme and a structure with its 
infrastructure plans that basically doesn’t ensure a level playing 
field for Saskatchewan companies. It actually has a whole 
bunch of added costs to those very companies to participate in 
these processes and shuts out the vast majority of Saskatchewan 
companies, and then doesn’t fulfill what a government should 
in ensuring good mortgage-paying jobs all across this province. 
 
And again it seems to me to be a government that has lost some 
of its care, that seems to have lost touch with Saskatchewan 
families, and in this case lost touch with Saskatchewan 

businesses, whether it’s in the design community, or in 
architecture, or whether it’s somebody in engineering, or 
whether it’s our contractors and our manufacturers, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We see a government who is just all too willing and rather 
relentless to build schemes and structures to its infrastructure 
projects that don’t allow Saskatchewan companies to have a fair 
shot at it and actually have big bills to participate . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . The member opposite says that’s just not the 
case, Mr. Speaker. But I would urge the members opposite to sit 
down with some of the fine businesses across Saskatchewan 
who have been caught up in the costly bidding process, one that 
has taken real dollars out of their businesses, Mr. Speaker, taken 
real dollars out of their businesses, and one that doesn’t ensure 
a fair shot for many other companies across this province to 
participate. 
 
So we would hope that the Government of Saskatchewan would 
have an interest in learning from these other jurisdictions, but 
it’s pretty clear, Mr. Speaker, that they’ve sort of . . . that 
they’re locked in their plan and that they’re ramming forward 
with their own agenda. Again just, you know, looking at what 
Saskatchewan people deserve, you know, they deserve a 
government that’s not going to simply look for its own sort of 
costly ideological pet projects, Mr. Speaker. They deserve a 
government that will focus on what’s in the best interests of 
today and tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. And we don’t see that with 
this government. 
 
When it comes to improving health services and access to 
MRIs, Mr. Speaker, and more timely surgeries, we see a 
government that through this legislation isn’t making things 
better, but really is just further, you know, more of an 
admission of failure of this government to get the job done 
where it matters. 
 
And I know we’ve been talking, we’ve been talking in this 
Assembly about, you know, the government’s promises they 
had in place for access to, you know, wait times in emergency 
rooms. And it’s laudable to have an ambitious goal on this 
front, and then it’s critical that a government can get the job 
done. 
 
You know, but we didn’t see that with this government. We 
saw, you know, all the spin and communications game around 
the goal, Mr. Speaker, but no efforts to actually improve on 
emergency room wait times for Saskatchewan people. And we 
actually see that wait times have gotten worse, Mr. Speaker. So 
it’s an example of a government that makes announcements but 
then just is unwilling to roll up their sleeves and to do the hard 
work, and to see a project through to the end, Mr. Speaker, and 
sort of throwing their hands up now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If we think about what’s important for the public, to receive an 
MRI and ultimately the full health care response that they 
require, a surgery that they require, we know that that patient 
and that family must first enter in through the doors of a doctor 
or a primary health care team, Mr. Speaker. And we see on too 
many fronts that Saskatchewan people don’t have adequate 
access to primary care or to doctors in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. But we don’t see that in this government’s plan, Mr. 
Speaker. We see a government instead that’s focused on its own 



October 19, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7373 

agenda. 
 
So if we were to really care about improving things for 
Saskatchewan patients as we should, we’d be fixing that whole 
cycle in a comprehensive way that improves the access to the 
primary care, that improves the access to the doctor, that 
actually makes improvements with access to the specialists that 
are needed, not make waits for specialists increase to almost an 
entire year as we’ve seen under this government, Mr. Speaker. 
And we would see a government that would learn from the 
evidence of other jurisdictions to invest wisely today and to fix 
a system for all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Instead we see a government bring forward a half-baked bill, 
Mr. Speaker, that just isn’t going to improve the system for all, 
and one that’s certainly going to be costly to many 
Saskatchewan people. It creates inequities and challenges 
within the system, and we should all expect better from our 
government, Mr. Speaker. So at this point in time, though, as it 
relates to Bill No. 179, I adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 179, The MRI 
Facilities Licensing Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House adjourns. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until 
tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:57.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7351 
  Nilson ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7351, 7352 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7351 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7351 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7351 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7351 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Accreditation Restored to College of Medicine 
  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7352 
 Anniversary of “Famous Five” Privy Council Decision 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7352 
 Dr. F.H. Wigmore Regional Hospital Opens in Moose Jaw 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7352 
 World Refugee Day 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7353 
 Commissioning Service for Regina Police Service Chaplain 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7353 
 Education Week 
  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7353 
 Regina Teacher Receives Governor General’s Award 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7354 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Review of Domestic Violence Deaths 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7354 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7354 
 Cost of Regina Bypass 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7355 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7355 
 Review of Firefighting Efforts 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7357 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7357 
 Climate Change and Environmental Protection 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7358 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7358 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 184 — The Automobile Accident Insurance (Motorcycles) Amendment Act, 2015 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7358 
 Bill No. 185 — The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous Measures) Amendment Act, 2015 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7358 
 Bill No. 186 — The Municipal Conflict of Interest Amendment Act, 2015 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7359 
POINT OF ORDER 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7359 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7359 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7359 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 183 — The Saskatchewan Employment (Essential Services) Amendment Act, 2015 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7359 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7360 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 179 — The MRI Facilities Licensing Act 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7368 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


