






















































Hansard: April 23, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 53A  THURSDAY, APRIL 23, 2015, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6991 
 April 23, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much. Mr. Speaker, there’s a 
special guest in your gallery that I’d like to introduce to 
members this morning. He’s certainly been introduced before. 
He’ll be familiar to members on both sides of the House 
because of his service to the province of Saskatchewan at the 
local government level. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you, Dave Marit who’s joined us today. Dave 
still farms with his brother at Fife Lake. He was indicating to 
some members this morning they’re kind of getting ready for 
seeding. We hope that can begin in earnest. 
 
He’s been involved in local politics since 1993, Mr. Speaker, 
which speaks to staying power and great experience in the fact 
that he’s getting a little older. He was elected to the SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] board of 
directors in 1999 for division 2. He was elected vice-president 
in ’04, president in 2006, and I think provided exemplary 
leadership for SARM and for the province of Saskatchewan in 
that capacity until very recently. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to report to the House that he was 
successful in winning the nomination in the Wood River 
constituency for the Saskatchewan Party, and he will represent 
us in that particular seat in the upcoming campaign. He and his 
wife, Lois, recently moved to Assiniboia. They have two kids, 
Jordan and Katelyn . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the 
member for Athabasca is chirping from his seat. I assure him 
he’ll have plenty of opportunity to debate our guest when he is 
on the floor of the legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — If he’s still here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — That’s assuming that he’s still here, Mr. 
Speaker, absolutely. Dave and his wife, Lois, recently moved to 
Assiniboia. They have two kids, Jordan and Katelyn and a 
granddaughter, Lily. I’d ask all members to join with us in 
welcoming Dave to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, some individuals seated in the east gallery. I’m 
talking about a group of 24 students from grades 3 and 4 from 
Connaught Community School, École Connaught. 
 
You may be wondering, Mr. Speaker, what’s happening. How 
is it that McCall is introducing students from Connaught? Well 
Connaught is currently located at the old Wascana School site 
while the site for Connaught Community School has been 
cleared, but we’ll see what evolves there yet, Mr. Speaker. 
 

But it’s good to see these students here from Connaught 
Community School. They’re accompanied by teachers Sage 
Fox, Stephanie Bruce, Wendy Jago, and by parent chaperone 
and Cathedral Village all-star Sheila Josza, who’s well-known 
from such events as the Cathedral Village Arts Festival and 
certainly is a pillar of that community. I’d ask all members to 
join with me in welcoming these individuals to their Legislative 
Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling for support for better schools here in 
Saskatchewan. And we know, the people, the undersigned 
residents want to bring to your attention the following: that far 
too many of our classrooms are overcrowded and 
under-resourced; and the Sask Party government eliminated 
hundreds of educational assistant, EA jobs; and that students 
often don’t get the one-on-one attention they need. None of this 
is acceptable, given the record revenues this government has 
had over the last eight years. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
call on this government to immediately stop ignoring 
schools and start prioritizing students by capping 
classroom sizes, increasing support for students, and 
developing a transparent plan to build and repair our 
schools. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the city 
of Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 
again to present petitions on behalf of concerned citizens as it 
relates to the unsafe conditions created by that government on 
Dewdney Avenue with the inundation of heavy-haul truck 
traffic without a safe route or planning to ensure safety, Mr. 
Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on 
Dewdney Avenue west of the city centre to ensure the 
safety and well-being of communities, families, residents, 
and users; and that those actions and plans should include 
rerouting the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial 
funding, and be developed through consultation with the 
city of Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions are signed by concerned residents of Regina. I 
so submit. 
 



6992 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2015 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. Homelessness is a major problem in La Ronge and 
other parts of the North, and it’s getting worse. Shelter is a 
basic need for everyone. But under this government, it’s getting 
harder and harder for people to find adequate housing, 
especially families, seniors, women and children who face 
abusive situations. The problem is getting worse because of the 
rising level of poverty, skyrocketed home ownership costs. The 
prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the Saskatchewan 
government to build a homeless shelter in the Lac la 
Ronge area to meet the needs of addressing homelessness 
in the Lac la Ronge area. 
 

And it’s signed by many good people of northern 
Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition in support of maintaining 
hyperbaric services at the Moose Jaw Hospital. The petitioners 
point out, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Moose Jaw worked 
hard for many years, through fundraising and community 
activism, in order to procure a hyperbaric chamber for the 
Moose Jaw Hospital. They also point out that hyperbaric 
treatments are essential for the proper treatment for many 
people living with diabetes, cancer, and other conditions. They 
talk about how the existing hyperbaric chamber is the only unit 
of its kind currently in operation between Edmonton and 
Toronto. And they point out, the petitioners point out that 
hyperbaric services will no longer be offered in the new design 
for the Moose Jaw Hospital because of the changes to the 
hospital design initiated through the John Black version of lean. 
The prayer I’d like to read: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly require the Sask 
Party government to reverse its decision to scrap the 
hyperbaric chamber and to instead ensure that this service 
continues to be provided in the new Moose Jaw Hospital. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Moose Jaw. 
I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition in support of safe staffing levels in long-term care. Mr. 
Speaker, in the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 
government to commit to the creation of safe staffing 
levels for all valued members of the health care team, and 
to re-introduce actual numbers of staff to match the level 
of care needs and the number of residents under their care 

in long-term care facilities. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by individuals 
from the city of Swift Current. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition in support of retaining Yarrow Youth Farm. The 
individuals who signed this petition wish to bring the following 
to our attention: the government has closed the Yarrow Youth 
Farm and have created an open-custody wing in Kilburn Hall, 
which is a secure custody unit for youth considered a greater 
risk to their communities; the provincial Advocate for Children 
and Youth has declared he can’t endorse such a rationalization, 
as low-risk teens could be influenced and pressured by close 
proximity to high-risk youth who may be involved in serious 
crimes or gangs; and that Kilburn Hall has a more institutional 
environment that could intimidate and alienate teens that have 
committed minor offences. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the government to keep 
Yarrow Youth Farm open, to ensure a caring home 
environment for youth who have committed minor 
offences, and provide support to help these young people 
redirect their lives by setting more positive goals. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by individuals from 
Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Saskatchewan Literacy Awards of Merit 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, last night I had the pleasure to 
attend the 2015 Saskatchewan Literacy Awards of Merit. Every 
year the Lieutenant Governor awards a number of distinguished 
volunteers and individuals who dedicate their time and energy 
to helping others to develop literacy skills. 
 
KPMG was recognized with a Business Leadership in Literacy 
Award for its long-standing support for Read Saskatoon. 
KPMG employees regularly volunteer their time and expertise 
with Read Saskatoon, and their ability to help those struggling 
with financial literacy is particularly valuable for those who 
struggle to read. 
 
Mark Williment was also recognized for his years of work as a 
superintendent of the Northern Lights School Division. Mark’s 
lifelong commitment to improving literacy in northern 
communities is an inspiration to us all. Dr. Helen Christiansen 
received the Volunteer Service Award for her 11 years of 
volunteer tutoring at the Regina Public Library. 



April 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6993 

Finally, Lucinda Nielson was recognized with the Cameco 
Literacy Learner Award for her perseverance and dedication to 
lifelong learning. She left school when she was in grade 3 to 
help out at home and had very limited literacy skills. But in 
2005 she linked up with a team at Read Saskatoon, and in May 
of last year she earned her GED [general equivalency diploma] 
at the age of 79. Mr. Speaker, she’s still taking post-secondary 
school now at the age of 80. Her speech was just lovely. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating these award 
recipients and thanking everyone at the Literacy Network for all 
the work they do to promote literacy in our province. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 

Saskatoon Organization Provides Autism Services 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. April 16th was 
the ribbon cutting and open house for Autism Services of 
Saskatoon. As an organization dedicated to supporting 
individuals who are living with ASD or autism spectrum 
disorder, as well as their families, this organization does 
amazing work for people with disabilities. Yet the 8.1 million in 
annual funding provides Autism Services . . . is annually 
working to change this. Funding for Autism Services of 
Saskatoon includes ASD consultants, ASD support workers, 
rehabilitative therapies, respite services, and training for service 
providers as well as parents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have spoken about the complexities of ASD and 
how it affects each child and each family differently. 
Organizations like the Autism Services of Saskatoon are 
helping families and individuals live life to the fullest with their 
diagnosis. There is no cure for autism, but it is a condition that 
can be managed. This government continues to believe that we 
need to work closely with health authorities and our community 
partners to create autism services that work best by everyone 
affected by ASD. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members join me in 
congratulating Autism Services of Saskatoon on their open 
house, as well as thank them for the amazing work that they do 
in our city. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

Sarazine Ratt Celebrates 103rd Birthday 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise in 
the Assembly today to recognize a constituent of mine, Mrs. 
Sarazine Ratt. Born in Knee Lake in 1912, she celebrates her 
103rd birthday this year. Sarazine learned to read and write in 
French at the Beauval Residential School, and when the policy 
changed to exclude Métis students, she left and learned the 
traditional livelihood of the Denesuliné from her parents. 
 
Denesuliné Yate was her mother’s language, as her father’s 
language was Cree, and she learned to speak both fluently and 
she learned to read English from the books brought home by her 
children. 
 

She married Frank Nezcroche and they built a life together at 
Knee Lake. Every year, Frank and Sarazine would leave for 
Cree Lake where they spent the winter trapping, using 
snowshoes and dog teams. Sarazine and Frank adopted three 
times and cared for many foster children. 
 
As they got older, Sarazine and Frank found portaging between 
Knee Lake and Patuanak difficult, so in 1965 they moved into 
Patuanak, also known as English River First Nation. Sarazine 
began teaching Denesuliné Yate at the local school. She sold 
moosehide moccasins and clothing she sewed to add to the 
family income, but their main source of food was still from the 
land. Frank died in 1990, but Sarazine still lives in their house. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in sending thanks to 
Sarazine Ratt and congratulate her for her lifetime of 
contributions and the role she has played in preserving Cree and 
Denesuliné languages and cultures in Saskatchewan. Thank 
you. 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 

Competition Showcases Trades and Technology Skills 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last weekend I 
had the pleasure of attending and bringing greetings at the 17th 
Annual Saskatchewan Provincial Skills Canada competition in 
Moose Jaw. Competing events took place at the Saskatchewan 
Polytech, Moose Jaw and Regina campuses, as well as A.E. 
Peacock Collegiate, Central Collegiate in Moose Jaw, and the 
Saskatchewan Pipefitters Joint Training Board in Regina. We 
had the honour to have Mr. Mike Holmes, Jr. as guest speaker 
at the opening ceremonies this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the competition brought together 440 secondary 
and post-secondary students and apprentices from across the 
province. Skills Canada Saskatchewan’s Olympic-style 
competition provides a forum for students to compete and 
showcase their skills in numerous trades and technology areas 
from welding to machine shop to 3-D [three-dimensional] 
animation. Mr. Speaker, it was truly an amazing event to see the 
enthusiasm and the pride of work demonstrated by these 
students. 
 
One of the goals of the competition is to bring a showcase to 
Saskatchewan prospective employers with the skills levels of 
our future workforce in the skills and trade field. It also 
demonstrated the vast number of career opportunities available 
in the trades and technology sector, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The gold medal winners in each competition will now go on to 
represent Saskatchewan at the Skills Canada national 
competition which will be held in Saskatoon in May. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating all 
the students who competed in this year’s Skills Canada 
Saskatchewan competition. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 



6994 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2015 

Mortlach Saskatoonberry Festival Wins 
Tourism Award 

 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week the 
26th annual Saskatchewan Tourism Awards of Excellence Gala 
was hosted by Tourism Saskatchewan in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say that the Mortlach Saskatoonberry 
Festival, which takes place in my constituency, won the 
Community Event of the Year Award. The festival is a 
delicious celebration of community and is organized by the 
Mortlach Community Development & Agriculture Society and 
is run by local volunteers. It includes a full day of activities and 
samples of tasty Saskatoon berry treats. Turnout has grown 
substantially over the past seven years with as many as 3,000 
people attending from all over, including other parts of Canada, 
the United States, and even Europe and Japan. This is a great 
opportunity for local businesses, street vendors, and community 
groups. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government applauds the achievements of all 
the Tourism Awards of Excellence recipients. Their hard work 
and innovation make Saskatchewan an inviting and memorable 
destination for tourists around the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the Mortlach 
Saskatoonberry Festival and all of the Tourism Awards of 
Excellence recipients. I would also like to thank them for being 
such great ambassadors for our province. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

North Central Facility Named Mâmawêyatitân Centre 
 
Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Friday I, 
along with many of my colleagues, had the pleasure of 
attending the name unveiling for the new North Central shared 
facility in Regina, a facility and community very important to 
me personally, but of course to all of us as well. 
 
Most members will be more familiar with it as Scott Collegiate, 
built in 1924, the second high school in Regina. As beautiful of 
an old building as it is, it is certainly showing its age and is in 
need of replacement. Talk of building a replacement facility 
began in 2003 when members opposite were in government. 
However, Mr. Speaker, that’s all it really was, just talk. I’m 
very pleased to say that progress has begun on the new shared 
facility, a facility that will house a high school, child care 
facility, city recreational complex, public library, and 
community policing centre. 
 
With significant input from community elders, this facility will 
be called the Mâmawêyatitân Centre, which is Cree for “We all 
come together.” It will indeed be a centrepiece for the North 
Central community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, to their credit, recognized 
it was time for Scott Collegiate to be replaced. But once again, 
Mr. Speaker, they only did what they were good at: lots of talk, 
no action. On this side of the House we are doing what we do 
best, and that’s get the job done, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Wholesale Trade Grows in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to rise today to announce that in February, 
Saskatchewan’s wholesale trade reached 2.5 billion, an all-time 
record high for the province. On a year-over-year basis, this 
represents an increase of 25.9 per cent. According to Statistics 
Canada, Saskatchewan had the largest percentage increase 
among the provinces and well outpaced the national average of 
5.5 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s wholesale trade growth between 
January and February truly stood out when compared to the rest 
of Canada. In Saskatchewan, wholesale trade increased by 7.3 
per cent, representing the highest percentage increase among all 
provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this growth in wholesale trade is indicative of how 
our province’s broad-based economy is continuing to expand 
and it’s helping us to continue to build a strong Saskatchewan. 
Our robust and diverse economy puts Saskatchewan in the 
unique position to be able to absorb short-term challenges such 
as those currently being faced in the energy sector while 
continuing to grow and build for the future. Financial analysts 
are predicting that not only will Saskatchewan continue to grow 
in 2015 but that our province will continue to show strength 
over the long term. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a great time to be living in our province, and 
we truly have what it takes to ensure we keep Saskatchewan 
strong. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Release of Information Concerning Worker 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the care aid whose privacy was 
breached by the Premier has lodged a formal complaint against 
the Premier and the Premier’s chief of communications and 
operations. Will the Premier commit to fully co-operate with 
this investigation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. Under section 29 
of the relevant Act, there was no breach. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier is dreaming if he 
thinks that is accurate. The Premier’s entire argument yesterday, 
Mr. Speaker, was that he believes, he believes that leaking 
confidential information about a private citizen was necessary 
in order to protect the Premier’s reputation and get him out of a 
conundrum. Conundrum is the exact word that the Premier 
used. He was in a conundrum, so he ordered the leak of 
confidential information about a private citizen. 
 
Nothing whatsoever in the legislation allows for a breach of 
privacy to protect the Premier’s reputation or to help the 



April 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6995 

Premier out of a conundrum. Will the Premier agree today to 
turn over all relevant emails, text messages, phone records, and 
other documents to the independent Privacy Commissioner? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’re used to a lot of things 
from the member opposite. We’re used to him representing 
facts in ways that we later find out aren’t correct. We’re used to, 
I think, the extreme use of rhetoric in certain situations. We saw 
it I think yesterday in the scrum when he was comparing this 
whole situation to what happens in Russia, if you can believe 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The conundrum that I . . . And he’s also now misrepresented, I 
would say, or not dealt fully and clearly with what exactly I said 
yesterday. And he does this. He cherry-picks a word here and 
there. 
 
Here’s the conundrum the government faced. The conundrum 
was this: that member, for some reason — he’s not done this in 
the past — asked as a preamble to his questions about Mr. 
Bowden’s inquiry here at the legislature three times if he would 
be protected from any retribution in the workplace for raising 
these concerns. I made that promise. I gave the commitment on 
behalf of the government. So did the Minister of Health, Mr. 
Speaker. So the conundrum that I was talking about was, how 
then do we ensure, in light of the fact that the health region has 
taken steps to discipline him because of complaints received, 
had nothing to do with his intervention here at the House but 
because of that, the conundrum for the government is, how do 
we make sure that other health care workers understand there 
will be no retribution for anyone that comes forward and raises 
concerns? 
 
He knows that’s the record of the government because, as 
concerns have come forward, either in letters to the editor or in 
to this Assembly, there has been no retribution. There have 
been no consequences in the workplace. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what the health region takes seriously and what 
the government takes seriously, and I wonder if the Leader of 
the Opposition takes this seriously, is the well-being of patients 
and colleagues, the health and well-being and welfare of 
patients in the system or residents in long-term care, and 
colleagues in the workplace. Mr. Speaker, we do take that very 
seriously. So does the region, and the appropriate action has 
been taken. The appropriate action was also taken with respect 
to information as outlined in section 29 of the relevant Act. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I asked three times because the 
Premier’s answers were weak and because we now see how this 
government treats individuals like that. Peter was the first care 
aid that came out publicly, Mr. Speaker, the first one that would 
put his name out there publicly because of the concerns that he 
saw, and that’s why he needed protection. 
 
My question was to the Premier, which he did not reply to or 
give an answer. Will the Premier agree to turn over to the 
Privacy Commissioner emails, text messages, and 
documentation, yes or no? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, he’s now not even 
remembering his own questions in the Legislative Assembly 
because he asked for assurance three times. He asked it in the 
first question when he raised this gentleman’s case. In the very 
first question before he went on with the actual case he was 
raising, he stood up in the House and said, was there assurance 
from me personally, from the government, that someone could 
come forward without retribution. And you know, it’s all over 
Hansard. He can read it in Hansard, Mr. Speaker. He should 
know what he said, but it’s in Hansard if he’s not clear about 
that. My answer was unequivocal each time, but he asked it 
each time. 
 
I mean I don’t know what the Leader of the Opposition knew or 
was asked to do on behalf of this individual, but I would just 
say this, that the proper procedure was followed, Mr. Speaker. 
The proper procedure was followed. There’s clear provision in 
legislation to allow us to ensure the public interest in terms of 
disclosure. This was general information that was provided, Mr. 
Speaker, and of course we’ll co-operate in any way with any 
inquiry by the Privacy Commissioner. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — When did the Premier learn that the care aid in 
Saskatoon was suspended? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I believe it would have been 
several days after the fact. I understand the suspension might 
have happened late last week, and I believe I heard about it 
earlier this week. Mr. Speaker, I could get the exact date for the 
member. 
 
The bottom line is this: when I heard this information, I was 
concerned because an undertaking had been given in the 
Legislative Assembly about the assurance that workers should 
have with respect to raising concerns in the House. And when I 
heard about this, I was wanting to ensure that that promise was 
kept. Mr. Speaker, I’m comfortable with that. 
 
I hope also that the Leader of the Opposition would agree with 
the health region that a lot of this could be settled, including 
important issues of the workplace that was affected, a lot of this 
could be settled with finality if Mr. Bowden would agree with 
the region’s request that he release his file. Obviously the 
region can’t do it. Obviously the government can’t do it. 
Neither should either of those parties do it. But Mr. Bowden 
should want that, should want to be able to set the record 
because it’s his position, and it’s shared by the Leader of the 
Opposition, his position is, the only reason he’s facing 
discipline is because he came to the legislature. Yes or no? I 
think that’s the position of the NDP [New Democratic Party]. 
 
I’m saying that is not the case. The health region is saying that 
is not the case. The union contract prohibits this from 
happening, Mr. Speaker. The answers to all of these questions 
can be resolved if the gentleman would release his file. I hope 
that he does that. And I hope the Leader of the Opposition 
would also support any action by the health region that ensures 



6996 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2015 

a proper workplace, a safe workplace, either at Oliver Lodge or 
anywhere else in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Peter is having his first meeting 
with the region today because that’s how due process works. 
That’s how rules are followed, Mr. Speaker, and that’s how the 
privacy of individual citizens is respected, something that we 
have not seen from this Premier. My question to the Premier, 
Mr. Speaker: the information, the private, confidential 
information was leaked on Monday. Is that the day that the 
Premier became aware of the information? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the government knew on 
Monday what had happened here because of the situation that 
has caused this event, the situation being assurances requested 
by the Leader of the Opposition and then given by myself that 
this gentleman would be protected in terms of his workplace 
from any implications of him coming to the legislature. But, 
Mr. Speaker, the health region itself has been pretty clear about 
what can cause an investigation of anyone in the health care 
system, and that relates directly to the health and well-being of 
patients or residents under care, and colleagues. That will 
always be the priority of the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provisions in the Act that would allow for a 
sharing of information are pretty clear about the public interest. 
I think it’s pretty clear that it’s in the public interest that health 
care workers know they can come forward without retribution 
and raise concerns, as they have on countless occasions with 
letters to the editor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s something else about the public interest. 
We want to make sure we have workplaces — and I remember 
events not very long ago when members opposite were in 
charge — we want to have an environment in the public service 
free, Mr. Speaker, free of anything that would harm or in any 
way take away from the health and welfare and well-being of 
patients in care and colleagues. That will always be a priority of 
this government. That is in the public interest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Act requires due diligence and 
caution. The Premier said he learned earlier this week. We 
know that the information was leaked on Monday. Is it correct, 
or what is the turn of events, Mr. Speaker? Did the Premier 
learn about the suspension on Monday, and was it leaked that 
Monday morning? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the answer of course to this 
question was just provided in the last answer. I would just say 
though again with respect to this particular issue, the member 
keeps using the word leak. The information was provided, was 
provided per . . . Well we hear them. We hear them chirping, 
Mr. Speaker, about legislation that’s been on the books in this 

province for a long time, where there is a specific provision for 
information to be provided if it’s deemed to be in the public 
interest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, long before Monday, long before Monday, this 
government deemed it to be in the public interest that it ought 
to, that the government and all of its partners, health regions 
ought to conduct themselves in a way that no one would face 
retribution or any implications at all from coming forward and 
expressing concerns about health care in the province of 
Saskatchewan or their workplace. Mr. Speaker, that is in the 
public interest. 
 
There was due diligence that has gone into that priority that we 
have made for the province of Saskatchewan, and it was on that 
basis that a decision was made not to leak but to provide 
background to media, background to media so that people 
would know in this province that nobody, not Mr. Bowden, not 
anyone else has ever faced workplace consequences because of 
coming forward as he did. Neither will they as long as we have 
the chance to form government in the province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it is not in the public interest for 
the Premier to engage in politically motivated leaks. That is 
absolutely clear. Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier: how 
is it that he came to learn about this information? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know the specifics of 
what’s in this gentleman’s file. I know in a general way what 
the concerns were, and they were generated by complaints — I 
think that was provided — generated by complaints of 
colleagues. And that’s why I would counsel some 
circumspection on the part of members opposite and the Leader 
of the Opposition. 
 
I think we want to always be ensuring that while people need to 
be able to freely express concerns about health care being 
provided in their workplace, we must also ensure that first of all 
there’s a freedom to do that and, secondly, that those 
workplaces are free from anything that would take away from 
the well-being and the welfare of people in care, and colleagues, 
Mr. Speaker. I think that’s very important. 
 
Let me just say this. This government will take action to protect 
those things. We want to ensure, and its partners in the health 
regions will need to ensure that the workplaces are safe, that the 
workplaces are also not taking away anything from the 
well-being of people. While the members are chirping opposite, 
Mr. Speaker, I think they should be taking that particular issue 
very, very seriously. 
 
Again, I hope the Leader of the Opposition would maybe reach 
out to Mr. Bowden and encourage that he provide the 
information in the file so that we will know all the details about 
this, about the investigation. Mr. Speaker, I think that would be 
instructive. You want to talk about who’s playing politics with 
the issue? Absent the facts in this line of question, we would 
answer that question: it would be the Leader of the Opposition, 
Mr. Speaker. 



April 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6997 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the question was, how did the 
Premier come to learn of this information? Who did he talk to? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it was a conversation with the 
staff in the Premier’s office who would’ve been informed I 
think by the health region and the Health minister’s office. 
 
Obviously we had stated a concern for this particular individual 
in terms of what might happen going forward, seeking to 
protect his position of coming forward into the legislature. Well 
it’s true. This is all . . . This is the fact. We wanted to make sure 
that there was nothing that any, any partner of government or 
government itself would do, any action that we would take that 
would clearly indicate that there had been a workplace 
repercussion for him coming forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and so when that person was suspended with pay, 
we would want to have known that, and then we want to have 
sought assurances. This is important. Then we would’ve wanted 
to seek assurances that whatever decision had been taken in 
terms of disciplinary action, the suspension with pay, that those 
actions were having nothing to do with him coming forward. I 
think that’s what the member opposite would want the 
government to do. That’s exactly what we did. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Did the Premier or the Premier’s office seek 
this information from the health region, or was it offered up by 
the health region to the Premier? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve just checked with the 
Health minister. We can provide the information to the member 
on that particular question. I don’t have the immediate details. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, because the 
Premier gave a very ambiguous answer about that yesterday in 
a scrum when asked about how he knew about this information, 
saying that he asked because he wanted to know and then talked 
about, well there was some sort of follow-out report that came. 
So which was it? Did the Premier’s office ask the health region 
for the information, or did the health region offer up this 
information to the Premier? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I sought assurances from 
government, from our government and from the region long 
before any of these events unfolded. The Leader of the 
Opposition on three occasions when this gentleman’s case was 
being raised asked for assurances that he would be protected 
from workplace repercussions. Mr. Speaker, on this side of the 
House, when we give a promise like that, we seek to ensure that 
that promise is kept. The request was made that a promise that I 
gave on the floor of the legislature would be kept by the health 

region immediately after those questions were first raised in the 
House. 
 
Because of that, I would expect the region, I would want the 
health region, if then disciplinary action was taken, to be able to 
let the government know that it had been taken and, more 
importantly, to let the government know that it had nothing to 
do with him coming forward, Mr. Speaker, because we gave 
that promise. On this side of the House, those commitments, 
those undertakings, not just in this legislature but wherever we 
are in the province, they matter. They matter to me, Mr. 
Speaker. And I wanted to make sure, the Health minister 
wanted to make sure that Mr. Bowden’s case had nothing to do 
with him coming forward. 
 
I am satisfied that that happened without seeing the specifics 
because I haven’t seen them. And if the member has, he might 
. . . You know, that would be interesting. But I have not seen 
the specifics. I have sought and received the assurance and 
general information from the health region that the 
government’s commitment was made, not just made but kept. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m confident that that’s exactly the case. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we see again in the Premier’s 
remarks here, it’s about protecting the Premier’s reputation, 
solving his conundrum as opposed to ensuring the privacy of 
private citizens is upheld. Mr. Speaker, my question for the 
Premier: with whom did the Premier discuss the details of this 
case before deciding to breach the confidential, private 
information of a private citizen? With whom did he consult? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP have just tweeted 
something out, and it reads as follows: “Note: NDP has seen 
file & is satisfied it appears Bowden is suspended specifically 
for speaking out about seniors’ care crisis.” Have you seen the 
file, and is that your opinion? Is that your view, the NDP 
position, that this is the only reason that he’s been suspended 
with pay? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we have seen the same 
information that this government has released to the people. For 
the Premier to do this, Mr. Speaker, and cloud the issue is 
unbelievable. My question to the Premier: before he decided to 
breach this individual’s private information, Mr. Speaker, with 
whom did he consult? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, his party, his caucus, the 
people that work for him and that are accountable to him have 
just tweeted, “Note: NDP has seen file & is satisfied it appears 
Bowden is suspended specifically for speaking out about 
seniors’ care crisis.” Well they’re asking why we’re not 
answering questions. This is a confidential file. This is a 
confidential file. So how did it come into their possession? 
 
Now that they’ve seen the whole file . . . because that’s what 



6998 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2015 

he’s saying. That’s what they’ve just tweeted. Now that they’ve 
seen the whole file, is this true? Is it the NDP’s position that 
whatever has happened with Mr. Bowden, the investigation is 
solely because he came forward in the legislature? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this is pathetic what the Premier 
is doing right now. We have seen, Mr. Speaker, the same 
information that the Premier breached and sent around to the 
media. It’s clear that is the case, Mr. Speaker. I said this 
yesterday publicly, for crying out loud, and now, Mr. Speaker, 
for them to pretend that this is breaking news . . . Give me a 
break. My question to the Premier: who did the Premier consult 
with before he decided to release this information? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what is pathetic, what is 
pathetic in this legislature is a line of questioning from the 
Leader of the Opposition about the confidentiality of 
information when . . . And apparently now he said he said it 
yesterday, and they’re tweeting it out that they have the file, 
that they’ve seen the file. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I again ask the member to put . . . I asked the 
Leader of the Opposition to state for the record if he has seen 
the entire file because I haven’t. I had a general briefing about 
it, but I have not. If he has seen the entire file, will he, again, 
stand in this legislature today and say that he believes that the 
only thing Mr. Bowden did to receive this discipline was come 
to the legislature and present his concerns about seniors? Is that 
his view? He’s seen the whole file. Does he believe it’s all 
about him coming forward and has nothing else to do with other 
workplace incidents? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, what I have seen is the email that 
was sent to Peter with the concerns that have been raised. I have 
not seen Peter’s file, Mr. Speaker. My question to the Premier: 
did the Premier consult with the Ministry of Justice before he 
decided to release the information? 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Thank you. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in the course of question 
period, his story’s changed fairly substantively and on a 
material, on a pretty material issue to this particular case. 
Because in the last question, he got up and said, well of course I 
said we had the file. I said we had the file in the scrum 
yesterday. That’s why we tweeted it out. Just now he stood up 
and said, well actually, I don’t have the file. I’m just going off 
of what was sent out to the media. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this goes to the credibility of this Leader of the 
Opposition, which I think has been eroding daily, each time he 
gets up in the Legislative Assembly with a question like this. 
What is it? Has he the file or does he not have the file? And if 
he has seen the file, as he said he did and as he’s just had his 
people tweet out, if he’s seen the file, is he of the view that the 

only reason Mr. Bowden is facing some disciplinary action is 
because he presented himself at the legislature, yes or no? Is 
that what he believes? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it is clear in the email that was 
sent to Peter Bowden that the consequences that he has faced is 
a result of him coming out and speaking at the legislature. Mr. 
Speaker, It is clear in that list. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: did the Premier 
consult with either the Ministry of Justice or the Ministry of 
Health before he decided to breach the privacy of this private 
citizen? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m always seeking the very 
good counsel of the Attorney General and other members of the 
Executive Council and MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, we’re familiar with 
legislation with respect to privacy issues. Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
think members opposite are familiar with the legislation 
because if they were familiar with it, they would know about 
section 29, where there’s a clear provision for allowing for the 
release of information if this is deemed to be in the public 
interest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Once again though, we have the Leader of the Opposition on 
this particular issue stating several different positions. I want to 
be very clear. He has not seen the file. And if he has seen the 
file, why did he say that he saw it yesterday, and why are his 
party officials back in his caucus office tweeting out that 
they’ve seen the file and they’re satisfied that Mr. Bowden’s 
side of the story is the accurate side of the story? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, did the Premier consult with the 
Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Health, or a privacy lawyer 
before he released the information? 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday, the day before, I 
consulted with ministers and members of Executive Council 
about a number of things. Whether there was specific 
conversations about this or not, Mr. Speaker, I can share with 
members, we’re familiar with the privacy legislation. And he 
might want to read it because if he were to read it, he’d find out 
the clear provision in section 29 that allows for the release of 
information if it’s in the public interest. 
 
Does the Leader of the Opposition agree that it’s in the public 
interest that health care workers should be able to come forward 
without any fear of retribution? I think they should. Does the 
Leader of the Opposition agree that it’s in the public interest to 
ensure that our workplaces are free, are free of anything that 



April 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6999 

would take away from the well-being and welfare of workers in 
the system? Mr. Speaker, I hope that he would. 
 
These are the motivations for my actions and for the actions of 
the government. Mr. Speaker, we stand by those motivations on 
this side of the House to protect that public interest, to use 
section 29 as it was used, and we’re going to continue to 
conduct ourselves in this manner. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — No answer, Mr. Speaker, about whether or not 
they consulted with ministries or with a privacy lawyer. 
 
I have another question, Mr. Speaker. Did the Premier have the 
written consent of the Saskatoon Health Region to release this 
information? And also did he consult with his deputy minister, 
or did he simply consult with his political staff when he made 
the call to leak this information? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there he goes again. There 
was no leak. The information was provided on background to 
the media . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well there’s not. 
We’re going to send over copies of the Act, so members 
opposite maybe want to look at it before they raise questions in 
the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the last couple of weeks, over the last couple 
of weeks we’ve seen this member stand up, over the last couple 
of weeks we’ve seen this Leader of the Opposition stand up and 
be proven to be factually incorrect time after time after time. 
We saw when his Deputy Leader got up and had a drive-by 
smear campaign all the way down to Mexico, and he had to 
stand up and apologize, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, occasion 
after occasion, members opposite are not, are not frankly 
dealing . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would be kind of grumpy 
over there too if I’d had the last couple of weeks that they’ve 
had. And here’s more bad news for the NDP but more good 
news for the province. In part because of the conduct of 
members opposite, even after now almost two full terms in 
government, Mr. Speaker, the voting intentions of the people of 
the province have not changed. 
 
Insightrix, the polling firm, has released a poll today, Mr. 
Speaker, and the facts are this: people are weighing in on the 
performance of that Leader of the Opposition. His party is 
actually at a level lower than it was under Dwain Lingenfelter, 
Mr. Speaker, lower than Dwain Lingenfelter, and a 27-point 
lead for the governing party. Why, Mr. Speaker? Why? Well 
hopefully it’s because of good government. We can always do 
better, but certainly it’s in part because of the terrible 
performance of the NDP opposite. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 612 — The Respect for Diversity — Student 
Bill of Rights Act 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 612, The 
Respect for Diversity — Student Bill of Rights Act be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved first reading of Bill 
No. 612, The Respect for Diversity — Student Bill of Rights Act. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. When shall this bill be read a second 
time? 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to question 929. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to question 929. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Canadian Wheat Board 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
proud to rise today to present this motion. I think it’s one that’s 
very important and one that should be paid attention to across 
the country actually. Sadly, I know that there was an attempt to 
have a debate on this in House of Commons earlier this week. 
 
And it’s really difficult for me to be heard over the din coming 
from across the way right now, so I’m not exactly sure whether 
it’s a positive thing to go ahead with comments at this time. 
Perhaps we need to wait until these guys settle down a little bit 
before we can actually get into this particular debate. 
Unfortunately the hubbub continues, Mr. Speaker, but I will 
carry on. 
 
I guess the issue here is it’s a long, long story, in fact it’s a 
70-year-old story, and members here know the history of this 
debate. Certainly there’s a lot of disagreement on both sides of 
the House in terms of the original decision made in 2011 to 
eliminate the single desk, the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
But what we’re talking about today is the sale of the new 
Canadian Wheat Board after the single desk was destroyed in 



7000 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2015 

2011. There’s a number of issues that we want to address today 
about this particular sale, if you can call it that. I mean it really 
wasn’t a sale at all. It was a giveaway to two international 
entities, one being a global American . . . American but global 
agri-food giant, Bunge, and the other one is, curiously enough, 
a state-owned agricultural investment firm. You would think we 
would have a similar firm in Canada that would be able to make 
these kinds of investments in food security, Mr. Speaker. But 
no, in this case the agriculture investment firm that’s owned by 
its own country happens to be Saudi Arabia, and there’s all 
kinds of issues that we could debate for 75 minutes on that 
particular item alone. 
 
But what I want to take a look at today, Mr. Speaker, is just 
some of the details of this particular deal and try and understand 
why this kind of set-up is deemed to be acceptable by the 
Government of Canada. And I see some members are raptly 
listening; I can imagine who’s going to get up next to speak to 
this. And I look forward to the comments that are coming 
forward. 
 
The first thing I think we want to talk about today is the trust 
that’s been established by the Government of Canada to own 49 
per cent of this new global giant, and it’s called G3 [Global 
Grain Group]. It’s a new global company that’s a joint venture 
between Bunge and the Saudi investment fund. We know that 
they didn’t buy the Canadian Wheat Board at all. In fact it was 
given to them for a promise: so if you do this, please promise 
that you will invest $250 million. And what they do is they give 
them 50.1 per cent of the company, and now this farmer trust 
gets 49.9 per cent. 
 
But what, Mr. Speaker, what is this farmer trust, and what does 
it mean for farmers? Now they hold . . . This is a trust. It’s a 
legal trust. It holds 49.9 per cent of the shares, but the farmers 
who deliver to get equity in this trust will never ever hold 
shares in this company. They hold units in the trust. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s not clear how these units are going to be valued, 
and one of the big reasons for that is because since they 
dismantled the Wheat Board in 2011, the government has 
refused to disclose any financial information about the new 
Canadian Wheat Board. So we have no financial information 
whatsoever. There’s no way farmers are going to even know 
what that $5 unit is actually going to be worth. 
 
One of the questions that’s being asked is, how does this meet 
securities regulations? Because we know, Mr. Speaker, that 
securities regulations require, they require a public disclosure of 
financial information. What if a farmer dies? What’s going to 
happen to his estate? How are they going to evaluate these 
shares? These are all kinds of wide-open questions that this 
government simply has not thought through in their rush to get 
rid of the Canadian Wheat Board. It’s not even called the 
Canadian Wheat Board anymore. It’s the G3. 
 
And they’re saying after seven years they will pay fair market 
value for those trust units, but how do you know what the value 
is if you don’t have public disclosure of the funds? We don’t 
even know if there is going to be dividends paid on those trust 
units. That’s entirely up to the G3 controlling partnership, Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
We know for sure that farmers will have absolutely no say in 

how this company is going to be run. There’s no guarantee that 
their $5 per tonne equity will ever be returned to them. 
Furthermore, we know that just the reduction in prices at the 
country elevators since the single desk was dismantled far 
exceeds that $5 per tonne. So I mean it just goes on and on. But 
these are just some of the simple questions that we have about 
this trust that the government thought they would establish to 
throw a bone to farmers when they decided to dismantle this 
once-proud company. 
 
I mean, and this is something else, Mr. Speaker — what we 
hear over and over from Minister Ritz on this is complete 
misinformation. It’s twisting the truth so it’s unrecognizable. 
And what we see here, the saddest part of this issue is that the 
Harper and Ritz twisting the facts and propaganda has now 
become a prevailing public narrative. And a good example of 
that was in the clip that CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation] used recently when Stewart Wells was 
interviewed by Evan Solomon. And what they did is they 
showed a clip belittling an individual named Dean Harder who 
was involved in a plebiscite back in 2011. And what he said is 
that Dean Harder made up the number that 62 per cent of 
farmers supported the CWB [Canadian Wheat Board] in the 
2011 plebiscite. 
 
Now we know that in this plebiscite in 2011, the results were 
released by the Canadian Wheat Board, and it showed that 62 
per cent of wheat producers who completed the mail-in ballot 
favoured retaining the single desk. That is a fact, Mr. Speaker. 
And yet CBC shows a story of Mr. Ritz saying that that was an 
outright lie. That is an unfortunate situation, and it’s unfortunate 
that these lies are being perpetuated by the media. 
 
There’s a number of other examples of lies which I can bring up 
in a few minutes. But I just want to talk a little bit about this 
deal. One of the things the minister argued is that the Canadian 
Wheat Board assets were not worth anything at the end of the 
transition from its role as a single-desk marketing agency. The 
federal government has given $300 million of taxpayers’ dollars 
to transition what was a marketing agency to now a grain 
marketing company. And that’s a completely difference entity, 
Mr. Speaker, than what the Canadian Wheat Board by law was 
able to do before 2011. 
 
So what we’ve seen is a massive injection of taxpayer dollars. 
Three hundred million taxpayer dollars have been injected into 
this company to make it ready to give away to global and 
state-owned, Saudi state-owned investors, Mr. Speaker. It 
doesn’t make any sense at all, and this is a desperate attempt on 
the part of this government to just make things go away. 
 
In fact one of the articles that was put out by the Free Press in 
Winnipeg, here’s what they had to say. This is a quote from the 
article: 
 

One experienced financial services executive who spoke 
on condition his name not be used, said regardless of how 
the arrangement is rationalized, the assets of the former 
wheat board were worth something. 

 
[He said] “I don’t know how much (they were worth), but 
they certainly had some equity value,” he said. “They are 
giving away the assets for nothing. It does not make any 



April 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7001 

sense to me.” 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, we are hearing that over and over 
again from different experts in the wheat transportation and 
wheat marketing world. 
 
Another quote that I think Mr. Ritz has said blatantly, and is 
clearly not the truth, he says, “This is a win for Canadian 
farmers.” “Nothing’s been given away.” Mr. Speaker, nothing 
could be further from the truth. Clearly the minister is trying to 
hide what’s happened and he’s just in a rush to get it over with. 
 
We know that the original deal was to give until 2017 for the 
Canadian Wheat Board to transition from the single-desk 
agency to this new competitor, they’re calling it now, in the 
global wheat marketing world. Well that’s, Mr. Speaker, 
something that the transition has been rushed. It’s been done in 
secrecy. And we know that $300 million of Canadian 
taxpayers’ money has been injected to create this entity that can 
now be given away. 
 
I think this is something that Canadian taxpayers should be 
outraged about. I’m very disappointed that the Speaker of the 
House of Commons ruled out an emergency motion brought 
forward to discuss this issue. We know the sale isn’t complete 
until July of 2015, so there’s still some time, Mr. Speaker, for 
the federal government to come clean, come clean and 
straighten it out. 
 
And of course this is an issue for Saskatchewan producers. The 
sad part is that we see nothing from this government defending 
this outright giveaway of farmer’s assets, and largely 
Saskatchewan producer’s assets, to an international grain 
company. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the facts are this: that since 2011 the price 
of wheat and the price of canola, because of the mess in the 
grain transportation and the grain marketing world, has actually 
dropped. In 2011 this government predicted that by 2014 wheat 
would be worth $277.00 a tonne and canola would be worth 
$488.00 a tonne. Now they had to revise that. In 2012 they 
dropped it. Well actually wheat went up a little bit, and canola, 
in 2012 because of the bumper year. But the actual results were 
a huge, basically a decline, even in 2012 when we had the best 
crop this country’s ever seen. 2013 actuals, another decline 
down to $257 a tonne, and they had to revise their 2014 
assumptions to $235 a tonne. But you know what, Mr. Speaker, 
even that was optimistic. In 2014 the actual price for wheat per 
tonne in Saskatchewan, or in the markets, was $200 per tonne. 
That’s a drop of $70 a tonne since the Wheat Board, the single 
marketing agency was dismantled. 
 
[11:00] 
 
And yet we still have Mr. Ritz saying how this is great for 
farmers and how it’s putting money in farmers’ pockets. There 
is no link between Mr. Ritz’s rhetoric and what’s actually 
happening to farmers on the ground. We know through best 
estimates from experts that Canadian farmers have lost $3 
billion in the second-last crop year and that $2 billion are now 
being lost in the last year for farmers. It’s out of their pockets. 
It’s in somebody’s pockets. It’s not in the farmers’ pockets. 
 

And I think the irony here is that what Mr. Ritz is calling 
somebody new, there’s going to be this new competitor. The 
competitor was already there. He created this Canadian Wheat 
Board competitor in 2011. So when folks welcome the fact that 
this is enhancing competition, it’s not enhancing competition at 
all because there’s no increase in competition. 
 
I think the most telling article that’s been released since the 
announcement last week was one that came out of the 
Leader-Post last week. And the questions there are questions I 
think that deserve answering, Mr. Speaker. The first question is 
asked: does selling the Canadian Wheat Board — albeit 
stripped of its single-desk marketing power and most of its staff 
to Bunge and the Saudi Arabia state-owned company — does 
that increase competition in the grain sector? And the answer 
given in this article says: 
 

Since the number of competitors in the grain trade remains 
the same, there’s no increase in competition. Moreover, 
the new Canadian Wheat Board will have far less market 
clout than the old Canadian Wheat Board. 

 
It’s just another competitor now, Mr. Speaker. The article goes 
on to describe what Ritz has injected in taxpayers dollars into 
this new entity: 
 

. . . 177 million from the federal government in 2011-12, 
part of the . . . [total $350] million in federal money 
earmarked for ‘restructuring costs’ . . . 

 
Restructuring costs — they had to create something out of 
nothing, Mr. Speaker, because they completely dismantled the 
original purpose of the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
But we know that since 2011 no annual report has been issued 
by the Canadian Wheat Board, leaving taxpayers to guess what 
they have at stake. What’s going to become of that $350 million 
from taxpayers? This is what we do know, and this is a quote: 
 

Many of the promised benefits of marketing freedom have 
failed to materialize. The bonanza of higher grain prices, 
the value-added investments, and the more responsive 
grain handling system promised by the proponents of 
marketing freedom have come a cropper. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we know farmers have lost more than $5 billion in 
the grain backlog caused in large measure . . . And any expert 
will agree, and I’m sure the Minister of Agriculture would agree 
that that $5 billion was caused in part by lack of logistics 
coordination, and yet there’s been nothing done on the part of 
this government to even try to improve those logistics. And 
there’s things this government can do. We know that, for 
example, they could require the corporations to publish monthly 
average tonnage and selling price. 
 
Let’s have some disclosure here, Mr. Speaker. Let’s have some 
open, transparent disclosure here so that farmers are not at a 
loss when it comes to making important marketing decisions. 
 
Other quotes that we’re looking at, this is from Friends of the 
Canadian Wheat Board Chair Stewart Wells. He says: 
 

It’s really an Alice-in-Wonderland scenario where assets 



7002 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2015 

that have been paid for by hard-working farmers have now 
been stolen or seized by the government and then turned 
over to a multi-billion dollar international company. 

 
There’s other quotes, Mr. Speaker, and unfortunately I’m 
running out of time. I did want to point out just something that 
is sort of back to the future. And this is a quote from the 
committee, the federal committee on November 2nd, 2011 and 
here’s what . . . described what was going to happen: 
 

The board has been an important and critical component of 
the grain handling and transportation system. And 
ultimately there will be significant fallout as a result of the 
removal of the board from the piece. Perhaps the most 
politically charged fallout will be the commercial pressure 
on producer cars. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s on November 2nd, 2011, page 3. I don’t 
have time to finish that quote, but I recommend all members 
read it. And so I’d like to move the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly express significant concern about the 
sale of the former Canadian Wheat Board to a Saudi 
state-owned agricultural investment firm and American 
agri-food giant. 

 
And I just have to find the motion, Mr. Speaker. Yes, I found it 
and I need to sign it. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That this Assembly condemn the Saskatchewan Party 
government for failing to stand up for Saskatchewan’s 
agricultural producers and for failing to protect Canadian 
interests by supporting the federal government’s giveaway 
of the former Canadian Wheat Board to a Saudi 
state-owned agricultural investment firm and American 
agri-food giant. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Arm River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to join 
in this debate. It’s interesting. The last two debates I’ve been at 
has been mostly federally driven from the federal NDPs. You 
know, obviously there’s not many issues in Saskatchewan 
which . . . We all know Saskatchewan is rolling good. The 
farming industry is rolling good. We’re talking about this 
particular motion. 
 
You know, they talk about, I can remember about the Wheat 
Board. I can remember I was at an auction sale when they 
announced the initial price. It was I think the early ’90s, $1.87 
was the initial price they were offering. And I remember how 
people were just, the farmers were shaking their heads at that. A 
lot of years, barely two oh five, two oh ten . Why do you think 
the farmers switched to lentils, peas, mustard? And they did that 
with the private industry. The farmers have now, are producing 
65 per cent of the world peas, I think, 60 per cent of the world 
lentils; they are 27 per cent of the yellow mustard — markets 
the farmers developed because they couldn’t make a living 
under the Wheat Board. 

You know, the only help that the Wheat Board offered at the 
end, after the farmers made them sales work in private industry 
was, oh we’ll help you sell it now. You know, we’ll help you 
sell it like we did the wheat all through the ’70s, ’80s, ’90s 
when the prices were almost at nothing. Instead of passing 
money on, they were building a palace in Winnipeg with our 
money. What else did they do with our money? I don’t 
remember being consulted when they bought ships. I don’t 
remember that. Spending the farmers’ money buying anything 
they wanted. I can remember questions being raised, why they 
don’t ship more grain through the United States, through ports 
there instead of going to Vancouver when there were strikes. 
Because some of them ports weren’t unionized, they wouldn’t 
go down the Mississippi. They wanted to go through unionized 
ports. 
 
You know, this motion speaks back to the NDP of the ’70s 
when Blakeney used to thump around and about nationalization, 
about the Wheat Board, and socialism. I remember the 
candidate, Faris, in ’74 coming to Bladworth and just extolling 
the futures of socialism, nationalism, about co-ops and the 
Wheat Board and then going, someday you’ll see the light. I 
remember my dad looking at him and says, if that’s your idea of 
light, I’ll keep stumbling along in the darkness. 
 
You know, they talk about standing up for farmers. Well we’ll 
just talk about, we’ll talk about that for a little bit. Last election, 
if you want to stand up for farmers, you couldn’t even find a 
farmer in Arm River-Watrous to run against me. If the Wheat 
Board was such a huge issue that all the farmers were all going 
to vote for that, you couldn’t find one farmer to run. In fact you 
couldn’t find anybody from Saskatchewan to run — the 
candidate was from Edmonton. He was working at the Regina 
Co-op Refinery temporarily. Last I checked he was still in 
Edmonton. Technically you don’t have a seat. You have the 
eastern politicians telling us they’re going to save the western 
grain farmers. 
 
You know, that reminds me of an old proverb I heard when I 
was a kid. You know, 10,000, 5,000 years ago Moses said, I’m 
going to lead my people to the Promised Land. He said, grab 
your shovels, put them on your asses — sorry, donkeys — grab 
. . . get on your camels. I will lead you to the Promised Land. 
What’s Justin Trudeau saying now? I’ll bring back the Wheat 
Board? Farmers, you can lay down your shovels, sit on your 
rear end, light up a Camel. You’re in the promised land. If the 
NDP were ever elected, each and every farmer and rancher 
would know what would happen. The NDP would take your 
Camel, tax your shovel, kick you in the rear end, and tell you 
there is no promised land. 
 
I’m tired of eastern politicians telling us how to sell our grain, 
when in Eastern Canada . . . Eastern Canada never had a wheat 
board. You tell Mulcair, go save Quebec. Go save Ontario 
farmers first. Put a wheat board there, then come and tell us 
how to sell our grain. You know . . . 
 
You know, that’s the premise of this motion. There’s a lot of 
issues out there in rural Saskatchewan. This isn’t one of them. 
You know, this isn’t one of them with farmers. This is 
something from the ’70s where the NDP don’t even want to 
push, push to help farmers. This is about pushing their agenda 
of socialism, nationalization, and about the land banks 



April 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7003 

back then. 
 
I can remember speaking about that, of them speaking about 
that, pushing that issue. We talk about the Wheat Board. 
Farmers have moved on. We can market our own grain. We do 
it with peas. We do it with lentils. We do it with mustard. We 
do it with every commodity that’s out there. We can work with 
the private industry. We don’t need big brother telling us how 
to sell grain. 
 
I can remember having no quotas. I can remember on the Wheat 
Board system, no quotas. You couldn’t move grain. Sitting on 
it, expecting us to store it. And when they did call a quota, it 
was maybe 3 bushels an acre. Now through the ’90s it went to a 
contract system, but still they would call 25 per cent. That’s all 
you knew, the most you were going to be able to sell. And then 
maybe in February they’d call another 25 per cent. Maybe June 
they’d finally call the last 50 per cent. The rest of the time we 
had to store it, on our dollar. 
 
You know, farmers want the option, which we’ve used. And she 
talked about a big crop year, which it was two years ago. 
Myself, a lot of my neighbours had wheat on the ground. I had 
to pile 10,000 bushels on the ground. There was grain bags. I 
moved that before the snow got to it because I could contract it 
all with a buyer and it was gone. Under the Wheat Board 
system, that pile would have stayed there and rotted through the 
winter under the Wheat Board. 
 
Now when they talk about coming out here, and from the 
federal NDP giving advice to the provincial NDP on how to run 
our farms, well like the member had mentioned, well thank you 
for being concerned, but maybe be a little more concerned 
maybe with the Quebec and Ontario and eastern farmers. Try 
pushing it there. You have to ask your question to your federal 
Mulcair. They don’t even have an MP [Member of Parliament] 
in this province and yet . . . and same as the rural, and the NDP 
opposite don’t have a rural member. 
 
We ran on ’99, on choice, on free marketing. You’d think if the 
farmers were behind you, you’d think you’d have had farmers 
running for you. You’d think you’d have run some seats. You 
may want to look at that and maybe think, maybe once you’re 
wrong on something. Maybe it’s time to move on and help 
farmers work to market in the system we’re in, in the world 
economy that we’re dealing in right now. 
 
You know we talk about, you know, market choice. And when I 
was door knocking — that’s big with a lot of farmers — they 
were tired for years and years of being threatened with jail. I 
had a neighbour that actually had his truck impounded at the 
border. Tried taking one load of grain across because he needed 
some money, and was put in jail. 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to remind the member to address his 
remarks through the Chair. I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — But you know, farmers were desperate in them 
times. You know, they were getting 4 to 5 to $6 across the 
border for durum, for wheat. Initial price, $1.97, $1.98, Mr. 
Speaker, and not being able to sell it because the Wheat Board 
hadn’t contracted, hadn’t called the quota. You know you can 

see that, you can see that money across the border and you’re 
not allowed to go to it, because in the Wheat Board’s mind they 
owned the wheat. As soon as you combined it, they owned it. It 
wasn’t yours to market. It wasn’t yours to sell. It wasn’t yours 
to do anything except store it till when they decided to call it. 
 
Now and they wondered why farmers asked for change in the 
marketing system and freedom. And you know, that’s what we 
got. When we door knocked, that’s what the majority of farmers 
wanted. And if the NDP want to live in the past, that’s up to 
them. But it shows in the polling. I just heard today, the 
polling’s down. The polling is down again, Mr. Speaker. Why? 
I hear that Mr. Lingenfelter is actually higher than the current 
leader right now. 
 
[11:15] 
 
You know, maybe they ought to sit around and ask themselves 
some of them questions of why is that, when you start pushing 
the old ideas from the ’70s and the ’60s and the ’50s, the way 
things were. Well things have moved on. We’re working in a 
world economy now, working with huge agribusinesses. 
Farmers are willing to do that. They know how to market their 
own grain. They all own computers. They know the prices. 
They know the market. 
 
You know, if you’re on an iPhone, a farmer’s constantly getting 
updates of prices, of contracts availability, knowing when to 
move his grain. Now that’s what the farming business is 
nowadays, not sitting back and having some organization take a 
lot of the money and saying, we’ll sell it, and not do that great 
of a job at it to begin with. The farmers right now want the 
freedom. They have the technology. They have the experience 
to do that job, and they’re willing to do it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So you know, I still can’t believe that they would actually bring 
something that far from the past instead of just saying, you 
know, how can we help the farming industry? What do we need 
in the future to move on? You think of all the motions they 
could bring forward that’s happening out in rural Saskatchewan, 
you know, you’d think they’d want to talk about that except 
some old idea that they just can’t let go. It’s something like the 
Regina Manifesto. If they had their way, I think they’d actually 
bring that back again. 
 
You know, they have to . . . I don’t know if . . . I don’t know 
why they won’t look even in the present. Always going to the 
back. So that’s why, Mr. Speaker, myself and the farmers and 
ranchers of Arm River constituency will not be supporting . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I wanted to get into this debate to 
talk about the future. I want to talk about the future because we 
all, some of us know that the most efficient way to move water 
around the world, fresh water around the world, is a grain of 
wheat. 
 
And why is the Saudi Arabian government buying into 
Canadian grain farmers? Well this is part of an overall strategy 
that they have developed when they were unable to create farms 
in the desert using water. And, Mr. Speaker, what we know is 
that the Saudi Arabian government and other Middle Eastern 



7004 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2015 

governments have been buying up land, if they can get it. 
They’ve been buying up transportation systems. They’ve been 
buying up grain companies. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, what we have here in this situation is our 
Canadian government not recognizing the value that we have in 
production of wheat in the world market, and they’re giving 
away some of our Canadian control of how this product is 
marketed around the world. 
 
The Wheat Board, no matter what form it’s been in over the 
years, has always been about farmers having some say in what 
happens to their product. And what we know is that this activity 
that’s happened now has happened probably about every 20 to 
30 years for almost 100 years because we know that the Wheat 
Board started during the First World War, between 1917 and 
1920, to basically make sure that there was food for Canadians 
and their allies. 1920, they got rid of it. 
 
Then after that, the farmers here in Saskatchewan and Alberta 
and Manitoba — primarily Saskatchewan; we were the 
third-largest province then — said, hey this isn’t working. Let’s 
go back to that other system. And there was a fair amount of 
political agitation till finally we had a Conservative Prime 
Minister of Canada create the Wheat Board in 1935. But it was 
building on a history of marketing, it was building on the fact 
that the wheat pools didn’t do the full job because they didn’t 
have the full opportunity. 
 
Now what we know is that we have a present government who 
is going back to the 1920 kind of perspective of let’s, let’s get 
this operation out of here. But it took 15 years after that 
decision before the farmers in the prairies changed the tune. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when we look at why is Saudi Arabia so 
interested in Saskatchewan wheat, well the answer is that we 
grow our wheat with green water. We grow it with rain. They, if 
they want to grow wheat, they have to use irrigation water, well 
water. They have to use up lakes. They have to use up their big 
underground reservoirs, and that’s called blue water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the world, all of the agriculture for things like 
grain, peas, lentils, those kinds of things are moving to where 
there’s green water. We live in one of the richest places on the 
earth where we can get our grain produced that way, so it’s no 
surprise that the Saudi Arabians are here. But they’ve already 
been into various parts of Africa. They’ve also bought up large 
parts of the Ukraine. They’re very interested in the large 
corporate farms in Kazakhstan. But here, if you look at some of 
the publicity material from this G3 group, it’s about the stability 
of our political system and our legal system, and so they want to 
put money here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now one year ago this week we had Australian members of 
parliament here from Western Australia, and they . . . Some of 
us had been over there the previous year in Western Australia, 
and one of the messages that we got from the farmers of that 
part of the world, which are very similar to our Saskatchewan 
farmers, related to what happened with their single-desk market 
in Australia. And some of the things that they said to us when 
we were there plus things that they have written emphasize 
what I think’s going to happen here on the prairies. Basically 
they have now marketing freedom there, if we can put it that 

way. And this is a quote: 
 

More middlemen to screw the prices down. Traders are 
not interested in farmers getting high prices. As long as 
they make a margin, it doesn’t matter to them if prices are 
high or low. Farmers are out of luck. 

 
Another quote: 
 

There’s terrible logistics in organizing export cargoes, 
with multiple exporters all wanting to load ships at the 
same time leading to shipping bottlenecks. Someone has to 
wear the cost of idle ships waiting too long. Guess who 
eventually wears that cost? Deregulation hasn’t benefited 
the average Australian farmer at all. 

 
Mr. Speaker, any of you been to Vancouver in the last two 
months and you’ve seen all those ships that the farmers of 
Saskatchewan are paying for? The oil spill that wiped out 
English Bay this last, you know, a few weeks ago was one of 
these grain ships waiting to get loaded with grain. All of that 
demurrage cost, all of those costs are paid for by the farmers, 
and this is part of this marketing freedom. One of the 
advantages that we had had in Canada for many years was the 
ability to market through a single desk, and that was important. 
 
Now another aspect that the Australians identify is this: 
 

I think our qualities to the export market has to suffer. 
How many two-bit outfits are now jamming grain in sea 
containers that don’t know anything about grain? 

 
Mr. Speaker, what happens is that the standards are monitored 
in a very different way. The member that spoke just before me 
talked about going and shipping grain through Portland or 
Seattle or other American ports. Well one of the things that we 
know is that a lot of our good-quality grain ends up going down 
there and is mixed with lesser quality, so at the other end they 
don’t know whether it’s Canadian or American wheat. We’re in 
a situation now where we’re losing, and I think we’ll lose total 
control on how this grain is marketed. 
 
Now the other point from the Australians is this, is a quote: 
 

Deregulation has allowed for more buyers, which has an 
advantage, until one does not pay. The Australian Wheat 
Board had the advantage of promoting Australian grain as 
a premium product. This is slowly being eroded, I think. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s another factor that we’ve already been 
hearing about, is that our end-user buyers around the world, 
where the Wheat Board has developed market for the 
top-quality bread grain or the top-quality baking grain, they 
don’t know when they get a load from Canada anymore 
whether it meets that kind of a standard. And that’s really sad 
for all of us, but it’s really difficult for farmers in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we’re in a situation where decisions are 
made without full discussion and without full openness on 
what’s happening, it’s bad for all of us. And the secrecy around 
the federal Agriculture minister’s announcements related to 3G 
grain is not in the best interests of Canadians. It’s not in the best 



April 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7005 

interests of farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I’ve looked through the material, it strikes 
me as this deal goes forward that they may have some major 
difficulties with our securities regulators in Winnipeg, 
obviously in Saskatchewan, and right across the country 
because they are not telling these farmers what they’re getting 
in this farmers’ trust. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s a great difficult 
situation as well. It looks to me like they’ve cooked up some 
kind of air miles system for farmers so that they’ll give credit 
until they’ve run out of the credits and then the whole system 
just ends. At that point, they’ll pay out those air miles credits 
for delivering grain with something. We’re not sure. Maybe 
they’ll get trips somewhere or maybe they’ll get blenders or 
other things, but it’s not a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. Next speaker. I recognize 
the member for Carrot River Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it’s great 
to speak on this motion put forward by the agriculture gurus on 
that side of the House. You know it’s kind of hard to sit there 
and read a motion like this when I can still remember that the 
member putting this forward actually said in her maiden speech, 
she talked about the evils of capitalism. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, farmers, farmers happen to like to have 
marketing choices, and unfortunately that didn’t happen with 
the Canadian Wheat Board. And if you noticed on this side of 
the House, we have people from agriculture areas, which is a lot 
different than from that side of the House which they have 
none, none whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, up in my area in northeastern Saskatchewan, we 
have some of the most progressive farmers, the best farmers in 
all of Canada. And I can, and I can guarantee you, Mr. Speaker, 
when this whole debate was going on about the Wheat Board, 
they can sit there and do their numbers however they want, 90 
per cent of the farmers in our area, the actual farmers — I’m not 
talking hobby farmers; I’m talking the actual farmers, the actual 
producers — 90 per cent of them wanted the Wheat Board 
gone. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, not only that, on our own farm I didn’t grow 
wheat for 10 years because of the Canadian Wheat Board 
because I couldn’t make any money growing wheat on our 
farm, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, when you start looking at 
this, and I can go back — I’m old enough unfortunately, well 
maybe not unfortunately— but anyway I’m old enough to 
remember when canola was under the Canadian Wheat Board. 
Years ago canola was under the Canadian Wheat Board. We 
could not sell, we could not sell our canola unless it went 
through there. And they took, and I can’t remember the name of 
the company now, but they took one company to court in 
Saskatoon that was trying to get canola to put through that 
wasn’t running through the Wheat Board. Wheat Board finally 
gave up and let us grow canola, and it’s been a godsend for 
people up in our country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can also remember when oats used to be under 
the Canadian Wheat Board. And I can remember the piles of 
oats that we used to have and we could not get rid of it. I can 
remember selling oats at 35 cents a bushel to our farmer friends 

there that had cattle. Now, Mr. Speaker, oats is a big issue for 
our area and we are growing lots of them. And I’ll tell you what 
— our farmers are making money on that. 
 
[11:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, do you want to talk about what the NDP did for 
the farmers? What did they do for the farmers over there? Like I 
mean they even had crop insurance in Winnipeg until our first 
Ag minister from Saltcoats brought crop insurance back to 
Saskatchewan where it should be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was brought up by my compatriot over there 
about people being thrown in jail just because they wanted to 
market product that they grew, that they actually grew, they 
owned on their farm and they could not sell. If they were sold, 
they were going to get thrown in jail, strictly due to the 
Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve just been informed by some of my colleagues 
that there’s no tweets coming on this debate. I wonder if maybe 
somebody shut down their tweeting section over in the NDP 
caucus. It generally doesn’t work out that well for them 
apparently. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about barley. Now remember here just a 
few years ago when the barley was going to go out and it wasn’t 
going to be . . . you were going to have freedom to market our 
barley, and then it got turned around because of the court 
system and everything else. The fellow that is renting my land 
on the Carrot River side of the river now, he had 120,000 
bushels of barley sitting there which he could have sold. Ended 
up having to put it through the Canadian Wheat Board, and he 
lost a dollar a bushel. Now that’s $120,000 out of his pocket — 
$120,000. Maybe it doesn’t mean much to the NDP because 
you know they spent $123,000 of taxpayers’ money by 
donating it to the friends of the Canadian Wheat Board — 
$123,000. But my friend lost $120,000 over that. 
 
The only thing the NDP was really good at in agriculture was 
potatoes. Oh just a minute. Maybe they weren’t that good. No, I 
think that potato idea kind of went downhill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s another thing that kind of fits into this, Mr. Speaker, 
and that’s the organic growers. Now my cousin happens to be 
an organic grower, and I know that’s hard to believe with me 
being ex-ag pilot, but one of those things, you know. It’s a 
family thing. Now since the Wheat Board didn’t handle organic 
grain, they had to sell it through another way. But what did they 
have to do? They had to go through all of the paperwork 
through the Canadian Wheat Board in order to be able to sell 
their own product. Now how great is that, Mr. Speaker? No, 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell you right now, the farmers in our area, 
they want marketing choice, and now they are getting it. And as 
my compatriot says, we’re getting better prices because of it, 
and we can move the grain. 
 
As was mentioned by my colleague, he was sitting with piles of 
grain under the Canadian Wheat Board and could not move it. 
This is a great move for our province. This is a great move for 
Canada and what it’s doing is, it’s moving things forward. 
 
You see, under the socialist system, they wanted all that stuff to 



7006 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2015 

belong to them, to kind of belong to the state in a sense, rather 
than having it belong to individual, rather than having it belong 
to individual farmers. Then of course, you know, that’s a 
socialist mentality that exists out there in a few places but, boy, 
it’s is getting to be less and less all the time, as we can tell from 
that side of the House. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the one thing you don’t want to do is tell a 
farmer that he can’t sell his or her own product. And you know, 
that’s totally, that’s being unfair. It’s unfair to the producers, the 
great producers that we have here in Saskatchewan which do a 
fantastic job, which is driving our economy. It’s one of the 
kingpins of our economy, Mr. Speaker, and it’s why 
Saskatchewan is outdoing all other provinces in their economic 
growth. Agriculture is a key point on that. And one of the 
reasons it’s a key point is because we don’t have the Canadian 
Wheat Board that we have to sell through anymore. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, and I could go on and on about this, 
but I can just tell you the things that were done so improperly 
like malting barley. Malting barley is another good example. It 
all had to go through the Canadian Wheat Board at one time. 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we could make good money on 
malting barley now. We couldn’t under the Canadian Wheat 
Board because . . . And I can tell you a real quick little story on 
how the Canadian Wheat Board will do things. 
 
I had two carloads of malting barley that were to be shipped 
through Thunder Bay, and it was all checked. It was all 
supposed to be good. Now this was under the great Canadian 
Wheat Board days. It got out to Thunder Bay and lo and behold, 
I was just reading in the paper where the Canadian Wheat 
Board had a big shipment that was going over to Europe, but 
they were talking about being short on good barley because the 
barley wasn’t weighing up. And as we all know, good malting 
barley weighs up very well. You know what happened? All of a 
sudden, I got a note back. They said my barley wasn’t good 
enough for malt even though it had been checked before. It was 
not good enough for malt. They said that the germ was down. I 
used that same barley for seed on my farm the following year. 
The germ was 97 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know what happened? The Canadian Wheat 
Board, in order to boost their weight on their barley, they 
confiscated that barley. It was nothing but an out-and-out 
robbery. I definitely will not be supporting this motion and I 
will . . . Anyway I’m not going to support the motion. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to join in the debate around the motion made by my 
colleague. And one may wonder, what does a Métis MLA from 
northern Saskatchewan have to do with the Canadian Wheat 
Board, and how can he participate in the discussion around the 
importance of this institution, and of course the whole notion of 
building the economy in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? 
 
I do want to say, while we have had limited exposure and 
experience with the agricultural sector, I know one time when 
we were fairly young we served as the mayor of Ile-a-la-Crosse. 
And during that time, Mr. Speaker, the Conservative 

government of the day had three farms operating in the North, 
and these farms were primarily cow-calf operations. Of course 
they grew some hay and feed for the cattle, Mr. Speaker. But 
the three farms that were shut down in the early ’80s, Mr. 
Speaker, include places like Cumberland House and Green 
Lake and of course now we . . . and the community of 
Ile-a-la-Crosse as well. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, a lot of people had some experience and 
exposure to farming. As we all know, in some of these northern 
communities the experiment at the time was to try and create 
some effort in the agricultural sector to create some jobs and 
opportunity for northern Saskatchewan communities. The 
premier of the day at that time decided to look at that option, 
and this is where I think the farms in Cumberland House, the 
farms in Ile-a-la-Crosse, and of course the bigger farm in Green 
Lake was created. And we did have a northern farms effort, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now when the notion came up speaking about the debate, one 
of the things that we talked around in our caucus about was 
trying to learn more and be more participatory in all sectors of 
the province of Saskatchewan. And one of the points that I 
raised at the caucus meeting when we talked about this motion 
is that we’ve got to do more to shed information and to shed 
light on what the agricultural sector is doing for Saskatchewan, 
and that includes all parts of Saskatchewan; that every MLA 
should be well rounded and know what exactly is happening in 
every sector of the province of Saskatchewan. And this is why 
I’m participating in this particular debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now setting aside the dramatics of the member from Arm 
River, Mr. Speaker, this is what I see as a northern MLA that 
has some limited exposure with agriculture, in particular with 
the cow-calf operation that we had in our home community. I 
want to be able to say what I observe, what I observe from a 
northern perspective, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What I see is happening is that first of all we have a grain 
transportation crisis that’s affecting every producer in 
Saskatchewan. Does that affect the economy of Saskatchewan? 
Absolutely it does. Does it have an impact on northern 
Saskatchewan communities? Absolutely it does, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we see the whole notion of farm land sales, the confusion 
by the Sask Party around the farm land sales where they’re 
having foreign governments look at buying up large chunks of 
farm land, Mr. Speaker, where we’re seeing that the pension 
plans now are being examined, whether they should be 
purchasing farm land. We’re seeing more and more corporate 
farms being established. I sit back and I say to myself, why are 
we giving away the most valuable asset in our province, which 
is farm land? Why are we not defending more the farm families 
that have operated these farms for many years? Why are we 
seeing more corporate ownership of our farm land, more 
foreign ownership, Mr. Speaker? It really confuses me from that 
perspective. 
 
And I look at some of the other examples, Mr. Speaker: the 
surface rights debate where people are still determining where 
that particular issue is going towards. 
 
And again from the northern perspective I also look at the most 



April 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7007 

recent example of how sour gas is killing off cattle, Mr. 
Speaker, and is a huge threat I think overall to the safety of 
many producer families and of course the cattle that they have, 
Mr. Speaker. And that was in the news the last couple of days. 
 
And then I look at the whole debate and argument that the 
members across the way, when they talked about being in 
opposition, that they’re going to value add to commodities, Mr. 
Speaker, make greater opportunity for what the farmers grow in 
the province of Saskatchewan. We have seen very, very little 
effort in that from that part and from that particular government, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then I look at the whole notion of the flooding issues, Mr. 
Speaker. We were seeing flooding becoming a major problem 
in all parts of rural Saskatchewan. We are seeing that people out 
there are really struggling to keep their homes above water, Mr. 
Speaker. They are trying their darndest to make sure they can 
do all they can on the land that they have, and they have 
flooding year after year after year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have toured, the member that’s sponsoring the motion 
today, we have toured various parts of rural Saskatchewan to 
see the flooding. And as I mentioned in the Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, when you see a road that’s covered with water and you 
better not make sure that you go off that road because there’s a 
10-foot ditch in which you will, when you go into that ditch of 
course, you seriously have a problem of potentially drowning, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s how bad the water crisis is in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And now we look at the Canadian Wheat Board, a marketing 
firm and a marketing agency that the farmers owned and 
controlled, Mr. Speaker. Now this particular federal 
government wants to sell off . . . No, not sell off. I’ve got to 
make sure I get the right language here, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
going to give it away. They’re going to give it away, Mr. 
Speaker. Imagine the asset base of the Canadian Wheat Board 
and how much value all those assets have, Mr. Speaker. And I 
can tell you about grain cars that they own, a number of 
properties that they own, and this is a very valuable, valuable 
operation and enterprise, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I sit there as an observer to Saskatchewan overall because I 
think it’s important as MLAs that we challenge ourselves to 
learn as much as we can about each other on many 
opportunities and occasions that we can. And this is the reason 
why I’m proud to say to the northern Saskatchewan people that 
we are, and we can understand how agriculture and rural 
Saskatchewan works better, and we become better people for it. 
And that’s one of the reasons why I’m standing in my place 
today. And I actually asked and volunteered to be able to speak 
today to this motion in saying what I observed with my limited 
background in terms of watching operations in some of the 
northern communities when it comes to cow-calf operations, 
what I observed that I think rural Saskatchewan is facing, and 
the challenge that they have. 
 
So despite the dramatics of the member from Arm River, Mr. 
Speaker, this government, their government has done nothing to 
address the flooding issues, Mr. Speaker. They have done 
nothing to address the grain transportation crisis that I observe, 
Mr. Speaker. They’re sitting on their hands. And now they’re 

going to come along and give away the Canadian Wheat Board. 
Nobody on the Saskatchewan Party side is standing up for that. 
Nobody is standing up for the opportunity to give the farmers 
the right choice and vote. The same way they have their choice 
to market their grain, they should have the choice on whether to 
sell this asset off or not. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I sit here and I listen to some of the 
semantics and the theatrics of the members opposite, why don’t 
they give their producers the opportunity to vote on the future 
of the Canadian Wheat Board? They won’t even give them that, 
Mr. Speaker. And they’re standing on their . . . They’re sitting 
on their hands, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And at the very least what I’ll tell the producers that may be 
watching this particular aspect of our debate . . . At the very 
least, at the very least, a northern MLA standing up and telling 
them, the Saskatchewan Party government, give the producers 
the opportunity to vote because the rest of their rural members 
are sitting on their hands, sitting on their seat, and they’re not 
defending the producers as they should, Mr. Speaker, and I say 
shame on them. They should be doing more to defend the right 
of these producers to vote. Give them the opportunity to vote; 
give them that choice. 
 
So again, observing from northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
trying to learn this issue more and more, I see how total 
disregard and total disrespect that the Saskatchewan Party’s 
affording many producers by denying them the opportunity and 
denying them the opportunity to vote on the future of the 
Canadian Wheat Board, Mr. Speaker. If they’re so confident in 
their 90 per cent rating as pointed out by the member from 
Carrot River, then give them the opportunity to vote. Give them 
the opportunity to have the debate. Give them an informed 
debate, Mr. Speaker, and see what the producers have to say. 
It’s really, really important, Mr. Speaker, from my perspective 
again. 
 
[11:45] 
 
You look at some of the issues that I raised earlier. The flooding 
challenges, no action from the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. 
Speaker. On the whole notion of sour gas, Mr. Speaker, another 
threat diminished and dismissed by the Saskatchewan Party 
government, Mr. Speaker. The surface right debates still up in 
the air: no leadership on that particular file, Mr. Speaker. Value 
added to the commodity that they spoke about for years and 
years when they got in government? Nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
When you look at the whole notion of the farm land sales 
overall, we’re talking about foreign governments and of course 
different entities from across the world buying up the valuable 
farm land that we’ve enjoyed in Saskatchewan for years and 
years and years. 
 
And the worst part of this whole mess, Mr. Speaker, that I 
observe from northern Saskatchewan, is they have the greatest 
grain transportation crisis in the history of Saskatchewan. And 
what is the Sask Party doing? They’re sitting on their hands and 
they’re very, very quiet about it, Mr. Speaker. When we have 
farmers that have literally billions of dollars in their bins, stored 
in their bins, Mr. Speaker, stored in their bins, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re not saying a word about it, Mr. Speaker. They’re not 
saying a word about it. And this whole Canadian Wheat Board 



7008 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2015 

sale issue is actually an opportunity for them to divert attention 
from their mismanaged, bungled effort to try and get some of 
our grain to market, to turn around and showing how the 
Canadian Wheat Board is such a bad board and that they don’t 
like it, Mr. Speaker. So my point is, if you want the producers 
to support this notion, give them the chance to vote. That’s what 
I see, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a real pleasure to 
enter into this debate concerning the Canadian Wheat Board. I 
think we need to bring some context and historical context into 
this discussion. 
 
First of all, this is solely a federal issue. This is not a provincial 
issue. The federal governments of the day made decisions and 
the present government has made decisions on the Canadian 
Wheat Board in consultation with the stakeholders, the farmers. 
And this is where we’re at today because of federal government 
decisions which I certainly support, the federal government’s 
decision with their attitude towards the Canadian Wheat Board 
by open up marketing choice, and also this last step in the life 
of the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
But also we need to take a look back at the historical context of 
the Canadian Wheat Board. Back in the 1920s when the wheat 
pools were formed, there was a need for wheat pools to be 
formed because of the conditions of marketing in 1920s. 
Remember this is 1920s. And farmers were growing grain on 
the prairies and had very poor infrastructure and virtually no 
storage space, and so farmers had to sell right off the, well off 
the wagon — they weren’t hauling grain in trucks in those days 
— and they had to take the price that was given to them. 
 
Now I believe this is accurate. In 1935 I think, the federal 
Conservative government of Prime Minister Bennett brought in 
the Canadian Wheat Board — 1935, again some context here — 
in the middle of the Great Depression. Of course 1935, farmers 
were still farming with, they were pulling plows with horses. 
And that’s when the Canadian Wheat Board came in. So of 
course bringing it closer to current times . . . I mean we went 
through the Great Depression and World War II, and then there 
was a lot of technological change across the world, but certainly 
it was in agriculture as well. 
 
And then to bring it into the ’50s and ’60s, talking to my father 
and neighbours about what was happening in the grain industry, 
in agriculture in the ’50s and ’60s, well technological 
improvements happened. Farmers were producing more grain, 
but the Canadian Wheat Board never changed during those 
years, and it is a common theme with the Canadian Wheat 
Board. It was always a decade or two behind change, what we 
needed for the betterment of farmers. Farmers were growing 
wheat in the ’50s and ’60s. That’s when farmers were 
summerfallowing half and half. They were taking land out of 
production. There was a huge environmental problem by 
leaving land fallow, and production of course was low because 
they were only seeding a crop every second year. 
 
And so it got to the point in the 1950s and ’60s where farmers 
were increasing their storage capacity. Their bins were full at all 
times. I can remember my dad and neighbours that had grain in 

bins that were grown four, five, six years previously to that 
time. The Wheat Board would not, could not, for whatever 
reason, sell their grain. And it got so bad that I believe in 1971, 
1970-71, the Trudeau federal Liberal government actually 
brought in a program to stop farmers from growing grain, wheat 
in particular. Farmers could actually not grow grain and get 
paid to do it. Can you imagine, even in the 1970s, of such a 
ridiculous position to be in because of . . . Well there’s people 
around the world that are actually starving to death and here we 
are in the grain belt of Canada and farmers were being paid not 
to grow grain. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s soon, like I said, finally the Wheat Board 
starting selling grain, but again the Wheat Board had rules that 
they could only export. They couldn’t sell domestically and 
they couldn’t sell to the United States. They started moving 
grain finally in the 1970s. But I know in 1976, my father was a 
feedlot operator and he bought feeder cattle for 25 cents a 
pound in 1976 and he was buying wheat for 25 cents a bushel. 
So you can imagine how the grain farmers were feeling about 
those kind of prices. 
 
And through that whole period, it made farmers do things; some 
of it was illegal. There was bootlegging of wheat. There was 
bartering of wheat. And you know, you could buy cattle if you 
traded wheat or grain. You’d buy machinery through the barter 
system. So farmers had to go out and go around the Wheat 
Board in various ways, Mr. Speaker, in order to make a living. 
And I know when I came into the business in the late ’70s 
buying barley, of course people forget that barley was also 
under the Wheat Board and at one time oats was as well. 
 
And under the Mulroney government, they took oats out of the 
Wheat Board but barley remained. And so for a feedlot like 
ours at Biggar, if we wanted to buy barley from the local Pool 
or the Pioneer elevator or the UGG [United Grain Growers 
Ltd.] elevator, they had to have off-board grain to sell to us as a 
feedlot. So if they didn’t have the bushels that they used to trade 
within the system to sell this grain to us . . . And sometimes we 
couldn’t buy barley out of a Pioneer elevator in Biggar because 
of the Wheat Board rules. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, thankfully, thankfully those days have 
changed. So now farmers can sell their wheat. They can sell 
their barley and of course oats for quite some time now, 
anywhere they want. And it’s such an improvement. It’s 
diversified the economy, value-added, I mean it just goes on 
and on about the increase in production in the livestock sector, 
both cattle and the hog sector. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan today in 2014, 
Saskatchewan farmers produced 99 per cent of Canadian 
chickpeas, 95 per cent of Canada’s lentils, 86 per cent of 
Canada’s durum wheat, 83 per cent of Canada’s flaxseed, 70 
per cent of Canada’s mustard, 60 per cent of Canada’s dry peas, 
and 49 per cent of Canada’s canola. 
 
And in 2013 Saskatchewan was responsible for 65 per cent of 
the world’s lentil exports, 54 per cent of the world’s pea 
exports, 34 per cent of the world’s durum exports, 32 per cent 
of the world’s flax seed exports, 16 per cent of the world’s 
canola seed exports, 27 per cent of the world’s mustard seed 
exports, 17 per cent of the world’s canola oil exports. 



April 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7009 

Haven’t we come a long way, Mr. Speaker? And you know, 
you just look at the Canadian Wheat Board and those types of 
policies, and thinking of governments of those days held 
Saskatchewan farmers back and held production back, held 
value-added industries from growing in this province. 
 
Another good example . . . Time is running out, Mr. Speaker, 
but I look forward to any questions. But, Mr. Speaker, I 
certainly do not plan on supporting this motion brought by a 
provincial opposition party about a federal policy and this 
decision, which has been taken a long time ago, and the 
producers of this province support the decision made by the 
federal government. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The time for debate has expired. 
Questions. I recognize the member from Regina Qu’Appelle 
Valley. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
put on the record August 1st, 2012, Art Walde’s farm near 
Kindersley. This was marketing freedom day. This was a day of 
celebration in this province. None of the members opposite 
were there at this day of celebration. Many of us were there. It 
was a good day. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there was so many people that turned 
to us and said, you know what, today I feel good. I feel good 
that I’m no longer thought to be a criminal. I’d like to ask the 
member from Athabasca: how can he sleep at night knowing 
that he supported a regime called the Wheat Board that made 
people feel like criminals, growing their own wheat and 
wanting to market their own wheat? How can that member 
sleep at night? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, it’s surprising that I get the 
question about a regime when we’re selling the Canadian 
Wheat Board to Saudi Arabia, Mr. Speaker. And this is a 
country that has the most horrific and the most terrible human 
rights record. And some of the worst examples of where we’re 
selling our Canadian Wheat Board to . . . And the member 
ought to know that, Mr. Speaker. Some of the examples of 
Saudi Arabia in terms of human rights, Mr. Speaker, who we’re 
selling the Canadian Wheat Board to . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . The member asked a question. I’ll give her an answer. Who 
we’re selling the Canadian Wheat Board to is to Saudi Arabia. 
 
And Mr. Speaker, some of the examples are torturing prisoners 
who speak out against the regime. The World Organisation 
Against Torture says that, and I quote, “The problem in Saudi 
Arabia is that the judicial system is used as a tool against those 
who want more freedom.” So don’t talk to us about a regime, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
In Saudi Arabia, the . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the 
member from Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, as owners and builders of 
the Wheat Board, producers should have had a vote on the 

potential elimination, Mr. Speaker. That was something that 
was denied to them by this Premier, by this Prime Minister, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s something that’s wrong. 
 
Now we see the giveaway of this asset with no vote, and we 
don’t see any compensation going back to the owners of the 
Wheat Board, the producers. To the member from Arm River: 
does he think it’s appropriate that there’s no compensation back 
to the owners of the Wheat Board? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 
River. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I’ll tell you what, there’s never any 
compensation. The Wheat Board was selling and buying ships 
and taking money from farmers in Western Canada and 
spending. 
 
As for the vote, that was done at the federal and we ran on that 
ticket. You ran against, you ran against freedom of choice. You 
ran on that, and where did that get you? How many seats did 
that get them? None. That’s where the vote took place, Mr. 
Speaker. They couldn’t even get farmers to run for them in rural 
Saskatchewan on that ticket. So they talk of . . . That’s where 
the vote happened. 
 
You want to go ahead and talk to the farmers out there instead 
of talking about freedom of choice? The Saskatchewan farmers 
voted and they want freedom and they want marketing freedom 
and they want choice. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Former NDP 
leader Dwain Lingenfelter lobbied the MP for Cypress 
Hills-Grasslands, David Anderson, to end the WCB monopoly. 
MP David Anderson says, “When Mr. Lingenfelter was in the 
private sector, he was one of the strongest proponents of free 
choice in the marketing of Western Canadian grain.” The NDP 
voted Lingenfelter to be their leader mere months after he 
declared that the WCB . . . CWB should be dismantled. 
 
To the member from Saskatoon Nutana: we know that your 
party has a pretty bad history of electing leaders, obviously, but 
Lingenfelter did get one thing right by allowing farmers to have 
a vote, a choice. Are you lobbying to take that choice away? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I would remind members to put their 
questions through the Chair. I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Yes, certainly the finger pointing is a little alarming on this side 
of the House, so thank you for that ruling. 
 
The question I think that the member should be asking is, why 
are we supporting a federal government that has continually let 
farmers down? For example, January 16th, 2007, Minister 
Chuck Strahl said this in an Agriculture Canada news release. 
He said: 
 

I am announcing today that Canada’s New Government 



7010 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2015 

will hold a further plebiscite on the marketing of wheat at 
an appropriate time. Western Canadian farmers have the 
Government’s commitment that no changes will be made 
to the Canadian Wheat Board’s role in the marketing of 
wheat until after that vote is held. 
 

The Minister of Agriculture has his head in the sand. He’s 
thinking that because there was a general election, that’s a 
plebiscite. That’s not right. We know that 62 per cent of farmers 
supported the Wheat Board in a plebiscite earlier than that. So 
they have to start supporting farmers instead of letting them 
down. 
 
[12:00] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I listen to the antics or I watch 
the antics of the member from Arm River, and I watched with 
great interest when he was talking about taking away the 
shovel, Mr. Speaker. What happens with the evidence I see — 
again from the vantage point I have from northern 
Saskatchewan — is he gave away the farm again. And the fact 
of the matter is, when it comes to the Canadian Wheat Board, 
why didn’t they open the books on the value of the Canadian 
Wheat Board? And why wasn’t the money from the Canadian 
Wheat Board asset sale — because there was no sale, but even 
if there was a sale — why wasn’t it given to producers? 
 
Why didn’t you stand up and defend the farmers when it comes 
to the Canadian Wheat Board? Is anybody in the Sask Party 
willing to stand up to defend the Canadian Wheat Board? 
Because I think there are some, but they’re told to sit down; 
don’t say a word, and sit on your hands. And sir, why don’t you 
start, why don’t you start defending the producers, give them 
the opportunity to vote, and share in the profits of the Canadian 
Wheat Board? Would you do that if they’re able to sell that 
CWB? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Well the member talks about opening the 
books. How long was the Wheat Board and how many 
questions were put to the Wheat Board? How much money that 
they, they cost the farmers to sell? I can remember a board 
director, putting the question to him, and he told me, oh it was 5 
cents. I asked him the next year. Oh, 5 cents. I asked him for 20 
years in a row. You know what he told me? Five cents. Well 
why didn’t they open the books to show what it cost? Because 
then farmers would have been totally disgusted at what they 
were spending, what it was costing to sell wheat through the 
Wheat Board. So when the member talks about opening books, 
maybe he ought to look at that’s why most of the farmers did 
not . . . disliked the Wheat Board, because there was no 
organization that was as secretive and closed-books as they 
were. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Farmers 

in Eastern Canada and around . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I would like to hear the questions that 
are being asked and I can’t hear them if there is this much 
discussion across the floor. So I would now recognize the 
member from Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Farmers 
in Eastern Canada and around the world have always had the 
right to sell their wheat to whoever they wanted, but in Western 
Canada, under the monopoly of CWB, farmers were arrested for 
selling their own wheat. To the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana: do you agree with arresting farmers for selling their 
own wheat and turning our hard-working farmers into 
criminals? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — I really enjoy the rhetoric that comes from the 
Sask Party. Nobody went to jail. Nobody went to jail under the 
Canadian Wheat Board Act. They went to jail for violating the 
Customs Act, so get your facts straight first of all. 
 
Secondly, I would like to know whether this member, I would 
like to know whether this party would actually go to support for 
Canadian producers. We know that $5 billion was taken out of 
farmers’ pockets in the last two years. That’s their version of 
marketing freedom, Mr. Speaker. And when you see farmers 
losing $5 billion out of their pockets and now $300 million of 
taxpayers’ money given away to the Saudis and the American 
global giants, I just wonder what the heck’s going on and why 
these people aren’t coming to the support of Saskatchewan 
producers. 
 
We have a Minister of Agriculture in committee say that 
livestock producers should get their assets back. Why won’t he 
let Saskatchewan agriculture producers get their assets back? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate the comments earlier from my colleague from 
Athabasca about Saudi Arabia and how their record is so 
atrocious when it comes to human rights abuses today. 
 
Here we have a situation that the Canadian Wheat Board is 
going to be given to the Saudis, and there’s been no mention of 
that over there at all about, how do they feel about a 
state-owned company receiving the Canadian Wheat Board? 
And whether it’s beheadings or whether it’s ways of silencing 
people who are against the government, I want to know what 
the member from Carrot River feels about the human rights 
record of the . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Time for the 75-minute debate has 
expired. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 



April 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7011 

Motion No. 2 — Social Impact Bonds 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s an 
honour today to rise in the House to discuss a motion I’ll be 
bringing forward that I hope will have the support of the whole 
Assembly. We’re going to be talking about an innovative 
change to deal with some of the social challenges we have in 
our province. Social impact bonds bring together investors, 
proven service providers, and government that have a common 
goal and common outcomes in mind to address social issues. 
 
Social impact bonds are an innovative funding method that 
leverages private capital. Government will enter into an 
agreement with private investors and proven service delivery 
organizations that sets out specific outcomes. They will be 
achieved in a specific amount of time and promises to pay an 
investor a pre-arranged amount of money if and only if the 
delivery organization can achieve the outcomes that are agreed 
upon in a specific time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the honour of serving the people of this 
province as an elected representative for nearly 20 years. 
Twelve of those years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, were in opposition, 
and I watched and I worked and I questioned the social 
challenges that were facing our province. When the people of 
the province asked us to become government in 2007, I had the 
privilege and the honour and the responsibility to see issues 
from the perspective of government and of being a minister, 
first of all the minister for First Nations and then Crown 
Investments and then the Minister of Social Services and 
Housing. 
 
I’ve witnessed and I’ve been part of the decision making that 
saw government invest more and more money into existing 
government programs to face the challenges. Some of the 
challenges were met with great success and others were met 
with very little success with the money that we put into these 
programs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that we must do things differently if we 
are going to make a difference. It is our responsibility as leaders 
to make a difference for the people we represent. I believe we 
must fundamentally change our approach to problem solving. 
As Albert Einstein once said very concisely and very wisely, 
“You can’t solve your problems using the same thinking that 
was used when you created the problems.” In other words, if 
you change nothing, nothing is going to change. Innovation is 
critical. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government believes in social innovation. We 
started as government with the Hub and COR [centre of 
responsibility] in Prince Albert. Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert was 
the first of 12 communities that have a hub right across our 
province. The Hub and COR identified that there are six risk 
factors that we have right across the province where dealing 
with people with social issues: the mental health issues; alcohol 
issues; negative peers; anti-social and negative behaviour; 
missing school or truancy; and parenting, people not getting the 
parenting skills that are required. 
 
Between 2010 and 2013, Prince Albert Police Service received 
3,554 fewer calls for service. Over the same time, the overall 
crime rate in Prince Albert decreased by 21 per cent, while 

violent and property crime rates have decreased by 38 per cent 
and 29 per cent respectively. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the next issue on the list for innovation was the 
child and family committee. Then we talked about reforming 
the child welfare system, which is under way right now. And 
then many, many hundreds of hours and dedication have taken 
place as we work on the strategies like the disability strategy, 
mental health and addictions strategy, and right now the poverty 
strategy. 
 
Many of the potential solutions that we are seeing have a 
common theme. They require working across ministries. They 
require new types of programming. Many point to working in 
conjunction with one or more of the 350 community-based 
organizations that we have right here in Saskatchewan. Many of 
them involve working with professionals in various fields of 
expertise. 
 
One hundred per cent of the time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
know that vulnerable individuals need support. In fact many, 
many times the intensive support is required. Whether the 
vulnerable individual is a child needing a safe home or early 
learning supports, or individuals needing a hand up to restart 
their life after incarceration, or reducing unplanned hospital 
visits, all of these require support. 
 
Most of our government spending, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
reactive. We spend taxpayers’ dollars after a citizen has had an 
issue or after a crisis has occurred. Our emphasis has always 
been on inputs rather than outcomes. It’s prescriptive. We 
require standardized programming. We spend our time trying to 
put a square peg in a round hole, Mr. Speaker. We never ask 
what the individuals would need. We talk about the programs 
that we have. We try and fit the people into the programs. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s prescriptive. 
 
We need a tool that would allow governments to shift from 
being reactive and having remedial activities to proactive 
prevention and supportive ideas. That’s why the innovation that 
started in Peterborough, England in 2010 made common sense 
to our government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, social impact bonds, sometimes called 
pay-for-success or pay-for-performance bonds, is a relatively 
new way of addressing some of the social challenges that we 
have, not just in Canada but right across the world. A contract is 
signed, promising to accomplish an agreed-upon social outcome 
within a certain time frame, and it’s going to result in public 
savings. The new social paradigm will improve effectiveness by 
rewarding programs that actually work. Social impact bonds 
encourage innovation. They measure and evaluate processes 
through an independent third party, and they attract private 
capital to social causes with people who really do care. 
 
The contracting process clearly states an investor cannot be paid 
until an outcome has been assessed by a third-party independent 
evaluator. Usually in government, a program’s risk is assumed 
by government. In a social impact bond, risk is transferred to 
the private sector. 
 
The most profound innovative change of social impact bonds is 
the shift on the focus to outcomes, not inputs. It allows the 



7012 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2015 

investor to work with providers in innovative ways, and it 
removes the prescriptive input rules that always focuses on 
outcomes. 
 
Probably the best way to explain the changes in the way of 
thinking about social impact bonds is to use a health example. 
Rather than focusing on the number of doctors, which we 
usually would call an input, or the number of operations, the 
output, social impact bonds would be based on achieving an 
improved health outcome. That is the real outcome, and these 
outcomes are measured by an outside party. 
 
Before I continue, Mr. Speaker, I want to make sure everyone 
knows, though I firmly, firmly believe in social impact bonds, I 
know they’re not the answer to all social challenges. They will 
not replace government responsibility but, in some cases, where 
a proactive prevention is needed and private sector can step up 
to the plate, we can do things differently. 
 
For anybody interested, if you want to go on Google, you’ll find 
out there are 642,000 Google reports on social impact bonds 
just five years after the first one was introduced. They are being 
looked at internationally, and they’re accepted globally. In 
August of 2014 there was just 25 social impact bonds in the 
whole world in seven different countries, one in Canada. 
 
The Sweet Dreams project in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan is the 
only one in Canada. Sweet Dreams is a new supported living 
project for single moms and for children under the age of eight. 
Mr. Speaker, they will provide moms and the children a safe, 
secure place to live. They’ll provide a continuum of care to 
keep families together. They’ll enable mothers to achieve an 
education and employment, and they’ll increase connections for 
moms with the job market and contribute back to society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Egadz has been operating in Saskatoon since 
1990. They have a long-standing relationship with the ministry 
and with government, with the members opposite. They’ve 
assisted many vulnerable children and families. In 2012-13 in 
their independent and their peer homes, they provided 30 
individuals and 34 children with safe housing. Mr. Speaker, 
they assisted 14 youth to transition back with their families, and 
they supported over 25 youth to become employed or be part of 
self-employment. They ensured students attended school, and 
they provided supports to moms. 
 
[12:15] 
 
Sweet Dreams is based on a multi-ministry approach where 
Social Services and Health and Education work together to 
support the single mom and their children, and those individuals 
will now have a chance to reach their full potential. Through the 
structured decision-making model, child and family services 
assesses which children are at the highest risk, and they can 
have a chance to come in the Sweet Dreams home. Child and 
family services will have an active involvement with the 
children to ensure their safety, and Egadz works in partnership 
with the child and family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, $1.4 million was the cost for the acquisition and 
renovation of the home at 600 Queen Street in Saskatoon, 
$150,000 a year for the operation. Mr. Speaker, at this time I 
would like to thank Colleen and Wally Mah for stepping up to 

the plate and being such wonderful contributors, being great 
citizens, and understanding the importance of supporting 
families. I also want to underline my respect for Conexus Credit 
Union for doing the same thing, for being a community partner 
and wanting so much to work within their community. 
 
Mr. Minister, social impact bonds are performance driven and 
they are accountable for outcomes. The investors and private 
sectors assume the risk, and the predetermined outcomes, if 
they’re not met, there is no payment made. 
 
In too many cases in human services, government spending is 
reactionary. Our money is spent to help the citizen after a crisis 
or an issue has occurred. For too long, citizens have been led to 
believe that more money for social issues meant better 
outcomes. Social issues are increasing in complexity, but 
regretfully our system that’s set up today isn’t set up to assess 
outcomes. 
 
As citizens, there is very little that hasn’t been asked of 
government, especially when it comes to addressing social 
issues. We need to do more, and a social impact bond provides 
us with a way. A social impact bond is an additional tool to 
allow us to shift from reactive and remedial activities to 
proactive and prevention activities. 
 
Our goal is not to replace public sector responsibility, but with 
the help of service providers, build a better safety net. 
Government has relied and shared responsibility with 
community-based organizations for decades, and that’s not 
going to change. We’ll contact the service providers with 
proven track records. Funds will be provided by the private 
sector for an agreed upon outcome, and the private sector will 
be repaid when the outcomes are met. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are so many opportunities to talk about the 
bonds that are being used right around the world. Mr. Speaker, 
in North America, in New York, in Salt Lake City, in New 
York State, in Massachusetts, they’re all doing work with 
individuals that are very vulnerable. In Europe there’s another 
20-some bonds that are being worked on. No bonds anywhere 
in the world yet have matured, but everyone that has been 
spoken to is very confident that they’re moving along the way 
to success for great outcomes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in March of this year, there was the government of 
the UK [United Kingdom] put forward seven new social impact 
bonds aimed at supporting social entrepreneurs to help them 
reform some of the challenges that we have. 
 
There are four more bonds that are dealing with disadvantaged 
youth to improve their educational qualifications. There is 
money that is put forward to deal with youth with behavioural 
and mental health issues. There is money being put forward to 
deal with ex-gang members and reoffenders in the prison 
system. There’s money being put forward to help children who 
have poor school attendance or have been excluded from 
school. There’s money being put forward for children who are 
in care or are on the edge of being in care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk about most of these bonds, but 
I think that the members opposite and my colleagues have a 
chance to look at them and understand that there isn’t any 



April 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7013 

prescriptive way. There’s no bond that is saying, this is what 
you must be doing. It’s happening when we have the right 
provider coming to the right investor saying that, together we 
can make a difference. 
 
In February of this year, we have Portugal has launched their 
first social impact bond in the area of education. They’re 
delivering computer programming classes to primary school 
students with the aim of improving their problem-solving 
ability and their school performance on the subject of math. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s also an article that I think is very 
important. We all remember the tragedy, the devastation that 
happened in Bangladesh when 1,200 garment factory workers 
lost their lives in a fire. The question is, how do we address 
these issues? The money that be would required isn’t available 
just from government. Mr. Speaker, there is an opportunity for 
corporations with a corporate sense of responsibility to move 
forward. 
 
In New Zealand, Mr. Speaker, they are working towards their 
very first social impact bond, and they’re going to be dealing 
with issues in alcohol and drug use or recidivism. The 
government gave approval to test the appetite of health care 
providers which are already going to deal with issues like this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the work that’s being done right across the world 
is looking at corporations and individuals to help us deal with 
issues. In August of 2014, when there was just 25 social impact 
bonds in seven different countries, the G8 [Group of Eight] 
convened a social impact investment task force to bring 
together government officials and senior figures from the 
worlds of finance, business, and philanthropy right across the 
G8 country system to stimulate the development of effective 
global impact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the report that they talked about called on 
government and the financial sector to take action to unleash 
the $1 trillion of private sector money that was needed to 
impact some of the social problems in the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe social impact bonds could be part of a 
new wave of social responsibility thinking in the corporate 
world. I listened to the member from Saskatoon Centre the 
other night in estimates questioning whether the credit union 
decision on investing in a risk project was the right thing to do. 
And then I attended the annual meeting of the Conexus Credit 
Union on Tuesday night, and I listened to their presentation, 
and I listened to them talk to their members about their 
corporate social responsibility. 
 
The credit unions are rightly proud of the work that they’re 
doing. In fact they’re asking what we can be doing next. They 
understand that their members want to step up to the plate and 
deal with the individuals that are not as fortunate as some 
people in the province. Hon. members in the legislature should 
know the credit unions understand and are seen as a leader in 
the area of corporate social responsibility in Canada. 
 
I know that Saskatchewan people give. I know how they 
support vulnerable people. I know that they lead the nation in 
volunteerism. I see how they give in Telemiracle and STARS 
[Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society], and I know how the 

United Way is supported. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in speaking to corporations, there is a social 
conscience around a corporate board table that most people 
don’t see, but we can feel it when we know what they are 
willing to give. And I think we all know the well-known 
corporate citizens populating the seats on many of our 
non-profit boards. They’re there because they care. Those 
individuals are not just business people. They’re moms and 
dads that go home at night and understand that they have an 
opportunity to help individuals who are vulnerable. I know the 
credit union here in Saskatchewan as well as the Mahs have 
talked about reinvesting their money back into the social 
investment if the contract is successful. 
 
Honestly I wasn’t sure what would happen when places like 
Goldman Sachs hedge fund thought about their investment. But 
on January the 29th, 2014, with their third social impact bond 
announcing a plan to reduce recidivism in the young men in 
Massachusetts, they said that the $27 million bond, if the target 
was reached, they had planned to recycle that money back into 
the system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I read a report from the head of the partnership for 
Russell Investments, talking about the philanthropic conference 
that was held in New Zealand last year. She said she’s 
expecting an upsurge of social impact bonds in the next five 
years, impact investing where investors get a social as well as a 
financial return on their investment, and that it’s gaining 
momentum right around the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Justin Rockefeller, the great-great-grandson of 
Standard Oil founder J.D. Rockefeller, has co-founded a 
non-profit body called The ImPact. Its goal is to increase the 
pace of solving social problems by improving capital . . . 
[inaudible] . . . to businesses and creating measurable social 
impact. As a philanthropist, he believes that impact investment 
will grow substantially as the millennials, people born around 
the 1980s, mature and accrue more wealth to invest. He’s 
already said, it’s the nature of millennials to care about the 
moral concepts of what they do with their money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, right around the world there is a corporate social 
responsibility. I believe it takes a community to raise a child, 
Mr. Speaker, and I believe it takes a province and our citizens 
to help build a better tomorrow for all of our citizens. The 
conversation around broader social impact investment is 
happening. Our government will be part of it. We are 
committed. We all want citizens in this province to join us, 
particularly the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly supports the use of social impact 
bonds to leverage private funding in order to provide 
specific services for our province’s most vulnerable; 
furthermore, that this new type of social innovation will 
break down barriers between ministries and will provide 
tangible benefits for human services. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 



7014 Saskatchewan Hansard April 23, 2015 

Kelvington-Wadena: 
 

That this Assembly supports the use of social impact 
bonds to leverage private funding in order to provide 
specific services for our province’s most vulnerable; 
furthermore, that this new type of social innovation will 
break down barriers between ministries and will provide 
tangible benefits for human services. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege and 
pleasure to rise for a few brief moments and just talk a little bit 
about the motion that has been presented by my colleague. 
 
A social impact bond is a very innovative funding model that 
leverages private capital to deliver social and client outcomes. 
And it’s an opportunity for our government to enter an 
agreement with private investors and service delivery 
organizations that in fact set specific social outcome or a set of 
outcomes that must be achieved and promises in return to pay 
those investors a pre-arranged sum if and only if those services 
are delivered and they achieve the desired outcomes. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think we once again here, we see this 
province and this government leading the way with the first 
social impact bonds here in Canada. And we’re already seeing 
the benefit of these first social impact bonds, and I know that 
we are certainly looking forward to developing this program 
even further in the future and leading the country again in 
another very innovative way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that several of my colleagues also would 
like to speak to this motion as well, so I would like to move that 
we adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on the motion. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. 
Monday. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:28.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6991 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6991 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6991 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6991 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6992 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6992 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6992 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6992 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Literacy Awards of Merit 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6992 
 Saskatoon Organization Provides Autism Services 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6993 
 Sarazine Ratt Celebrates 103rd Birthday 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6993 
 Competition Showcases Trades and Technology Skills 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6993 
 Mortlach Saskatoonberry Festival Wins Tourism Award 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6994 
 North Central Facility Named Mâmawêyatitân Centre 
  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6994 
 Wholesale Trade Grows in Saskatchewan 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6994 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Release of Information Concerning Worker 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6994 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6994 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 612 — The Respect for Diversity — Student Bill of Rights Act 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6999 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6999 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Canadian Wheat Board 
  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6999, 7009 
  Brkich ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7002, 7009 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7003 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7005 
  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 7006, 7009 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7008 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7009 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7009 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7009 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7010 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7010 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 2 — Social Impact Bonds 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7011 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7014 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


