
























































Hansard: November 05, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 80A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 5, 2015, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Hon. Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7623 
 November 5, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Exceeded Bounds of Authority 
 

The Speaker: — Before introductions today I have a statement 
I would like to read. On the order paper today is a proposed 
motion concerning my actions as Speaker during the sitting on 
October 29th, 2015. As Speaker, it is truly my goal to have the 
support of all members. Upon reflection it is clear that I 
overstepped my authority as a presiding officer. My actions 
should not stand as a precedent. For that I would like to extend 
my apology to the Leader of the Opposition and the member for 
Saskatoon Centre and collectively to the Legislative Assembly. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’d like to introduce two young ladies: Taylor 
Ewart — can you wave, Taylor? — and Mya Slobodian. Mr. 
Speaker, these two selfless young ladies seated in your gallery 
were able to raise a significant amount of money for STARS 
[Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] air ambulance through 
sales from their lemonade stand. 
 
I will be speaking more about this in my member’s statement, 
Mr. Speaker, but I would like all members of this Assembly to 
welcome Taylor and Mya to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join in the 
introduction of the young people in your gallery today with the 
Minister of Corrections. You know, so often that we think of 
STARS and the service it provides and supported mainly by 
large corporations and small corporations, Mr. Speaker. But by 
the actions of Taylor Ewart and Mya Slobodian, Mr. Speaker, 
we see that it’s supported very much by the general community. 
And quite often it’s young people like this or families like this 
that do things like supporting STARS in such a way because 
they’ve been impacted directly by this organization, Mr. . . . 
STARS. And it’s just another example of the help that STARS 
does give — 2,000 missions — and Taylor’s grandpa Bob being 
one of the 700 critically ill people that have received care 
through STARS, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to join with the minister and ask all members to help me 
and welcome them to their Legislative Assembly and 
acknowledge their selfless actions in what they’ve done. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, I’m pleased to welcome Taylor and Maya to 
their legislature here today and say, thank your for your work, 
your efforts with your lemonade stand. I’m really looking 
forward to hearing a little bit more about it in a member’s 
statement. And as mom of young kids myself, I’m really 
excited to hear a little bit more about the work that you’ve done, 
and I can maybe inspire my seven-year-old to do a little bit 
more too. 
 
So thank you for the work that you’ve done in helping the 
people of Saskatchewan, and I’d ask all my colleagues to 
welcome you to your legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you and to all members of the legislature, I’d like to 
introduce a very special young person sitting in your gallery. 
We have Maia Smith here today with her mom and dad, Janna 
and Murray, and her little sister Mila. I will be having a 
member’s statement on her excellent citizenship for the city of 
Moose Jaw and her volunteerism coming up in a few minutes. 
So I’d like all members to welcome them to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And to 
you and through you I’d like to introduce some people sitting in 
the west gallery, the group from the Financial Planning 
Standards Council: Cary List, president and CEO [chief 
executive officer], FPSC [Financial Planning Standards 
Council]; Stephen Rotstein, VP [vice-president], policy and 
regulatory affairs and general counsel; Dan Ongaro, manager, 
CEO office and senior policy adviser; and from the Moose Jaw 
Credit Union, Linda McIntyre. 
 
Our group had a chance to meet with them quickly, briefly 
about a half an hour ago and talk about some issues they are 
bringing forward. And it was very nice to sit down and chat 
with them about financial planning standards and what they 
would like to see in this province. So to you and through you, 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to join with the member opposite and welcome these 
leaders from the Financial Planning Standards Council to the 
Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly. Certainly we welcome 
their voice in this industry. Certainly sound planning is 
something that’s important. The integrity of that system is 
incredibly important. I know that’s what’s important to them. 
So we are encouraged by their interest in a constructive 
dialogue, and certainly we look forward to engaging directly 
with them as well. 
 
So I ask all members to welcome these leaders to their 
Assembly. Thank you. 



7624 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2015 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition that calls for greater support for 
GSAs [gender and sexuality alliance] in Saskatchewan schools. 
And we know this government is not doing enough to create 
safe spaces in our schools for sexually diverse students or 
students bullied because of their sexual identity or sexual 
orientation. And this government must act so students have a 
simple, easy . . . information about gender and sexual alliances 
in their schools, how to form a gender and sexual alliance, and 
who they should talk to in order to form GSAs. I’d like to read 
the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
call on this government to take immediate and meaningful 
action to pass The Respect for Diversity — Student Bill of 
Rights Act and enshrine in legislation the right of 
Saskatchewan students to form GSAs within their schools 
in order to foster caring, accepting, inclusive environments 
and deliver equal opportunities for all students to reach 
their full potential. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, these people signing this petition come from 
the city of Regina. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
asking for this government to support a new long-term care 
facility for Creighton and Denare Beach. Mr. Speaker, seniors 
have done their part to build this province and northern 
Saskatchewan is no exception. According to the 2009 Croft 
report, long-term care stats of our health region is at a code red 
level. Seniors from northern Saskatchewan and northern 
communities need immediate attention from this government. 
Many residents cannot afford private care. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 
the Saskatchewan government to treat northern 
Saskatchewan’s senior citizens with respect and dignity 
and to immediately invest in a new long-term care facility 
in the Creighton-Denare Beach area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
It is signed by many good people of Creighton-Denare. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again I rise in my place to present a petition as it relates to 
cellphone coverage in northern Saskatchewan. And the prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To cause the provincial government to improve cell 

service coverage for northern communities like St. 
George’s Hill, Dillon, Michel Village, Dore Lake, Michel 
Point, and Sled Lake to provide similar quality of cell 
coverage as southern communities currently enjoy. This 
would provide support to our northern industries as well as 
mitigate safety concerns for those living in the remote 
North. 

 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said hundreds of times, that this petition 
has been signed by people from all throughout Saskatchewan, 
and on this particular page this petition has been signed 
primarily by the people of the great community of Dore Lake. 
And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise again today to present a petition in support of better 
seniors’ care. The petitioners point out that, Mr. Speaker, we 
all continue to hear an increased number of stories about 
inadequate care in long-term care homes because of 
decisions this government has made around short-staffing, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We hear about people being left, call bells going unattended, 
people being left on the toilet for hours on end and basically 
just not getting the care they deserve because of 
short-staffing. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the provincial 
government to immediately undertake meaningful steps to 
improve the quality of seniors’ care in our province, 
including creating more spaces and more choices for 
seniors; ensuring higher standards of care in public 
facilities, private facilities, and for home care; ensuring 
appropriate staffing levels in seniors’ care facilities; and 
providing more support to help seniors remain independent 
in their own homes for as long as they desire. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of Regina and 
Craven. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition from residents in the province of 
Saskatchewan concerned about the high cost of post-secondary 
education, and they’re particularly concerned about how that 
works out in tuition and resultant student debt loads upon 
graduation. Mr. Speaker, in the prayer that reads as follows: 
 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 
cause the provincial government to immediately increase 
the funding for post-secondary education in this province 
with a legislated provision that this increase in funding be 
used to lower tuition rates. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by citizens from 
the good city of Regina. I so present. 



November 5, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7625 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to present a 
petition in support of better schools. And in the prayer that 
reads as follows: 
 

These petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan call on this government to 
immediately stop ignoring schools and start prioritizing 
students by capping classroom sizes, increasing support 
for students, and developing a transparent plan to build 
and repair our schools. 

 
The petition is signed by people from Saskatoon. I so present. 
Thank you. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

New Co-op Opens in Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On October 23rd I 
attended the grand opening of the new Westview Co-op in my 
constituency. It was a great, well-attended event. The weather 
was beautiful, and there were lots of great Co-op burgers and 
hot dogs on the barbecue. 
 
The new 50,000-square-foot store on 33rd Street looks 
fantastic, and I know it will continue to offer great food and 
service to the people on the west side of Saskatoon for many 
years to come. 
 
I’d like to thank the board of directors of the Saskatoon Co-op 
for this important investment in the heart of the Westview 
constituency. And I’d also like to thank the employees of the 
Saskatoon Co-op for their exceptional service, whether at the 
gas pumps or the grocery store. Co-ops all over the province 
contribute so much to our economy and community, and not 
only through dividend cheques. At the grand opening, it was 
announced that $90,000 will be donated to support the creation 
of a new accessible playground in Caswell Hill. 
 
So on behalf of my daughters and all the kids in our 
constituency, thanks for your generosity. I ask all members to 
join me in congratulating the staff and members of the new 
Westview Co-op and in thanking all of the people who work in 
our co-ops to make Saskatchewan better each and every day. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

Moose Jaw Student Fundraises for Terry Fox Foundation 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to rise in the House today to introduce and 
acknowledge the fundraising contributions of a very special 
young lady from Moose Jaw. Maia Smith is not your average 
eight-year-old. Driven by her passion for helping others, by the 
age of eight Maia has already made astounding charitable 
contributions in our province through her fundraising efforts. 
 

Inspired by her grandmother’s recent diagnosis with lung 
cancer, Maia organized and held a fundraising event at her 
house in Moose Jaw to raise money for the Terry Fox 
Foundation. At Maia’s event, she sold homemade bracelets and 
wallets, hosted games, held a silent auction that showcased 
original sculptures donated by her grandfather. Maia even had a 
variety of food available for purchase at the event, such as chili, 
pork on a bun, and cake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier in 2015, in September, Maia’s event raised 
$1,568.75 for the Terry Fox Foundation. This greatly exceeded 
her original fundraising goal of $500. Maia plans to continue 
fundraising and will be opening up a bank account for the future 
money raised for the Terry Fox Foundation. Mr. Speaker, I ask 
that all members of this Assembly recognize and thank Maia 
Smith for the outstanding work that she has done. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

Accomplishments of Northern Musician 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Several years ago, I 
paid tribute to an amazing musician from my constituency, the 
godfather of west side music, Don Corrigal. But, Mr. Speaker, 
when I talked about Don, his wife, Lea, and their impressive 
family, I forgot to mention one of the most important members 
of that musical family. That was a mistake, and this statement is 
all about Roland Corrigal. 
 
Roland’s musical career has been growing by leaps and bounds 
in recent years. His music artfully blends the old with the new, 
and he has a very distinctive northern sound that so many of our 
talented musicians bring to listeners across this province and 
around the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Roland’s list of accomplishments is very 
impressive, including a final stage performance at the 620 
CKRM Proudly Saskatchewan Showcase, a feature 
performance at the Canadian Country Music Awards Showcase, 
and a performance at the Aboriginal Recording Artist Showcase 
during the 2013 Junos here in Regina. In addition to those 
important performances, Roland has been a judge for three 
years in the Voices of the North Showcase in Prince Albert. He 
has worked hard as a youth mentor in the Northern Spirits 
Showcase, and hosts an acoustic jam session with local 
musicians in his home community of La Ronge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing the 
incredible musical contribution that this fine northern musician, 
Roland Corrigal, has brought forward in his lifetime. Mr. 
Speaker, I ask all members to recognize the achievements and 
accomplishments of Roland Corrigal. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 

A Day at the Legislative Assembly 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this is a special day here in the Legislative Building as we will 
be welcoming students from Coronach, the grade 8, 7 and 8 



7626 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2015 

students from Coronach and the grade 8 students from St. 
Michael School in Moose Jaw. 
 
They’re here to celebrate and participate in the Day at the 
Legislative Assembly program. Mr. Speaker, this program was 
designated to support the Provincial Capital Commission’s 
mandate to educate youth on the provincial government and the 
history of Saskatchewan. The program also helps celebrate 
pride in the capital city and complements the learning 
objectives of the grade 8 social studies. By exposing students to 
the various roles in government early on, perhaps some of them 
will be inspired to pursue a career in politics or public service 
right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by providing this opportunity for students to 
familiarize themselves with the inner workings of government 
and of the Legislative Building, we’re helping to build a 
stronger democracy and a stronger Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 
the Provincial Capital Commission is doing excellent work in 
running this program, and I hope these students enjoy their 
experience and are inspired by this opportunity to learn about 
the government. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in 
welcoming the participants from the Day in the Legislative 
Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 

Students Raise Money for STARS Foundation 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I want to 
acknowledge the selfless efforts of two young ladies who set up 
their lemonade stand every week last summer to raise money 
for a very good cause. Mr. Speaker, Taylor Ewart was inspired 
to give back by the air medical emergency evacuation of her 
dying grandfather, Bob Ewart. And on a side note, Mr. Speaker, 
I knew Bob Ewart very, very well. STARS gave the Ewart 
family time to be with him in the hospital before he passed 
away, and we share our sincerest condolences to the whole 
Ewart family. 
 
Taylor and her friend Mya Slobodian made dozens of 
handcrafted necklaces and other items which they sold from 
their roadside booth, along with lemonade. Mr. Speaker, with 
persistence, these hard-working young ladies raised more than 
$2,000, which they donated to the STARS Foundation in 
August. That is the kind of spirit that makes me proud of the 
talent and promise of our next generation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, STARS works in tandem with ground ambulance 
services and a fixed-wing Saskatchewan air ambulance program 
to make sure people across Saskatchewan can receive excellent 
emergency care whenever they need it. 
 
I would like to ask the members of this Assembly to join me in 
thanking Taylor Ewart and Mya Slobodian for giving their 
summer to raise money for this life-saving program. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

Dr. F.H. Wigmore Regional Hospital Opens in Moose Jaw 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, tomorrow marks a milestone for 

health care in southern Saskatchewan with the grand opening of 
the new Dr. F.H. Wigmore Regional Hospital in Moose Jaw. 
The planning, design, and construction of this nearly $100 
million facility has resulted in a modern, patient-centred 
hospital with private patient rooms throughout. Also, critical 
care patients transported by STARS helicopter can now arrive 
or depart via a helipad on the hospital grounds to save precious 
minutes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health, the Minister Responsible 
for Rural and Remote Health, and both of the members of 
Moose Jaw North and Moose Jaw Wakamow will represent our 
government on this proud day. I hope to attend as well. 
 
As part of the opening ceremony, the family of the late Dr. Fred 
H. Wigmore will attend a naming ceremony. The ceremony will 
acknowledge Dr. Wigmore’s accomplishments in improving 
surgical and other services, attracting physicians, and gaining 
support for an expansion of the Moose Jaw Union Hospital in 
the 1950s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say that the people of Saskatchewan 
will be well served by this innovative hospital. Additional work 
is under way to allow continued hyperbaric oxygen therapy 
services and the first permanent MRI service in a Saskatchewan 
hospital outside of Regina and Saskatoon. That’s expected to be 
operational by 2016. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me 
in celebrating this exciting news for southern Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 

Cadets Recognition Day 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure today to acknowledge Cadets Recognition Day in 
Saskatchewan. In 2008 our government passed legislation 
declaring the first Saturday of November as a day where the 
people of Saskatchewan can honour, salute, and celebrate the 
tremendous contributions of air, army, sea, and navy league 
cadets in Saskatchewan. 
 
The cadet organization has played an important role in the lives 
of thousands of young people in Saskatchewan and in Canada 
for close to 150 years. The cadets have been a place where 
young people can learn valuable traits and life skills that will 
help a young person succeed in the challenges of life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only was there a positive impact in the lives of 
young people but also in the world. During the Second World 
War there were an estimated 230,000 cadets, that had cadet 
backgrounds, that served in the conflict in various capacities. 
These young women and men were essential to helping secure 
an Allied victory and secure the freedom we have in our nation 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all members of the Assembly to join me in 
acknowledging Cadets Recognition Day to honour the young 
women and men who have and will belong to the army, air, 
navy, and sea cadets as they are a testament to the integrity and 
character of the next generation. Through our cadets, our 
society is investing in today’s youth as well as Saskatchewan 
and Canada’s future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 



November 5, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7627 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Highway Repair 
 
Mr. Broten: — Eight years ago, 600 kilometres of highway 
were paved, graded, twinned, or resurfaced in our province. But 
with just one exception, the number has been considerably 
lower every year since then. This year the Sask Party 
government did 20 per cent less roadwork. A simple question to 
the Premier: why? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the 
Premier, I’m happy to take that question on behalf of the 
government. Mr. Speaker, I’m proud of the record that our 
government has when it comes to infrastructure investment in 
our province. In the last eight years, we have invested $5.2 
billion in highways, which is $1 billion more in eight years than 
the last 16 years of the NDP government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is obviously more work to be done. Particularly the last 
few years, we’ve had some extreme weather which has caused 
failures across the province, Mr. Speaker, and we are doing our 
best to keep up to that. But, Mr. Speaker, overall I am very 
proud of the investment that we are making, and we are 
planning for the future, Mr. Speaker, which is something that 
the NDP never did. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not that this government isn’t 
paying more. They’re definitely paying a lot more. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, highway spending jumped by 80 per cent. But actual 
roadwork, actual roadwork dropped by 20 per cent. So the 
question, Mr. Speaker, for the Premier is this: why is the Sask 
Party government paying more but paving way less? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, again I’m happy to take 
that question on behalf of the Premier in his absence. Mr. 
Speaker, I am very proud of the investment that we’re making 
in our highway system across this province, Mr. Speaker. As I 
said, we are building for the future. It’s not just crack filling and 
pothole filling which . . . obviously we have to do a lot of that, 
Mr. Speaker, but we are building for the next generation, 
whether it’s interchanges or passing lanes or the bypass, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
There are huge projects. Our budget last year was $842 million, 
which is record investment in highways in our province, Mr. 
Speaker. Obviously there’s inflationary pressures when it 
comes to any kind of project in our province, Mr. Speaker, but 
again, very proud of the record that we have. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, here’s the thing. They are paying 
way more but they are paving way less. Mr. Speaker, these are 
the government’s very own numbers, so you would think they 

would have a better explanation than what we just heard from 
the member opposite. A $180 million increase, $180 million 
increase in Highways spending compared to eight years ago, 
but 120 fewer kilometres were paved this year. 
 
And Saskatchewan people see it, Mr. Speaker. We see it with 
those red triangles all over the province, and we certainly feel it 
when we drive up and down the highways throughout 
Saskatchewan. So again to the Premier, Mr. Speaker. The $180 
million increase in Highways spending didn’t lead to more 
paving. They’ve actually paved 20 per cent less. So where 
exactly did all the money go? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can give you an 
example of where that money went. If we look at northern 
roads, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had a 40 per cent increase in 
infrastructure investment in the North, including a $15 million 
project for a Stony Rapids airport which is incredibly important 
to the folks in the North, Mr. Speaker. That’s just one example. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, they’re paying way more but 
they’re paving way less. The government’s very own numbers 
show this: $180 million more, 120 fewer kilometres. That is 
what this government’s numbers clearly show. 
 
And do you know what’s changed during that time, Mr. 
Speaker? What has changed is that the Sask Party government 
has gutted the Highways ministry and then jacked up spending 
on highways consultants by 400 per cent — 400 per cent. Will 
the Premier admit that those reckless decisions are one of the 
main reasons why the Sask Party government is paying way 
more but paving way less? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think one of 
the things that the member asking the question needs to 
understand is that it’s the Ministry of Highways and 
Infrastructure. It’s not just highways that we’re responsible for, 
Mr. Speaker. As an example, culvert replacement across this 
province, we’ve increased that by 2,000 per cent over what the 
NDP did, Mr. Speaker. There is more than paving. We are 
making investments in paving, Mr. Speaker. There’s bridges. 
There’s culverts. There’s passing lanes. There is major 
construction, Mr. Speaker. It is Highways and Infrastructure. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it is clear in the government’s 
very own numbers that they are paving fewer kilometres than 
they were before, Mr. Speaker, but they are spending way more. 
The numbers from the government clearly show that, time and 
time again. Mr. Minister, at the same time as we have seen 
Highways spending skyrocket and actual roadwork plummet, 
we’ve seen the Sask Party government get rid of about 350 road 
building and engineering staff within government — around 
350. Meanwhile, spending on highways consultants has gone up 
by a whopping 400 per cent. 
 



7628 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2015 

Mr. Speaker, this is the Sask Party government’s approach to 
highways here in Saskatchewan. Get rid of highways workers 
and waste huge sums of money on consultants instead, and then 
they pay way more and they pave way less. And we, Mr. 
Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are left to pay the price for 
that. How can the Premier, how can the Premier possibly justify 
the 400 per cent increase in highways consultants and the 20 per 
cent decrease in actual roadwork being done on our roads? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, again it is the Ministry of 
Highways and Infrastructure. We have increased culvert 
projects by over 2,000 per cent. And when it comes to 
consultants, Mr. Speaker, we are doing bigger projects, more 
specialized projects. And I would point out just this April the 
actual Highways critic, the member for Athabasca, said, and I 
quote: 
 

. . . I agree, you do need specialized services. And we 
don’t need five or six individuals sitting in the Highways 
ministry that are going to be used once every two or three 
years. I agree with that, that if there is an instance where, 
where you’re able to look out and find some private firms 
that can do . . . [that kind] of the speciality work that is 
required, so be it. 

 
[10:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s exactly what we’re doing. We are hiring 
consultants to work on specialized projects — bypass, passing 
lanes, interchanges, those sorts of things, Mr. Speaker. But 
when it comes to paving in this province, the members opposite 
have to understand that the budget in the Ministry of Highways 
and Infrastructure includes infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. 
Culverts, bridges. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s clear with this government’s 
record. They have cut hundreds of staff within Highways, Mr. 
Speaker. They have hugely increased the use of consultants. 
They are paying way more, Mr. Speaker, and they are paving 
way less here in Saskatchewan. So a simple question, Mr. 
Speaker, to the minister: would she agree, would the minister 
agree that they have cut roadwork by 20 per cent? Yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, what I can tell the 
members opposite is when it comes to bridge and culvert repair 
— which again, Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure — is 
up 381 per cent funding levels from what the NDP did, Mr. 
Speaker. When we look across the province there was an 
infrastructure deficit, whether it’s schools or hospitals or 
highways. That includes bridges and culverts and the other 
responsibilities that are within the Ministry of Highways. But 
when it comes to building, Mr. Speaker, we have spent $17 
million on Highway 10 passing lanes and I think anybody who 
has travelled that highway fully understands the necessity of 
that. In partnership with the federal government, we are 
twinning Highway 7. Again in partnership with the federal 
government, we are twinning parts of Highway 16 and we are 

working on twinning of Highway 39 between Estevan and 
Bienfait, Mr. Speaker. We are building in this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the government’s numbers show 
that they’re paving 120 fewer kilometres than eight years ago. 
Does the minister agree with that? Yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, as I pointed out, within 
the Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure there are projects 
across this province. Paving is one of those things, Mr. Speaker. 
We take care of 17 airports across the province, I believe almost 
all of them in the North, Mr. Speaker. We are making 
investments in our airports in the North. We are building 
passing lanes. We are twinning across this province, Mr. 
Speaker. We are planning for interchanges and planning . . . 
The work for the bypass has already started, Mr. Speaker. Yes, 
there is paving work to be done, but there’s also infrastructure 
projects across this province that we are responsible for. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Contract with Corporation on Regina Bypass Project 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, the Saskatchewan Party 
government signed an incredibly lucrative contract, almost $2 
billion, with Vinci, a Paris-based company, for the Regina 
bypass. This secretive contract with Vinci will even have this 
company from Paris, France hired to, among other things, plow 
the snow on the supposed bypass. But Vinci is the same 
company that’s just been caught blacklisting workers who 
raised safety concerns. 
 
You know, we think it’s wrong enough that this government is 
continually sending billions of dollars to out-of-province and 
out-of-country corporations, Mr. Speaker. But it’s especially 
alarming that this government is hiring corporations, foreign 
corporations, with sketchy records. To the minister: will the 
Sask Party agree to release the full details of its relationship 
with Vinci? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we find the actions 
that have been reported to be wholly unacceptable. We have a 
very robust labour legislation in this province and we expect 
every company that operates in this province to be respectful of 
that. But, Mr. Speaker, just to put the issue into context, this 
issue happened 25 years ago. It happened with respect to a 
subsidiary of Vinci, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had assurances from 
Vinci that this is not part of their corporate culture, Mr. 
Speaker. We have confidence in Vinci to perform the terms of 
this contract, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as I had mentioned in this House before, the full details of 
the contract, including the value-for-money report and the 
conflict report, Mr. Speaker, including all the documents 
associated with it, will be available online within the 120 day 
period which has been set out by the auditor who, Mr. Speaker, 



November 5, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7629 

has already said that we have good practices and effective 
practices for evaluating P3s [public-private partnership]. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the government wants us 
to just trust them and just trust Vinci, even though it’s clear that 
this Paris company cuts a whole lot of corners, including 
blacklisting workers who simply asked for basic health and 
safety protections on the job. 
 
The Sask Party says if the Paris company doesn’t meet 
requirements for snow removal on the Regina bypass, then it 
will have to pay us penalties. That’s what the Sask Party says. 
But Vinci says, “. . . cap delay and performance penalties to an 
acceptable percentage of the contract price.” So Vinci’s 
protected itself, and it seems cutting corners and paying 
penalties is just the cost of doing business. 
 
So to the minister: what are the specific requirements Vinci 
needs to meet, and how low are the penalties when they fail to 
meet those requirements? Simply, why is Vinci protected but 
not Saskatchewan people and taxpayers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll answer that question on 
behalf of the government as the Minister Responsible for 
SaskBuilds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s amazing that this member can stand up and 
play politics with an important infrastructure project in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, that’s going to save the lives of 
Saskatchewan residents and anyone else using that road. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have all the confidence in Vinci. These 
contracts that have been entered into will be made public. All 
the terms and details subject to the commercially sensitive 
information will be made public. They’ll be available to look, 
and I challenge the member to look at any other traditional 
project that’s ever been built in Saskatchewan that has this 
degree of transparency, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the contract provides for significant penalties for 
non-performance, not only with respect to the construction, Mr. 
Speaker, but with respect to the ongoing maintenance. And we 
have all the confidence in the world that this consortium will 
complete its term, but if they don’t, Mr. Speaker, we will rely 
on the terms of the contract to enforce. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, outrageous statements 
from the minister opposite who’s delaying actions when 
Highway 1 East deserves traffic lights and they deserve 
overpasses as soon as possible. They don’t need to be caught up 
in this Paris boondoggle, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This massive corporation from Paris also faces serious 
allegations of awful human rights abuses in the Middle East. 
And now Vinci has admitted to this nasty scheme of 
blacklisting workers for simply raising health and safety 

concerns. It doesn’t sound like the kind of company we should 
be doing business with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Labour minister has said we can get out of this contract if 
it’s proven that Vinci has not acted appropriately. So now 
we’ve learned that the Paris corporation has admitted illegal 
activity, and at this point the Sask Party should be scrapping its 
secretive contract with this Paris company. 
 
And as for snowplowing, Mr. Speaker, this government should 
be allowing our publicly owned snowplows to do their job, Mr. 
Speaker. Why won’t the minister do just that? Why won’t he 
stand up for Saskatchewan people and taxpayers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, with respect to the specifics of the question, Vinci is 
involved in a number of large infrastructure projects in this 
country, Mr. Speaker. And in fact they’ve been short-listed to 
perform the services with regard to the south Calgary bypass, a 
project which has been endorsed by the New Democratic 
government in the province of Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned before in my first answer, these 
allegations, these allegations which were made were actions 
which were undertaken by a subsidiary of Vinci — who has a 
great number of subsidiary corporations, Mr. Speaker — over 
25 years ago. We have been assured by Vinci that it certainly 
does not perform . . . is not part of their corporate policy, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We expect companies that operate in Saskatchewan to comply 
with our labour laws, Mr. Speaker, and we will be vigilant. And 
if there’s any circumstances which the opposition member is 
aware of in Saskatchewan, he should tell us so that we can 
properly investigate that, Mr. Speaker. But we will work, Mr. 
Speaker, to ensure that our labour laws are respected by those 
that contract in this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, let’s get this straight. This 
is the government that took this bypass from $400 million, after 
they said they studied it to death, have driven up the cost to 
over $2 billion with this Paris company, Mr. Speaker, and they 
say, just trust them when it comes to protecting Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Meanwhile, Vinci’s very clearly protected itself, Mr. Speaker. 
And it’s very serious allegations. Sort of like the “just trust us” 
that we got from the Premier and from the minister responsible 
for the carbon capture project, Mr. Speaker, when it’s clear, it’s 
clear, Mr. Speaker, that with that $1.5 billion, taxpayers aren’t 
getting value. 
 
Now this Paris company admits serious unethical and illegal 
activity, and the Labour minister says he could scrap that 
contract, but the Premier refuses to do it. He wants to just plow 
ahead, quite literally, with this Paris company in this ridiculous 
contract. How can the Premier possibly justify this? 
 



7630 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2015 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, we have a full and complete 
contract with Vinci. Vinci is one of the partners associated with 
building this bypass, Mr. Speaker, including a number of large 
Saskatchewan companies that are participating: Graham 
Construction, Broda Construction, Clifton and associates, Mr. 
Speaker. And I’m pleased to go through the entire list of 
Saskatchewan companies that are working on this project, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But Vinci is only one small part of this project. And I can tell 
you this, Mr. Speaker, that if the labour laws of this province 
are offended by anyone working on any contract in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be vigilant and we’ll be aggressive 
in enforcing those laws. And, Mr. Speaker, the terms of the 
contract are very, very clear. If there’s a breach of the contract, 
Mr. Speaker, if Vinci is convicted or if any company is 
convicted, Mr. Speaker, of committing any criminal offences, 
Mr. Speaker, then we have a right to demand a change in the 
participation of the contract, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll do that if 
the facts prove that out, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Carbon Capture and Storage Project 
 
Ms. Sproule: — In May 2012, the Premier’s deputy minister 
received a memo from SaskPower’s president with the subject 
line, strategic considerations 2012. In this memo, SaskPower’s 
president said that the economics of carbon capture projects are 
unclear. And this is what he said specifically about the 
Boundary dam 3 project which the Sask Party had already 
committed to: “This project will determine the technical, 
economic, and environmental performance of carbon capture 
and storage technology.” 
 
So right there in black and white is a clear admission that this is 
a $1.5 billion experiment without a sound business case or any 
kind of economic rationale. So is the SaskPower minister 
finally willing to admit that the results of this $1.5 billion 
experiment are pretty dismal so far? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the project has always been a 
controversial one to say the least. But I would go on to say this, 
that SaskPower has predicated the project based on a number of 
areas that they believe that there is opportunity within. First of 
all, it’s within the use of coal to begin with, Mr. Speaker. We 
have 44 per cent of the generation here in Saskatchewan is used 
as coal to generate electricity, so the use of the coal is very 
important. In addition to that, the sale of the CO2 is part of that 
as well. The sale of the CO2 to Cenovus for use in enhanced oil 
recovery is very important. And that, Mr. Speaker, throws off a 
whole host of royalties to the province of Saskatchewan through 
the enhanced oil recovery benefits associated with CO2 in 
enhanced oil recovery. 
 
Then of course there’s the sale of the electricity, Mr. Speaker, 
from the BD3 [Boundary dam 3] facility which likely would 

have been shut down had it not been retrofitted for this project, 
Mr. Speaker. And then of course there’s the possible sale of the 
technology going forward. That’s why we’re seeing 
international experts from all over the world looking at the 
facility, Mr. Speaker, and commenting very favourably on it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, again SaskPower’s president 
wrote to the Premier’s deputy minister to say that this $1.5 
billion project did not have a technical, economic, or 
environmental case; they just hoped it would work out. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, let’s look at these results. The unit has only 
operated at a 40 per cent capacity, and its performance in 2015 
is worse than in 2014. So those are not good technical results. 
Economic results, we’re at least $1.5 billion in the hole and 
hemorrhaging more money every day. Also, on the 
environmental front, in SaskPower’s annual report they show 
their own greenhouse gas emissions are going up. So why won’t 
the SaskPower minister just admit that, on all three criteria, this 
one-and-a-half-billion-dollar experiment is not paying off for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the most recent expert in this 
area when it comes to carbon capture and storage, Carolyn 
Preston, who holds a Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] and 
engineering degrees and chemistry degrees, most recently 
commented — by any standard an international insider, an 
international expert in this area, Mr. Speaker — has commented 
recently. She said, “SaskPower did something that’s almost 
unbelievable. They commercialized a technology that wasn’t 
ready to be commercialized . . . So kudos to them for doing . . . 
[so].” 
 
Mr. Speaker, international experts have looked at this facility. 
They believe it’s the right direction for the province of 
Saskatchewan to go. They understand very clearly that if we’re 
going to continue to use coal here in Saskatchewan to generate 
electricity, this technology is the only way to do that, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s why SaskPower is receiving international 
kudos from international experts and international insiders. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan, we, 
the people of Saskatchewan are one and a half billion dollars in 
the hole for this government’s carbon capture experiment. 
SaskPower doesn’t even own the technology, so we can’t make 
money off that. We clearly don’t have expertise in actually 
making it work, so we can’t make money off that either. So the 
only real explanation from the government that’s supposed to 
give us any hope is, “Someday someone will knock on our 
door.” 
 
This government’s rhetoric about their carbon capture 
experiment is sounding more and more like a sad country song 
every day. Someday someone will knock on our door? To the 
minister: what does that even mean? 
 



November 5, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7631 

[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious that 
the NDP would shut down coal here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. That’s obvious, should be obvious to the people 
of Saskatchewan. Throw all the workers . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Throw all the workers out of work down at 
Boundary dam, 550 people with the IBEW [International 
Brotherhood of Electrical Workers]. Throw them all out of 
work. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — The NDP would throw them all out of 
work at the IBEW down at Boundary dam 3, about 550 people 
right there. There’s about 400 people employed in the coal 
industry down in the southeast of our province as well, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re prepared to do that, Mr. Speaker. You know, 
the NDP’s approach to these kinds of things is always the same, 
Mr. Speaker. They talk about it. They say they would do 
something about it. They would set targets. They would . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Will the member for Athabasca and the 
member for Canora-Pelly come to order, please. They can talk 
behind the bar later if they want. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP have talked about 
these kinds of things in the past. I think it was the member for 
Lakeview at one time announced a grandiose project for down 
there and then immediately cancelled it a few weeks later. 
 
They talk about emissions. They talk about greenhouse gas. 
That’s all they do, Mr. Speaker. They have never done anything 
when it comes to building anything. They shut down hospitals, 
shut down schools here in the province of Saskatchewan. When 
it comes to emissions, when it comes to anything to do with 
targets, they resign from any of that, Mr. Speaker. That’s been 
their history. 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the internal memo that we 
obtained clearly shows that the Premier knew there was not a 
clear economic case for this one-and-a-half-billion-dollar 
project. He also knew that this one-and-a-half-billion-dollar 
project did not have a technical, economic, or environmental 
case, that this project was nothing but an experiment. But he 
plowed ahead anyways, and now there are major problems with 
the project. 
 
The government is being embarrassed around the world for its 

story not matching reality, and the only real answer for that 
from this government is that, well, someday someone will 
knock on our door. To the minister: for what precise purpose 
will they knock on our door, and how exactly will that benefit 
Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, BHP Billiton just recently 
signed an agreement, an MOU [memorandum of understanding] 
with SaskPower around the promotion and the technology 
around carbon capture and storage. They just did that at the 
recent conference here a few months ago here in Regina, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re very, very interested in the technology. 
They’re interested in helping to promote the technology on a 
worldwide basis, and I think we’ll see more from BHP very, 
very soon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the reason why is because they look at this project and they 
know that there’s a lot of information that has been gathered in 
this project on the construction, on the operating data, the 
environmental permitting, the training, the commissioning, the 
project management. All of those are the areas of expertise that 
SaskPower has gained through this project, Mr. Speaker, 
expertise that has been gained by the IBEW workers down at 
the facility, Mr. Speaker. That’s the kind of technology that is 
being commercialized here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think that’s why, Mr. Speaker, Carolyn Preston, an 
international expert in these areas, concluded by saying this — 
and I think this is very important — that “We all need to be 
patient.” Mr. Speaker, she says, “I, myself, am confident it will 
work . . .” And, Mr. Speaker, this government shares that 
confidence. The NDP should get on board. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Asking leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Moose Jaw North has 
requested leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and all my 
colleagues. Mr. Speaker, to you and through you and to my 
fellow members, I would like to introduce some special guests 
here in the Legislative Assembly. Joining us in the west gallery 
are 22 grade 7 and 8 students from Coronach high school. If we 
could get a little wave from the Coronach . . . There we go. And 
also we’ve got 26 grade 8 students from St. Michael School in 
Moose Jaw. A little wave. Thank you. Accompanying them 
today are their teachers, their chaperones, and ministry officials 
from the Provincial Capital Commission, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These students are here today in the capital to participate in a 
Day in the Legislative Assembly program. These students will 
have the opportunity to tour the building, observe MLAs 



7632 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2015 

[Member of the Legislative Assembly] at work — and it’s a 
little different from what you just saw — and engage in a panel 
discussion followed by a question-and-answer session right here 
in the Chamber this afternoon. 
 
I ask all members to welcome these students to their Legislative 
Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the minister on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce 
guests as well. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to introduce 
guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to 
join with my colleague from Moose Jaw in welcoming these 
students to their legislature today. As the member mentioned, 
we have students from my constituency, from the town of 
Coronach that have joined us, and I’m looking forward to have 
an opportunity to meet with them later today. And I hope they 
enjoy their time here at the legislature and in the capital city. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to request leave to introduce a specific guest. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has requested leave to 
introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join the Minister of Health and the member from Moose Jaw in 
welcoming the students to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
It’s not too often that I get family here, Mr. Speaker, but I do 
have my nephew up there. Landon, if you can give us a wave. I 
see you’re going really red in the face. Landon is a star hockey 
player down with his peewee team, Assiniboia, wearing the 
famous no. 9. I very much appreciate Landon coming down. 
And now he’s covering up his face, Mr. Speaker. But the 
MacLeans family down in Fife Lake area are good farming, 
Saskatchewan multi-generational Saskatchewan farmers, and 
good friends and obviously good family and good advisers on 
enlightening me in the agricultural file. So again, Mr. Speaker, I 
want to welcome Landon and his classmates to his Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the minister on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Ask leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Rural and Remote Health has 

requested leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, in the excitement of 
introducing guests during the normal time, the member from 
Wascana Plains and I forgot to introduce some more specific 
guests in your gallery. We introduced Taylor and Mya, 
obviously, with what they’ve done. But also I forgot to 
introduce both Amy Ewart and Trevor Ewart, Taylor’s mom 
and dad, I believe; and her brother, Kade, as well as Tricia and 
Craig Slobodian, Mya’s mom and dad. So I’d ask all members 
to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 125 through 128. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 1,025 to 1,028. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to order the answers to 
questions 129 through 131. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered responses 
to questions 1,029 to 1,031. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 1,032 through 1,035. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 1,032 to 1,035. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I ask leave to move a motion regarding 
commemoration proceedings. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked 
leave to move a motion regarding commemorative proceedings. 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Commemorative Proceedings  
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move: 
 

That members be permitted to wear military decorations in 
the Chamber during proceedings on Monday, November 



November 5, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7633 

the 9th, 2015 in order to commemorate the 90th 
anniversary of the Royal Canadian Legion and the 70th 
anniversary of the end of World War II. 

 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved: 
 

That members be permitted to wear military decorations in 
the Chamber during proceedings on Monday, November 
9th, 2015 in order to commemorate the 90th anniversary 
of the Royal Canadian Legion and the 70th anniversary of 
the end of World War II. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Carbon Capture and Storage Project 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 
always pleased to be able to enter into debate in the Assembly 
here. Today I’m moving a motion that I think is quite urgent 
and important for the people of Saskatchewan. And we’ve seen 
a lot of discussion and a lot of words flying about here in the 
last few weeks about the one and a half billion dollar carbon 
capture project down in Estevan. So at the end of my 15 
minutes, I’m going to be moving a motion saying we need to do 
more and we need to make sure that this government comes 
clean with all the facts on this project. 
 
And I mean just right off the hop, Mr. Speaker, and a follow-up 
to question period, it was interesting to note that the minister 
quoted an expert, that he cited even her credentials on this 
subject, but he didn’t give the full story from the article that he 
was reading from. And I think it’s very important to put on the 
record what this woman also said about the carbon capture 
project. 
 
In the second half of the column — this is by Bruce Johnstone 
in today’s Leader-Post — it says that there’s a problem with the 
amine solution, the solvent, that’s getting dirty basically by fly 
ash. And that’s a very simple layperson’s perspective. But 
here’s what she said, and this is a quote from the article: “In 
fact, she said the contaminated amine solvent is currently being 
shipped to Ontario to be ‘reclaimed’ before being returned to 
Estevan.” . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Now the minister says, 
she’s wrong and it’s Alberta. So I don’t know if he thinks she’s 
credible or not. 
 
But at any rate, this amine solution is not being cleaned on site. 
We’re actually shipping this stuff out of province — I’m sure 
the minister will agree with that — before being returned to 

Estevan for reuse in the capture process. And the quote from 
this expert says, “That (amine solvent process reclaiming 
process) should be done on site.” 
 
So there’s another extra cost that this government has incurred 
by causing this amine solution, which is getting really dirty 
because of the contaminants coming out of the flue gas stream 
. . . So why have they not done that? Why aren’t they keeping 
that here? And again the minister’s disagreeing with his expert 
that he was originally citing as a case for his point. 
 
So she goes on to say that, you know, there’s construction 
issues that are causing all these shutdowns. Things aren’t built 
the way they were supposed to be built. There’s cost overruns. 
We know the amine tank itself has been leaking, and they 
couldn’t figure out why it was leaking. They tried all kinds of 
solutions to fix it. Labour costs were extremely high during the 
construction phase. And there’s a number of other comments. 
 
She said the construction deficiencies are probably the primary 
problem. This is a quote from her: “. . . because the plant was 
not built the way SaskPower wanted it built.” That’s another 
quote from her. So not only are there a number of problems 
with the operations plant, but there’s a whole host of problems 
associated with construction. So time and time again, Mr. 
Speaker, we keep hearing in dribs and drabs and bits and pieces 
about the problems that presumably were known to this 
government all along. 
 
Now one of the things I wanted to point out in the very short 
time that I have here is the fact that I think a lot of the members 
opposite have not been getting those memos, because I have a 
number of quotes from various members talking about how this 
project is working so well. For example, in the Economy 
committee on March 31st, 2015, we have the minister then for 
the Environment telling us, here’s a quote from her, this is . . . 
Sorry. March 31st: 
 

That includes things that have been discussed here tonight 
that have real reductions in carbon CO2 emissions in the 
province of Saskatchewan, such as the carbon capture and 
storage project at Boundary dam 3, which we are all aware 
removes 1 million tonnes of carbon or CO2 from the 
atmosphere each and every year. 

 
[11:00] 
 
When clearly the minister should have been told, he should 
have known that that was not the truth at all, and in fact it’s 
much, much less. We’re looking at 400,000. And even this year, 
2015, we know it’s going to be much less than 1 million tonnes 
of carbon. So why wasn’t even the Minister of Environment 
given the proper notification about what was really happening 
at Boundary dam? 
 
He said something again on March 19th, Mr. Speaker, here in 
the Assembly. And I quote again; this is the Minister of the 
Environment saying, “Boundary dam 3 which is reducing those 
emissions by in excess of 90 per cent, Mr. Speaker.” So that 
was in March of this year. At that time, the then minister of the 
Environment should have been told, at least by the Premier or 
the Minister for the Economy, that that was not the truth and 
that he shouldn’t be saying things in this House when other 



7634 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2015 

people in the cabinet know that it isn’t really exactly happening. 
 
Another member that didn’t get the memo on what’s happening 
at Boundary dam was the member for Walsh Acres. And on 
March 5th, 2015, he said a number of things about Boundary 
dam which clearly were not accurate. First of all, he said, “CO2 
capture is expected pre-launch of 1 million tonnes, and then 
we’re on target to hit that 1 million tonnes.” That’s a quote from 
the member from Walsh Acres. 
 
He went on to say, “We’re reaching all the targets that were put 
in place for Boundary dam 3 and the project that we think was 
well worth the investment.” So again the member from Walsh 
Acres obviously didn’t get the memos from the SaskPower 
officials. 
 
We have the current Minister of the Environment who is getting 
up and providing a commentary on November 13th of last year, 
so about a year ago, and it was — actually this is interesting — 
it was his address to the Speech to the Throne. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s ironic somewhat that at this time last year, we 
were winding up our replies to the Speech to the Throne, where 
here, in this particular stage, we aren’t any . . . Well we didn’t 
have an opportunity to comment on any Speech to the Throne 
because there was no Speech to the Throne. 
 
But here we are, almost at the end of the proceedings, when this 
time last year we weren’t even getting into the debating of bills. 
Makes me wonder what kind of agenda this government is 
bringing forward and why they didn’t bother to do so when they 
had the opportunity here at the beginning of this part of the 
session. 
 
At any rate, we have the member for, the current Minister of the 
Environment who was speaking in the House last year on 
November 13th. And he said, “I think this is a project that 
indicates that Saskatchewan is . . . hitting above its weight.” 
And he goes on to say, “We’re taking the equivalent of 250,000 
cars off our highways.” Well clearly somebody should have 
told the current Minister of the Environment that that wasn’t in 
fact the case and it isn’t going to be achievable, at least in the 
near future. So these members, I feel bad for them because they 
should have been informed. 
 
Again we have the member from Regina, I think it’s southeast, 
anyway on November 3rd, 2014, he said, “More than 90 per 
cent of the carbon dioxide emitted at Boundary dam . . . will be 
captured and stored for use in enhanced oil recovery operations 
in mature oil fields.” So there’s again another member who 
didn’t get the memo, who wasn’t informed, and wasn’t kept 
alive to what was really going on at Boundary dam 3. 
 
And it’s not just members opposite, Mr. Speaker, who have 
been kept in the dark, and that’s the true tragedy of this debate 
that we’re raising right now. Saskatchewan people . . . And 
what I’m worried about here is we have a Premier and a 
Minister of the Economy, we have high-ranking SaskPower 
officials who are flying around the world on our dollar. They’re 
bringing people in from all around the world, and they’re 
embarrassing us, Mr. Speaker, on an international stage by 
blowing their horns about a technology that still isn’t proven 
either technically, economically, or environmentally, Mr. 
Speaker. They should have hung on to their celebrations at least 

until we know that this was going to work. And it’s still not 
clear that it’s going to work. 
 
We have all kinds of cost overruns. We have all kinds of 
misleading information coming out. We have, you know, half a 
million dollars in travel by a vice-president of a Crown 
corporation just to hope that someday someone will come 
knocking on our door. I mean, I think this is probably the single 
biggest issue that we’ve seen come forward in the last little 
while, where we have seen misleading information. We’ve seen 
stories coming out that don’t match, and we’ve seen a lot of 
money being spent on a project that still isn’t proven. 
 
So again, I think, as the official opposition it’s certainly our 
responsibility to raise these questions in the House and, as 
we’ve asked, perhaps have a committee convene — and 
obviously the Crown and Central Agencies Committee would 
be the obvious place for a legislative body to ask real, direct 
questions about this project — but again the government turned 
down the opportunity to have a clear and thorough and 
revealing discussion about what’s really going on down there. 
 
Another thing that concerns me is the false choices that this 
government is throwing out there. It’s clear in many countries 
across the world that a diverse power grid and a diverse 
economy is the way to go, and many, many companies or 
countries are looking at a much more diverse portfolio when it 
comes to energy and a much more diverse range of jobs. 
 
So jobs are definitely not ever lost in a green economy. In fact 
there’s many statistics, and I can share articles with the minister 
that show that other technologies, other energy-producing 
technologies actually create more jobs than coal. And so that’s 
what we’re talking about. I’d be happy to share this with the 
minister from Walsh Acres, and I’ll email it to him as soon as 
I’m finished the debate today. I’d be happy to share it. I’m 
happy to share that information and I will share that 
information. 
 
So I think that they’re raising bogeymen and they’re raising 
false choices here, Mr. Speaker. And I think that in itself is 
misleading to the workers, to the workers down in Estevan. I 
think it’s misleading to them, and I think it’s misleading to 
workers in general in Saskatchewan. We need a power economy 
and an environmental economy that creates good green jobs. 
And there’s no reason for this government not to engage in that, 
other than they’ve locked themselves in in their one idea, their 
one egg in one basket and, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s a real 
disservice to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And never once has anyone said that this is meant to be shut 
down. What we’re saying is that we have to be smart about our 
power grid, and that this kind of putting everything into one 
basket goes against the grain of what every other, every other 
jurisdiction in the world is looking at. It goes directly in the face 
of that. 
 
And for our Premier to go to Paris in December and hold up a 
shining light to this project I think is a disservice as well to the 
Saskatchewan people. Until such time that it proves itself 
technically, ecologically, and environmentally and 
economically, there’s a lot of things left to prove before we 
should be blowing any horns about this project anywhere 



November 5, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7635 

outside of our boundaries. So I think this government better just 
pull in the reins a little bit until they figure out what the heck is 
going on, and then and only then should we start blowing our 
horn about this technology. 
 
There’s a number of things that I . . . Unfortunately we don’t 
have a 750-minute debate, Mr. Speaker, because I think there’s 
a lot of points that could be made about this project. But what 
we really want to make the point here is that this is just another 
misplaced priority of this government. Their bet on a carbon 
capture experiment using money that belongs to SaskPower 
customers and taxpayers is in jeopardy. Instead of being upfront 
with taxpayers when the project is sputtering through failures 
and flaws, operating at only about 40 per cent of its targeted 
capacity over a year after it was opened, they just spend more to 
promote it as a mission accomplished. 
 
And again I think this is embarrassing to the people of 
Saskatchewan and it should be stopped. The penalties, the 
repairs, and the losses are piling up, and this government still 
refuses to convene the Crown and Central Agencies Committee, 
refuses to be transparent about what’s going on, but it continues 
to blow a horn that is out of air. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has raised power bills on 
Saskatchewan people by about 40 per cent since they came into 
power, using the smart meter fiasco and now the carbon capture 
boondoggle. It’s clear that the price families pay is just not this 
government’s priority. 
 
We celebrate innovation of course, but the Sask Party 
government has let down Saskatchewan taxpayers with their 
poor handling of this project. Saskatchewan taxpayers invested 
$1.5 billion into this experiment, and we still have no idea what 
the total cost will be. We know that we’re paying penalties. We 
paid $12 million in penalties last year to the oil company that 
we’re supposed to be making money off of, and now we know 
that we’re on track this year to pay another 5 or $6 million in 
penalties. That’s not the way this is supposed to work, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And we’ve been let down by this government’s excitement 
about a project that is still unproven. We know that this money, 
it belongs to Saskatchewan families, and it seems that the Sask 
Party has forgotten that. And it seems they’ve also forgotten 
that in order to get the $250 million commitment from the feds, 
they had to give up on our equalization lawsuit. So there’s a lot 
of things the government’s given up just to entice getting the 
money from the federal government for this project which again 
is . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — The debate will continue. Both of the 
members yelling across the floor will have the opportunity to 
participate, so why not wait until then? I recognize the member 
for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We need to be 
asking a lot more questions. Wish we could do it in committee 
where it’s the right place to do it, but I will raise these questions 
today. I know we won’t get answers, but after a 
multi-billion-dollar investment, millions of dollars in penalties, 

repairs, expenses, and lawsuits, the question again, Mr. 
Speaker, is where did all that money go? 
 
And then the second question that is raised on this project is, 
what are we selling? We have no idea. How are Saskatchewan 
people ever going to get their money back from this project? I 
think even if it was working, it’s a many-decades return, if in 
fact there is an oil industry to continue to sell the liquid carbon 
to. So the question is not only where did all the money go, but 
what are we selling? And this government has not been able to 
answer that question at all. 
 
So we have our VP flying all across the world selling . . . we’re 
not sure what. We don’t own the technology. We know that the 
corporations own the technology. So what’s in it for 
Saskatchewan taxpayers other than higher power bills? We 
know — again I mentioned this earlier — taxpayers are 
expected to foot an additional 5 to $6 million in penalties, and 
we know that this is a sweetheart deal for Sask Party donor 
Cenovus. 
 
So seeing that my time unfortunately has come to an end, at this 
point, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Premier and SaskPower 
minister for not giving Saskatchewan people the facts 
about the $1.5 billion carbon capture project. 

 
And I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Nutana has 
moved: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Premier and 
Saskatchewan Power minister for not giving 
Saskatchewan people the facts about the 1.5 billion carbon 
capture project. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And first off, Mr. 
Speaker, you’re going to have to forgive me because I have a 
terrible cold. But this debate is too important for me to not be a 
part of, as it has detrimental effects on my constituency. But 
despite my cold, Mr. Speaker, I am happy to enter this debate 
on the carbon capture unit at Boundary dam power station. And 
of course, Mr. Speaker, as you would know, Boundary dam is 
located in my constituency, the constituency of Estevan, which 
I have been very proud to represent since 1999. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of environmental concerns the federal 
government was coming down . . . was bringing in and was 
among the first in the world to legislate on emission reductions 
for coal-fired plants, and that is the reason why this took place. 
And you know, the sequestered carbon is used to enhance oil 
recovery. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, carbon capture and sequestration is not 
unproven. In fact, as I stated last fall when I spoke on this issue, 
the first carbon capture and storage project dates back to 1979, 
and many have successfully stored carbon dioxide underground 
for over 30 years. And I know my colleague from Weyburn-Big 



7636 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2015 

Muddy will attest to this, that one of these projects is in the 
Midale-Weyburn oil field. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, it is the first project of this scale. Unit 3 
at Boundary dam was nearing the end of its production years 
and was the ideal situation for retrofit. So the question was, do 
we just decommission it or do we use world-leading technology 
to capture the carbon? And, Mr. Speaker, the technology works. 
There are some mechanical problems, granted, but the 
technology does work. But, Mr. Speaker, we chose the latter. 
Estevan has coal deposits to last 100 years, and this is a very 
affordable source of power, so it only made sense. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, there are the jobs down there. 
There are about 300-plus workers at Boundary dam power 
station at any given time, jobs at the coal mines, and other 
spinoff jobs. So employment is probably right around 1,000 
men and women in the Estevan area alone. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
would be remiss at this point if I did not mention that, at the 
peak of construction, there were around 1,700 employees down 
there and not one man-hour lost due to accidents. And this is 
something that all the employees, employers, and everyone in 
this province can be very proud of. 
 
[11:15] 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I doubt whether anyone over there has even 
been out to the carbon capture project. I’d almost bet on that. 
But they just don’t like it. They had their mind made up before, 
you know, it was even built. As soon as it was announced, they 
had their mind made up on this one. But it’s easier to sit back 
and criticize. In fact the Leader of the Opposition, during 
question period when the member from Nutana was asking 
questions on this, he was sitting in his seat laughing about this 
project. 
 
And we know the mover of the motion, the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana, is against this. And I’ve got a quote here in 
fact, and I’m quoting, Mr. Speaker: “Cathy Sproule, NDP MLA 
for Saskatoon Nutana, has opposed SaskPower’s 
implementation of carbon capture technology.” And another 
quote from her is . . . And that previous quote was in The 
Estevan Mercury, February 17th, 2015. And another quote from 
her is this, and I quote, “At one point the NDP supported carbon 
capture, but has since moved away from it, while the Sask Party 
still supports the concept.” And that was that same member 
from Saskatoon Nutana in The Melville Advance on May 22nd, 
2013. 
 
But you know this is troubling because the leader during his 
leadership campaign said this, and it’s called “A Greener 
Future,” and I’m quoting again, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Cam’s vision for a greener future includes . . . making our 
province a world leader in safe, environmentally friendly 
and economically viable carbon capture and sequestration 
by equipping our current power plants with mechanisms to 
safely capture and sequester CO2 emissions and permitting 
SaskPower to profit from its knowledge and innovation by 
marketing CCS technology. 

 
So you know it’s just really, really confusing, Mr. Speaker, 
because they’re all over the map on this one and I’ll just add 

another one into the mix here. And it says that, and I’ll quote 
again, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The possibility of coal generation with near-zero 
emissions along with enhanced oil recovery and 
permanent sequestration of CO2 has tremendous potential 
for both the provincial economy and the environment. 

 
And that was the minister for SaskPower that said that and 
that’s the minister of SaskPower, the member from Regina 
Lakeview, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So they are all over the map on this one, Mr. Speaker, but when 
the member from Saskatoon Nutana was up quoting Carolyn 
Preston, there was more to the quote too, and it’s got: 
 

Still, Preston defends SaskPower’s choice of CCS 
technology and its courage in building the first 
commercial-scale, post-combustion carbon capture plant 
on a coal-fired generating station in the world. [She says] 
“We all need to be patient. I, myself, am confident it will 
work . . .” 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, there are so many other quotes that I could 
give to you on the positive comments that have been made 
regarding this, but I can also remember in 2011, Peter Prebble. 
He was a former cabinet minister for the NDP and he just wants 
coal shut down. And I think that’s what the members over there 
want too, Mr. Speaker. You cannot have it both ways. You 
can’t have it both ways. Either . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
And the member there is chirping from her seat. She had her 
time; I’ve got mine. 
 
What are you going to do? If the environmental regulations 
state that those emissions cannot happen, if you don’t clean up 
the coal, what do you do? You have to shut the plants down and 
that’s what the NDP want to work but all the people in the 
Estevan constituency that work out at Boundary dam, where 
you would never have a hope of having a member from . . . And 
I’m going to make sure this is public out there. I’m going to 
make sure that everyone out there knows where your candidate 
out there stands on this. I’m sure he’s in line with the rest of 
you. But we are going to make sure that that candidate, that the 
people of that constituency knows where your candidate stands 
out there. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, there’s also a letter from Neil Collins, 
and I’m going to read that. And Neil is a person from Estevan, 
worked at Boundary dam in Estevan. He ran for the Liberals 
against me in 1999. Neil is now business manager and financial 
secretary for IBEW Local 2067, and here’s what he says — and 
I am quoting, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Dear Mr. Broten: 
 
I am very concerned about the recent comments you have 
made regarding Boundary Dam Carbon Capture and 
Sequestration project. Our union members work very hard 
on this project and fully support this important initiative. 
 
While I recognize that it is the role of opposition to ask 
questions about government actions, your comments and 
that of your critic Cathy Sproule calls into question your 



November 5, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7637 

position on this matter. 
 
Do you support the carbon capture project as a means to 
reduce carbon emissions at our coal-fired plants or do you 
intend to eliminate coal-fired electrical facilities in 
Saskatchewan, thereby eliminating hundreds of union 
jobs? 
 
The CCS project is crucial to both Saskatchewan’s 
economy and our environment. This is an important public 
policy question, and our members are interested in your 
immediate response. 

 
And you know what? The Leader of the Opposition is a 
wonderful dancer because he dances around this issue every 
time he’s asked. He skirts it. He will not . . . He’s a fence-sitter. 
He will not answer it. At least the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana has come out right off the bat and says, you know what, 
I don’t like it. I’m not even giving it a chance, but I don’t like it. 
That’s more than her leader has done. And he needs to tell the 
people of Saskatchewan where he stands on this project. And 
with that, Mr. Speaker, I will definitely not be supporting this 
motion. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. You know, it’s 
not with pleasure that I enter this debate, Mr. Speaker, but 
certainly it’s an important discussion. You know, normally it’s 
with pleasure you enter into, you have the constructive 
exchange on this floor. And you know, it’s a shame that we’re 
forced to be dealing with this project in this way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker, that the government opposite has 
been unwilling to be clear, clean and clear with Saskatchewan 
people when it comes to this project, a project, Mr. Speaker, 
that has torqued up the bills of Saskatchewan people, the power 
bills of Saskatchewan people all across this province in a 
massive way. And it’s just the start, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Members opposite shout “wrong,” Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This is the sad reality of the lack of basic understanding of the 
economics of a project like this by members opposite. They 
took on a project, Mr. Speaker, despite internal 
recommendations and advice that this was a highly costly 
experimental project, Mr. Speaker. And that cabinet thought 
they knew best. That cabinet, Mr. Speaker, wanted to, I guess, 
Mr. Speaker, to stand out in some way, and certainly they have, 
Mr. Speaker. We are, as Saskatchewan, now we’re the only 
jurisdiction of course with this experimental process with $1.5 
billion, Mr. Speaker, on the hook. And sadly, Mr. Speaker, and 
in a very embarrassing way, we have a government that won’t 
come clean with Saskatchewan people about its operations, 
about its effectiveness, about its cost, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, Saskatchewan people are working hard all across 
this province, in every corner of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
And what Saskatchewan people deserve is a government that’s 
going to take care of the basics, that they’re going to make sure 
that there’s power generation for the future, that it’s done in an 
affordable way, and that we have good jobs in SaskPower, Mr. 
Speaker. Instead what we see from this government is a 

government intent on undermining those good jobs at 
SaskPower, SaskPower itself, Mr. Speaker, and sticking a 
massive bill with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it was clear by way of briefing notes 
that have exposed this government that they knew from the 
get-go, right from the Premier’s desk, that this experiment was 
non-economic, Mr. Speaker, and it was highly risky. The costs 
from the get-go and for many years forward are being piled on 
to the power bills of Saskatchewan people who quite frankly are 
struggling in many cases with the cost of living. They deserve 
better from their government, a government who in its second 
term and as they’ve grown with this big majority seems to have 
really fallen out of touch with Saskatchewan people, the 
priorities that are important to them, and have lost interest in 
making sure that decisions and tax dollars are used in a way that 
benefit Saskatchewan people. 
 
We have a government that’s outsourcing in our Crown 
corporations on front after front after front to the detriment of 
good, mortgage-paying jobs here in Saskatchewan, to the 
detriment of ratepayers and taxpayers in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. We see a government that rammed forward without a 
business case, without an economic case, without sound 
certainty as to what bet they were making, Mr. Speaker, and 
they placed Saskatchewan people in a highly vulnerable 
position, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We deserve a government that can deliver safe, affordable 
power to Saskatchewan people, that can ensure the integrity of 
our Crown corporations, in this case SaskPower, and to ensure 
good jobs for Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. The actions, 
reckless actions and misleading statements of this government 
undermine the integrity of that Crown, the viability of certainly 
this project, and Saskatchewan people are holding them to 
account. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, this is a government that claims 
poverty on front after front where it matters in people’s lives, 
yet they’ve got $1.5 billion for an experiment with no basis, Mr. 
Speaker, from a financial perspective. They’ve got $1.5 billion, 
Mr. Speaker, that they’re sticking directly on the tabs of 
Saskatchewan people. You know, it’s noteworthy, Mr. Speaker, 
when the private sector won’t go near something, and it’s pretty 
worrisome when government chases it hook, line, and sinker 
without the oversight and scrutiny that Saskatchewan people 
deserve. 
 
In this case, Mr. Speaker, they’ve put taxpayers on the hook. 
The bills are being passed to Saskatchewan people, and the 
cheques, Mr. Speaker, because we know this government’s 
terrible with its contracts and protecting taxpayers, the cheques 
are going back to a big oil company, Mr. Speaker. And that 
doesn’t make any sense. How on earth would the people of 
Saskatchewan be forced into stroking cheques, $12 million last 
year in penalties to an oil company, this year even more, Mr. 
Speaker, to the tune of millions of dollars, all while the losses 
are piling up and this project is hemorrhaging dollars? 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, you know, so as I say, this project, even if it 
was working, is the most expensive power this government 
could have put on the bills of Saskatchewan people, Mr. 
Speaker. $1.5 billion for a little over 100 megawatts is 



7638 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2015 

ridiculous, Mr. Speaker, absolutely ridiculous. The costs that 
they’re putting on Saskatchewan people are unfair and it 
certainly reflects a government that’s certainly lost touch with 
the reality of who really pays the bills in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, but it’s paid by Saskatchewan people. 
 
It’s also about trust, Mr. Speaker. And you know, you should be 
able to trust what’s coming from government. You should be 
able to trust, when the Premier says something throughout the 
year and when the minister opposite does, that it’s based in fact. 
And if this project, this highly costly project, Mr. Speaker, was 
going off track, as it clearly did, with in the end really 
underwhelming and very poor performance, Mr. Speaker, we 
should have had a Premier with the backbone, Mr. Speaker, and 
the integrity to be clear with Saskatchewan people about the 
costs. Instead we had a Premier, a minister, and officials 
directed by government to go out around the world and to tell a 
story, Mr. Speaker, a very tall tale, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
inconsistent with the very basic facts, Mr. Speaker. We have a 
government, Mr. Speaker, that’s globe-trotting around at the 
dime of Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, you know, to the 
tune of half a million dollars, Mr. Speaker. And we can’t 
determine and the minister certainly hasn’t been able to clarify 
what they’re actually selling, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It seems, Mr. Speaker, that this government thinks somehow 
that this Crown corporation and the bills of Saskatchewan 
people are just a big piggy bank for them to play around with 
experimental technology, Mr. Speaker, to not do due diligence 
on files that are really important, and to get all over the world, 
Mr. Speaker, with a story that’s not consistent with what’s 
going on here. 
 
You know, we owe it to certainly those around the world to tell 
them what’s actually going on with this project, to share the real 
cost, to let them know how highly risky and how highly costly 
this project was from the get-go and certainly to let them know 
as it relates to the poor performance and the massive problems 
that this project has experienced, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But beyond sharing that with US [United States] senators who 
certainly deserve the truth, Mr. Speaker, not a tall tale 
inconsistent with the facts, and certainly entities and companies 
around the world, they deserve the truth as well, Mr. Speaker. 
But I’ll tell you who deserve the truth the most, Mr. Speaker: 
Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan families, Saskatchewan 
communities who are picking up the tab for yet another debacle 
of this government. 
 
[11:30] 
 
The waste and debacles this government has entered into, Mr. 
Speaker, and putting taxpayers on the hook, are now many. And 
these aren’t small potatoes, Mr. Speaker. These are big dollars, 
Mr. Speaker, dollars that Saskatchewan people are on the hook 
for, for a long period of time. We’re talking about a bypass that 
went from $400 million to nearly $2 billion, and in a 
nonsensical world over there, they somehow think it’s good 
common sense to have a Paris company with serious allegations 
engage to do that work. 
 
To build a bypass, Mr. Speaker, quite frankly, within the city 
doesn’t make any sense, Mr. Speaker, but the tab’s picked up 

by Saskatchewan people, by government that grew big and 
grew arrogant, I guess, Mr. Speaker, and certainly fell out of 
touch with what really matters to Saskatchewan families. 
 
It is embarrassing, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier of this 
province, that the minister of this file, Mr. Speaker, and the 
whole front bench in cabinet, Mr. Speaker, haven’t been clean 
with Saskatchewan people on this front. When we get a tweet 
and we get a statement from members opposite, Saskatchewan 
people deserve to trust it. But you know what, Mr. Speaker? 
Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan people will hold members 
accountable for those kinds of actions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we owe it to Saskatchewan people to make smart 
investments in this Crown corporation. We owe it to 
Saskatchewan people to not subject them to ridiculous costs and 
risks that aren’t fair, Mr. Speaker. We owe it to the workers of 
this province and those in this Crown corporation to build 
power generation, Mr. Speaker, that serves Saskatchewan today 
and well into the future. The actions of this government 
undermine that trust, Mr. Speaker, and they undermine that 
Crown corporation. They certainly don’t serve the people of 
this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I certainly support the words and motion of the member from 
Nutana. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I want to start off this debate and I’m very excited to 
get into this debate. I want to admit, I’m not an engineer. I’m 
not an expert in BD3. I’m not an expert in carbon capture and 
sequestration, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
What I would like to ask, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is have any 
members from the opposition actually taken the highway down 
to Estevan and go and look at the facility? Just do a drive-by. 
Just even see it outside of the Internet or from their experts that 
they’re talking about that have . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Sutherland has quite a strong voice, but I am having . . . Order. 
There’s a lot of chatter across the way. If members want to have 
discussions, take it behind the bar. I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If need be 
I can amp up my voice to make sure that the opposition is not 
drowning me out with their chatter. 
 
Again I want to follow up with this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want 
to know if they’ve actually gone down there, first of all. Have 
they even driven through Estevan other than maybe the local 
candidate? Secondly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to know have 
they talked to anybody in the industry. Are they just getting 
their researchers to be able to channel them some quick little 
information, and some information that isn’t factually correct, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker? It’s not accurate to what the facts are. 
 



November 5, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7639 

They seem to be thinking over there that they’re the experts in 
all industries. They’re experts in P3s, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
They’re experts in carbon capture sequestration. They’re 
experts in power. They’re not, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
They need to be able to sit down and talk to the people. Yes, as 
the minister has indicated, are we operating at peak capacity? 
No. Do we have some issues that we’re working out with the 
contractor that built this, as also with the people that are 
operating it, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Yes. We have some issues 
and we’re working that out. It’s called commissioning the 
project. 
 
I think this happened with the synchrotron where it was down 
for a year. Nobody was lighting their hair on fire saying that 
this is a horrible project, that we can’t do this, that we have to 
stop. 
 
But the fundamental question which the opposition has not 
identified, the people in this Chamber want to know, are they 
for clean coal or are they for shutting down coal? It’s a very 
simple question, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We want to know, the 
people of Saskatchewan want to know, and as we found out just 
recently, the IBEW wants to know what their position is. 
 
Now these are unionized people down in Estevan area that are 
working hard, first of all to build the project, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, second of all to get the project running. And they have 
a lot of pride, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they are making this 
project a success because they want to be able to be involved 
when we have 260 companies around the world coming down 
to Estevan, Saskatchewan to be able to look at what we’re 
doing. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s absolutely amazing that they can’t 
answer a simple question: are they for clean coal or are they 
against coal altogether? And from what I’ve been told, 44 per 
cent of our electricity in Saskatchewan comes from coal, coal 
generated. 
 
Now I’d like to know what their option is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
if they’re against coal and they shut down all of coal in 
Saskatchewan, as I believe the member from Nutana has 
alluded to. If they want to shut down everything in 
Saskatchewan, where are we going to get this 44 per cent? 
Where are we going to get this power generation coming into 
Saskatchewan? I would like to see a proposal put forward by 
the opposition to be able to say okay, we don’t like clean coal; 
we’re against it, but here’s our option. 
 
Because you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? They continue 
to find ways to throw mud at this government and be able to say 
. . . But they don’t come up with a viable option for the people 
of Saskatchewan. And you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
The people of Saskatchewan aren’t buying this anymore. 
They’re not just coming out and saying, well we’re against the 
Saskatchewan Party government. They want to see some 
options. They want to see some platform ideas from this. What 
are you going to do with clean coal? What are you going to do 
with this? You cannot keep coming out and just saying, we’re 
against the Saskatchewan Party government. Sooner or later the 
people over there are going to have to start deciding on where 
they are on the fence. Are they on this side of the fence with 

clean coal and being able to work with Boundary dam 3 and 
carbon capture sequestration, or are they against coal and 
they’re going to shut it down? If they’re against coal, then they 
better come up with a plan on how to fix the problem and how 
to be able to create 44 per cent of the energy that’s going to be 
gone as soon as we shut down the coal plants. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I wanted to touch base was an 
article that came out today, and I think the minister references 
in question period. But what we’re looking at over here is 
experts in the industry, people that actually have engineering 
degrees, that have worked on power plants and actually visited 
power plants and been there working, solving problems. 
 
What we have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is we have Carolyn 
Preston. Carolyn is the principal of CKP & Associates in 
Calgary. Now I just want to give a little bit of information about 
that. Preston, who has a Ph.D. degree in engineering and 
chemistry — I would consider that an expert in the industry — 
said that the CO2 project is a great project, that we are working 
and we’re marketing a project that is revolutionary. 
 
As we know, we have 100 years of coal energy within 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but around the world there 
are coal plants popping up every single day. And what are they 
looking at? They’re going to have environmental regulations on 
them just like our federal government has put, that if you’re 
going to produce coal, use coal to produce energy, you’re going 
to have to meet these standards. We’re meeting those standards 
and actually we’re surpassing those standards. And because 
we’re surpassing those standards, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have 
people around the world that are coming to us and saying, can 
you please share this technology with us? Can you please? We 
will look at this because we have to meet the environmental 
regulations throughout the world, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But I want to touch base just on a couple of things that have 
come out. I’m not sure if they classify this as policy over there, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, but one of the things that came out was 
from the member from Nutana, and her quote was, “At one 
point the NDP supported carbon capture, but has since moved 
away from it.” Now I wonder if the member from Nutana is 
going to stick to that. I wonder if the party leader and the entire 
opposition is going to stick to that. And the quote continues, 
“While the SaskParty still supports the concept . . .” 
 
Of course we support it. We’re standing behind the people 
down at BD3. We’re standing behind the technology. And I 
can’t wait to stand up in this legislature, quote every one of 
them from Hansard who slammed this project when we are 
going to be a success in this project and we have people taking 
this technology around the world, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But one of the ones that I found most interesting in doing my 
research, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was this quote, “The possibility 
of coal generation with near zero emissions, along with 
enhanced oil recovery and permanent sequestration of carbon 
dioxide, has tremendous potential for both our provincial 
economy and the environment.” And that would have been the 
minister at the time responsible for SaskPower, the member 
from Saskatoon Lakeview. 
 
So again we keep seeing them over there. One is for . . . The 



7640 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2015 

member for Nutana, we can’t do this; the member from 
Lakeview, yes, we should do this. You know what? Maybe if 
they had some leadership over there, they could actually make a 
decision and follow through with it and tell the people in this 
Chamber first of all, then tell the people in Saskatchewan what 
they’re doing. 
 
And then I want them to drive down the highway, go down to 
the member from Estevan and talk to the people down there and 
make sure that they understand this. Because I don’t believe 
that they completely understand what’s going on down there — 
the job creation, the power, the technology. And what I find the 
most disappointing is that the members opposite have no faith 
in the people of Saskatchewan. They have no faith in the people 
of Saskatchewan to be able to create this technology, to be able 
to build this technology, and to be able to market this 
technology. It’s absolutely shameful, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
they don’t have the integrity to be able to support the people of 
Saskatchewan in creating a new idea. Probably because they 
haven’t had a new idea over there for a long time, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
But the idea of supporting the people from Saskatchewan 
saying, yes, you know what? We can stand up on the world 
stage. We can show what we’ve done. We can market our 
technology. And we can make sure that we’re helping out all 
the coal plants across the world to be able to develop them so 
they can use this carbon sequestration project and be able to add 
to them. 
 
I don’t understand why they continue to put the people of 
Saskatchewan down. They’ve thrown officials under the bus. 
They’ve thrown engineers on the bus. They seem to be experts 
in everything, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but they lack the faith in 
Saskatchewan ingenuity to be able to solve this problem and 
move forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They don’t do that. 
 
And I would encourage every one of them to zip down the 
highway to Estevan, talk to the people down there because I’d 
really like to hear what the local candidate has done there for 
the New Democratic Party. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say 
that I am very disappointed in the opposition because all they 
seem to be doing in there . . . I hoped that they would form an 
effective opposition, but all they are is naysayers, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
They don’t like anything that we’re doing over here, but yet 
they don’t come up with any solutions on what they were going 
to do. I’d love to hear a solution from anybody over there on 
how you’re going to make up for the 44 per cent lack of power 
when they go . . . if they ever had the privilege of forming 
government, which I’m really hopeful will not happen, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I want to know where they stand on this. So I 
will not be supporting the motion. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 
pleasure to enter into this debate, and I’ve listened with great 
interest to all the people making contributions this morning. 
And I particularly want to thank the thoughtful contributions 

from our side. I have questions, a lot, on the other side. I have 
to tell you, it’s like they haven’t read the motion for today, and 
that is: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the Premier and SaskPower 
minister for not giving Saskatchewan people the facts [the 
facts] about the $1.5 billion carbon capture project. 

 
And that’s what the issue is all about. 
 
Now the member before me would want to, really want to talk 
about other issues, other issues. And we can have those debates. 
They have their time when they can put forward their motions 
about clean coal, but this is really a diversion. What the people 
want to know is the honest truth about this project, what’s really 
happening, because they’re getting so many mixed messages. 
This government is out spinning, spinning, spinning around the 
world a project that we don’t know what the results will be for 
the people of Saskatchewan. It’s so simple. The people of 
Saskatchewan are the shareholders of SaskPower and they want 
to know, what is going on? It’s a simple question: the facts, the 
honest stuff, the honest truth. And what we’re getting is spin, 
spin, spin, and we’re finding out from . . . The president of 
SaskPower said the other day that they’re hoping someday 
someone will knock on their door. And we’re getting really 
worried about this, really worried about this. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan, over the eight years we’ve 
had the Sask Party in government, have seen their rates go up 
some 40-some per cent, 40-some per cent, so they’re really 
concerned. It’s not like rates are going down in Saskatchewan; 
they’re going up. And they’re looking at this $1.5 billion 
project and they wonder what’s going on. 
 
Now this government side would want to divert the attention 
away, and they want to talk about clean coal or not clean coal. 
We can have that debate another day, and they can put it 
forward and we’ll have that debate. They can talk about IBEW 
and lost jobs. It’s not about that at all. They want to divert the 
attention. And I haven’t seen . . . This is really so strange. This 
is so strange. This is a government that cut 350 union jobs from 
laundry through K-Bro in Prince Albert and other centres 
around the province. Did they care at all about that? No. Those 
jobs are lost. And all of a sudden, all of a sudden they have 
found, they have come to labour’s side. I find that really passing 
strange. But it’s not about that. It’s not about that. 
 
[11:45] 
 
Let’s get back to the debate. The questions we’ve had have been 
. . . Just give us the straight, honest goods. We are the 
shareholders of SaskPower. We deserve the honest truth and not 
spin, not spin. That’s pretty simple. That’s pretty simple. And 
it’s a business way of doing things, the honest truth. If you’re 
investing $1.5 billion in a project, it better work and you better 
know what the business plan is. They want to talk about other 
things. 
 
And I found it passing strange that this government and the 
minister and some of the members have held up this article 
from today. And again, you know, it’s interesting because it’s 
good to have people who are balanced. And it’s interesting that 
she says with time this should do better. But she really points 



November 5, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7641 

out the downfalls of what’s happened earlier, or earlier on in the 
plan that’s caused us to be where we are today, for example, 
when she talks about where she’s confident in the project but 
she says it’s “. . . been hobbled by cost overruns, construction 
deficiencies and operating problems.” 
 
So she says, and I quote, “SaskPower did . . . almost 
unbelievable [things]. They commercialized a technology that 
wasn’t ready to be commercialized.” We didn’t hear that. They 
weren’t talking about that. We didn’t know that, but they 
commercialized it before it was really ready. And in fact and 
we’ve heard the member from Saskatoon Nutana talk about it, 
and I quote: “In fact, she said the contaminated amine solvent is 
currently being shipped to Ontario to be ‘reclaimed’ before 
being returned to Estevan for reuse in the capture process. ‘That 
. . . should be done on site.’” 
 
So pointing out all sorts of issues that have happened. But we 
haven’t heard that. We haven’t heard that. And this government 
has refused consistently to come forward and admit that there 
were mistakes and really come forward with the business plan. 
And so we really have some, we have some questions. Because 
at the end of the day, it’s the people of Saskatchewan who will 
pay, and they’re hoping that they get a return and this isn’t one 
big white elephant. 
 
You know, we are wanting to make sure this thing at some 
point . . . I mean it’s producing power, 100 megawatts, 
sometimes 120 megawatts, but at a cost of 1.5 billion. That’s 
pretty expensive electricity, but it’s there. But we’ve got to 
make sure that works, and we really want to make sure the other 
part of it works. But really some honest truth, and this is really a 
real problem for this government. 
 
And I think that if they want to quote articles, here’s one, and 
this really gets back to condemning the Premier and the 
SaskPower minister. And this is an article from Murray 
Mandryk, and I quote, “Bill Boyd and his latest billion 
dollar-glitch.” And I want to quote: 
 

When Bill Boyd speaks of “glitches” in government, he 
does so with considerable authority. 

 
“Glitches” — and we’re talking about glitches of the 
billion-dollar variety — have pretty much defined the 
eight-year career of the Saskatchewan Party government’s 
economy minister. 
 

And it goes on: 
 
Remember all those glitches with SaskPower’s meters? 
Boyd — the minister responsible for SaskPower — 
shouldn’t be exclusively blamed for this highly 
combustible problem, which then SaskPower president 
Robert Watson initially also tried to sell as a few glitches. 
Indeed, Boyd should be given credit for . . . ownership of 
the fiasco and presiding over the . . . termination of 
Watson. 

 
So we are talking about maybe there are a few people, and we 
think the minister should be one. But he talks about the 
billion-dollar glitches of the Global Transportation Hub and 
then Kal Tire, and it goes on to go on. And I quote: 

Before smart meters, came the 2009 budget glitch on 
potash [royalties] . . . when Boyd and his cabinet 
colleagues bought into the hype from the PotashCorp 
leadership of the day about the company’s projected sales. 
As it turned out, instead of $2 billion in potash royalties in 
2009-10, the province wound up paying the potash 
companies for tax breaks . . . 

 
And it goes on. 
 

But perhaps Boyd’s most impressive addition of late is the 
$1.5-billion carbon capture and sequestration project at 
Boundary Dam, which Premier Brad Wall, SaskPower 
CEO Mike Marsh and Boyd insist is “fully operational” 
. . . except for the little glitches which result in it either 
operating at half capacity or not at all. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, people are watching this very carefully, very 
carefully. They want the honest truth because what’s at stake 
really is our reputation as a province. They’re going around the 
world telling people that we’ve got this new technology and it 
will work on coal, and people are interested in that. But if they 
find out it sort of only half works, it only half works or it will 
take you two or three years longer to get it up and operational 
. . . And what’s really in it for Saskatchewan? At a cost of what, 
$1.5 billion, what have we got to show here? 
 
So we have some real questions because at the end of the day, 
here we have a government that’s not come clean. The 
Premier’s not come clean and not been fully forthwith with 
people and not owned the issue. And really what we need to 
make sure is when we travel around the country — we 
understand, like, the Premier is going to go to Paris — that he’s 
honest and he’s really telling people what are the issues with 
this kind of technology. What are, kind of, the problems that 
you have to have? And really, is it worth it in the end of the 
day? Is it really worth it in the end of the day? 
 
And we want to make sure that there’s good jobs, there’s good 
jobs for people involved. That’s for sure. But you can do that in 
green technology as well. You know, it’s not an either/or 
proposition at all. It’s not false choices. And this is what this 
government wants to do. It’s really about the resolution that we 
have before us. And it’s about making sure the people of 
Saskatchewan get the facts, get the facts about this project. And 
that’s what we’re not hearing from the people responsible on 
the other side, the Premier and the minister who have really 
ducked this out. 
 
And we’ve seen a minister actually who’s refused to even talk 
to the media about this and instead sends out his officials. And 
really we would like to hear more from the minister in the press 
about this issue because he’s not coming clean either with the 
people of Saskatchewan who continue to see their rates go up, 
continue to see their rates go up. Therefore I’m against this 
motion . . . or for this motion. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And it’s an honour for me to join in this debate to talk about 
one of the most innovative projects that this government has 



7642 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2015 

taken on in its first eight years in government, started by, Mr. 
Speaker, the former NDP government. Let’s not forget these 
facts. They had started the idea of Boundary dam and the 
carbon capture and sequestration. And the former minister from 
Regina Lakeview obviously had thoughts about that at the time, 
that it would be a good project and one to move forward. 
 
First and foremost, I’d like to correct some of the 
misinformation that has been provided by the members 
opposite, especially the member that just spoke from Saskatoon 
Centre, which was absolutely ridiculous. He reads Bruce 
Johnstone’s article dated November 5th, 2015 and quotes 
Carolyn Preston who is an actual expert. She has a Ph.D. and 
degrees in engineering and chemistry. And he says, 
“‘SaskPower did something that’s almost unbelievable. They 
commercialized a technology that wasn’t ready to be 
commercialized,’ said Preston in an interview Wednesday . . . ” 
Stop. He stops there and says, well that means they 
commercialized it before it was ready. Well it goes on to say, 
“So kudos to them for doing that.” 
 
Like what a bunch . . . Unbelievable, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how 
they want, they spliced it together. We know their caucus is 
good at splicing things together, since they had splice-gate a 
couple years ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So he takes two quotes 
and splices them together and then tries to lay them, present 
them in this Assembly as fact. 
 
So when they bring forward a motion, and we’re talking about 
Ms. Sproule moved the motion “that this Assembly condemns 
the Premier and SaskPower minister for not giving 
Saskatchewan people the facts about the $1.5 billion carbon 
capture project,” they haven’t brought facts forward for the last 
70 minutes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So they bring forward a 
motion, and they want to talk about truth, and they just haven’t 
really done that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And then I want to talk about transparency, transparency about 
the project that has been going on for eight years. The 
production levels at Boundary dam, since it began operation in 
October last year, have been made public on a number of 
occasions with information being reported after just three 
months. 
 
It has been reported in the Moose Jaw Times-Herald — I think 
that’s public; in the Leader-Post story, February 17th; in The 
Estevan Mercury, February 17th; at a presentation to the Pacific 
Northwest Economic Region, PNWER, forum on July 13th, 
2015 which is available online for the member from Nutana if 
she wants to take time and actually read some information; in a 
SaskPower news release from September 14th; in a Leader-Post 
story from September 14th; in The Estevan Mercury story from 
September 16th; in an article in National Geographic from 
October 13th. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that’s a lot of 
information that this government has put forward on carbon 
capture and sequestration in the past 16 to 18 months trying to 
keep the public informed on what’s going on. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, has there been some glitches? Yes, there 
has. There is no doubt, no reason to debate that topic, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I think that with any big project . . . And the 
member from Saskatoon Centre should know this, is that the 
synchrotron, it didn’t just throw a switch and start perfectly the 

first day. And I believe that happened under the previous 
government, under the NDP, Mr. Deputy Speaker. When you’re 
going to do big projects like this, big, innovative projects, it’s 
going to take a little while to make sure everything’s running 
properly. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Boundary dam facility is the first 
of its kind in the world and we have had 260 groups from over 
30 countries here to learn about CCS [carbon capture and 
storage] — 260 groups from over 30 countries. So is that trying 
to hide the facts of what’s going on at Boundary dam with our 
carbon capture and sequestration? Having visitors come from 
all over the world and show them this technology, is that not 
being open and transparent? Because I believe that when you 
want to have a new, innovative idea and you’re trying to show 
the world this idea, that’s being pretty transparent, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I think that there has been some issues. But virtually every large 
project has start-up issues in the first couple of years. Like my 
colleague from Saskatoon Centre said, it’s called the 
commissioning year. It takes a while to make everything go. 
 
I know, growing up on the farm, that whenever you start 
something new or you buy a new piece of equipment . . . 
Actually, I had a conversation with a constituent about this last 
Friday. In Walsh Acres, we made 1,200 phone calls and this 
came up once and we talked about it. And I said, you know . . . 
The older gentleman was from the farm. And I said, whenever 
you buy a new piece of equipment, if some bugs are going to 
happen it’s going to happen in the first five or six weeks when 
you’re using that piece of equipment. So, something happens; 
you shut it down; you take it to the shop; you get the bugs 
fixed; you throw a switch and it’s going to work better, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And that’s what we’re expecting the people 
from SaskPower to do, because on this side of the House, unlike 
the members from the NDP, we’re confident in the employees 
of SaskPower. 
 
We’re confident in the IBEW workers down at Boundary dam. 
We believe that they know what they’re doing. We believe that 
the engineers, the consulting engineers, we have faith that the 
hard-working people of Saskatchewan have the innovation and 
the technology to make sure that this project goes right. And on 
this side of the House we’re going to support hard-working 
people in Saskatchewan every time. 
 
There are nine people in this province that hope this project 
does not work and they’re all sitting across the aisle. There are 
nine people hoping that we fail on this front, that we fail in 
decreasing the greenhouse gas emissions. The member from 
Nutana stood up and said, oh, the greenhouse gas emissions are 
going up. She’s happy. She’s happy if things don’t work out for 
this government on this side of the House. She’s like, it’s great 
that the greenhouse gas emissions are going up; that means you 
guys are failing. 
 
How can you have that attitude, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have that 
bad attitude and say, hey, it’s great that SaskPower’s going to 
fail? That’s what they’re saying over there. They’re hoping for 
the failure of one of our major Crown corporations to not get 
this project right. We on this side of the House think that’s 
wrong and we’ll never take that kind of attitude towards 



November 5, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7643 

projects that the hard-working people in Estevan are trying to 
put forward. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a motion talking about transparency 
but it is also a conversation that’s going to be held over the next 
four or five months before April 4th. This is a conversation that 
they’re going to have to answer one question: are they in favour 
of coal-powered electricity or not? Because 40 per cent of our 
electricity, our baseload electricity, comes from coal-powered 
fire plants. 
 
And I’m not sure if the member from Saskatoon Nutana has 
actually read the federal regulations on emissions. But she 
actually has, she has the paper. I’m not sure if she read them or 
not. But we’re going to have to meet these targets and we’re not 
sure what the new government and the new federal 
government’s going to do, if they’re going to increase the 
emissions or not. 
 
But on this side of the House we think we have to be ready to 
meet those targeted emissions. We have to be ready with new 
and innovative technology so we can continue to use coal-fired 
electricity, because on this side of the House we support the 
people working in the coal mines in Estevan. We support the 
International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers and the work 
they’re doing in the electrical plants all over Saskatchewan, and 
we think that those coal power plants should be working for a 
long, long time. And on this side of the House we’re going to 
support the hard-working union members down in that area 
every time, unlike what they’re doing over there. 
 
[12:00] 
 
So my question also would be to the member from Rosemont 
because there seems to be a bit of a leadership vacuum over 
there. There hasn’t been any really public policy before on this 
and they got a question asked of them by the IBEW. 
 

Dear Mr. Broten [I’m quoting, Mr. Deputy Speaker]: 
 
I am very concerned about your recent comments you 
have made regarding the Boundary dam 3 carbon capture 
and sequestration project. Our union members work very 
hard on this project and fully support this important 
initiative. 
 
While I recognize that it is the role of the opposition is to 
ask questions about the government actions, your 
comments and that of your critic Cathy Sproule call into 
question your position on this matter. 
 
Do you support the CCS project as a means to reduce 
carbon emissions at our coal-fired plants or do you intend 
to eliminate coal-fired electrical facilities in 
Saskatchewan, thereby eliminating hundreds of union 
jobs? 
 
The CCS project is crucial to both Saskatchewan’s 
economy and our environment. This is an important public 
policy question and our members are interested in your 
immediate response. 

 
I don’t know what they think immediate means, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, but they have not responded to this letter in the past 
three days. They have not come out and said, we unequivocally 
support coal power in Saskatchewan. We will support the 
unionized workers in Estevan. We will support the unionized 
workers in coal plants. They have not said that yet. And I think 
it’s a disservice to Mr. Neil Collins that they haven’t even taken 
an opportunity to give them a call back and talk about this. 
 
I know that the member from Rosemont talks about all the 
stakeholders he’s spoken to you. And he never names names, 
Mr. Speaker. He says, I’ve talked to these, I’ve talked to these 
people, but he’s never very . . . And I know someone once said 
that you can say whatever you want in opposition because it 
doesn’t matter. And he does. 
 
He says whatever he wants because he’s never held to account 
for anything he says because people just don’t really want to 
listen to what he’s saying, I guess. The media’s never asked him 
a question in a couple of months. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t support the motion from the 
member from Nutana. I will always support the hard-working 
people in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Time for debate has expired. 
Questions. I recognize the member from Carrot River Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, Boundary dam 3 is an 
investment in our environment. This technology has the ability 
to have a global impact on CO2 emissions, and this technology 
is starting here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were some start-up issues which virtually 
every large project this size will experience. But we are moving 
forward and expect to make a profit in 2015. This facility is 
putting Saskatchewan on the world stage for technology that 
will be essential for our environment in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. Have you ever visited the Boundary dam 3 facility or 
would you blindly just scrap it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I think the statements by the 
member is misleading and actually not to the point of the 
motion itself. 
 
What we want to know is whether or not he supports the 
position of this minister which right now is saying, we don’t 
know if we’re going to go forward with this technology before 
the federal coal regs take place. He said that in the media scrum 
just a few minutes ago. 
 
So is it the position of the member for Carrot River as well that 
we’re going to have one Boundary dam 3, but we don’t even 
know if 4 and 5 are going to use the same technology? That’s 
how questionable this technology is. That’s how misleading this 
government has been. And that’s where Saskatchewan 
taxpayers . . . $1.5 billion, that’s not a small amount of money. 
$1.5 billion into one project, and he’s not even sure if he’s 
going to use it himself. Yet he’s selling it around the world. The 



7644 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2015 

Premier’s jaunting off to Paris to sell it and he’s not even going 
to use it himself, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I listen 
with interest to the member from Walsh Acres, and he’s 
admitted that you should expect a few glitches in the first few 
years of getting something of a $1.5 billion project up. There’s 
going to be glitches. 
 
So why, why in the world would a government sign a fixed 
contract with Cenovus that have us paying more in penalties 
getting delivery of CO2? Then if we had really expected poor 
performance in the first few years, why would we sign that 
contract? I’ve got a question to the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and it’s an honour to rise and answer that question. Thank you 
to the member from Saskatoon Centre. That’s a great question 
because, Mr. Speaker, we believe that technology and the 
innovation of our people are going to come through. We believe 
that the engineers in SaskPower are going to make sure that 
within this commissioning year that everything’s going to be 
working well at the carbon capture sequestration. 
 
And it’s funny, coming from that member actually, that exact 
question because why would you enter a contract with Cory 
cogen, when you had to pay $11 million in penalties, when you 
were in government? Would you guys not do that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? So for him to turn around and ask that question is 
quite ironic, coming from the member from Saskatoon Centre, 
because they entered the contract with the power generation, the 
Cory power cogen plant, and they had to pay penalties of $11 
million, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 
Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
carbon capturing is integral in keeping coal mines open. We 
need that power. 
 
I’d like to share a letter that the business manager and financial 
secretary of IBEW, Neil Collins, wrote to the Leader of the 
Opposition. He says, and I quote, “I am very concerned about 
recent comments you made regarding the Boundary Dam 3 
Carbon Capture and Sequestration . . .” He goes on to ask 
whether the Leader of the Opposition intends to eliminate 
coal-fired production producing electricity and the hundreds of 
jobs that go with it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. In his speech, he was saying it’s not an either-or 
proposition, but I suggest it may be. And I’d like to know, for 
the people of Saskatchewan who would like to know, would 
you plan to eliminate power electricity and the hundreds of jobs 
that go with it? Yes or no? 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 
appreciate every time . . . You know, the labour movement, 
they watch closely what happens in the House, and so we 
appreciate the question and the letter. 
 
But what we don’t appreciate, what we don’t appreciate is the 
fearmongering that’s going on by the government who creates a 
false choice, a false choice: either-or. And they are out making 
this happen by fearmongering and saying it’s either-or, and it’s 
not. What we want, what we simply want are the honest facts 
from this government about what’s going to happen with this 
$1.5 million project. It’s a simple question. It’s a simple 
question. It’s not an either-or at all, not at all. Thank you for the 
question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that the minister 
has some explaining to do here because he’s concerned about 
the loss of jobs, yet he won’t commit to using this technology 
before twenty I think nineteen when the federal regs kick in. So 
which one is it? He’s the one that’s throwing these jobs under 
the bus, Mr. Speaker. So I’m wondering if the member from 
Walsh Acres supports the position of his own Economy 
minister when he’s saying he won’t commit to furthering the 
use of this $1.5 billion experiment on the other Boundary dam 
units. 
 
So which one is it? Who’s throwing jobs under, who’s throwing 
jobs under the bus here? I think you better find out what your 
minister is talking about. And I want to know whether the 
member from Walsh Acres agrees with his minister on that 
point. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Well if she wants to know, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’ll give her an answer. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re 
going to make sure the technology is working right. And when 
that technology is working right, we’re going to move forward 
with it. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I would like to know is . . . 
That member from Saskatoon Nutana has flip-flopped on this 
issue a couple of times. She is for coal; she is against coal. She 
was for reducing greenhouse gas emissions; she is against it. 
 
And my question is, she always says there is some magical 
other technology and there’s some magical other modes of 
innovative electrical production, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
there’s other sources of energy we can use. We use 25 per cent 
in hydro, solar, and wind. Does she have another magical 
source of energy that she’d like to tell us about? Are we going 
to run our company, are we going to use . . . How are we going 
to supplement 44 per cent of our electrical power — magic 
pixie dust? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 



November 5, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7645 

Lloydminster. 
 
Ms. Young: — When he was running for the leadership of the 
NDP, the Leader of the Opposition claimed to have, I quote, a 
vision of a greener future that included “. . . making our 
province a world leader in safe, environmentally friendly and 
economically viable carbon capture and sequestration . . .” 
 
But on May 22nd of 2013, just two months after the election of 
the new NDP leader, the member from Nutana was quoted in 
the Melville Advance as saying, and I quote, “At one point the 
NDP supported carbon capture, but has since moved away from 
it . . .” 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, my question to the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana: which is it? Does the NDP think that we 
should use CCS to clean up the process of generating power 
from coal at Boundary dam, or is it their position that we shut it 
down? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Obviously the minister from Lloydminster 
can’t even understand what she is reading. What the leader said 
at that time was “economically viable.” And there is no way 
that this government can say that this project currently is 
economically viable. 
 
We are paying penalties to the tune of $12 million before the 
ink is even dry on the contract with Cenovus. How can that be 
economically viable? How is paying $12 million in penalties in 
its first year of operation, another 5 to $6 million this year, how 
could that ever be considered economically viable? And why, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is this minister not committing to use the 
technology himself in the future? That’s a big question, and I 
think these members maybe should talk to their own minister 
before they go on about the position that we’ve been 
consistently taking about this technology. It has to be 
economically viable, and this government cannot demonstrate 
that it is economically viable. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the mismanagement and 
reckless approach of that government is costing Saskatchewan 
people big dollars with massive hikes to their power bills, Mr. 
Speaker. Question to the member from Walsh Acres: he’s 
learned now, Mr. Speaker, that there was a briefing directly to 
cabinet, Mr. Speaker, that this was not economically proven, a 
very risky, costly experiment, Mr. Speaker. We’ve learned since 
then that the statements of the Premier and cabinet haven’t 
matched the reality, and the poor performance, of course that 
means high costs for his constituents. When did he learn of 
those details? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and it’s an honour to rise and answer this question. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we’ve been aware of carbon capture and sequestration 

for eight years now, so we knew it was coming, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And we’ve been aware also that when a government 
goes on, moves forward with an initiative this large and a 
project this large, there is always going to be a bit of start-up 
issues, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I guess my question would be to the member from Regina 
Rosemont or wherever he’s from. The fact that he stands up in 
his place every day and stands up this day in this debate and 
speaks completely about issues that have affected people across 
the province, and never once does he ever stand up and say, you 
know what, the NDP did nothing for the people . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Time for the 75-minute debate 
has expired. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 2 — Social Impact Bonds 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Ms. Draude.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure and honour to rise in the House today to speak on this 
important motion and topic being presented in Saskatchewan. 
And I’d like to state the motion. 
 

That this Assembly supports the use of social impact 
bonds to leverage private funding in order to provide 
specific services for our province’s most vulnerable. 
Furthermore, that this new type of social innovation will 
break down barriers between ministries and will provide 
tangible benefits for human services. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I were to tell you that there was a way 
to improve the lives of our most vulnerable citizens to ensure 
the best possible use of tax dollars and provide a new degree of 
financial stability to organizations in Saskatchewan, would you 
not explore this plan? 
 
The new funding model, SIB [social impact bond], can do all 
three, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We can use this model to make a 
real difference in the lives of the people of Saskatchewan, the 
vulnerable children of society. And this model I’m referring to 
is called the social impact bond or SIB. 
 
SIBs are funding arrangements between the government, 
private investors, and service providers. Here’s how they work. 
Under these agreements, government sets a specific social 
outcome it wants achieved, acquires the money to achieve that 
social outcome from private investors, and promises to pay the 
investors a pre-arranged sum if and only if the service provider 
achieves the desired outcome after a set period of time. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the benefit of the public and to put on 



7646 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2015 

record, the history of the SIB should be further explained. Since 
2010 more than 20 social impact bonds have been used around 
the world. SIBs have been used in United Kingdom, Australia, 
United States. Alberta, BC [British Columbia], and Ontario 
have expressed interest. 
 
[12:15] 
 
They have been used to address a range of issues such as 
prisoner rehabilitation, at-risk youth, homelessness, and child 
protection. Between 2010 and 2014 there was 129.4 million 
invested globally in SIBs. They have historically allowed a 
quick response to fund interventions that otherwise would not 
exist and bring together parties that otherwise would not work 
together. 
 
As the growth of P3s took place in public spending, alternatives 
were explored to effect means of partnering private business 
with social needs. Hence, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the rise of SIBs 
in social innovation. 
 
Of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the real return on investment is 
seeing families blossom, seeing families stay together into 
contributing members of society. This SIB formula funds the 
Sweet Dreams project, a home meant to be a safe landing for 
families with no place to go, thus demonstrating it does take a 
community to raise a child — human souls in need of respect, 
safety, caregiving. Not every family, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has 
their own support or their own catch net. So thus SIBs would 
provide something for the vulnerable people of Saskatchewan. 
 
In our past Throne Speech, the Sweet Dreams project was 
discussed. And I will quote from the Throne Speech: 
 

Sweet Dreams will provide at-risk single mothers with 
affordable housing and support while they complete their 
education and learn life and parenting skills. 
 
This project was made possible through a Social Impact 
Bond funding model — the first of its kind in Canada. 
 
My government will continue to explore other 
opportunities for Social Impact Bonds to make a positive 
difference in Saskatchewan communities. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the history of Sweet Dreams came about 
by Egadz receiving 1 million in funding from a private investor, 
Conexus Credit Union and Wally and Colleen Mah. Vulnerable 
single mothers and their children together as a family unit . . . 
and keep at least 22 children out of the foster care system for at 
least six months after they leave the services of the Sweet 
Dreams program.  
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, taking these concrete steps will make a 
difference in the lives of those who live in our province. We can 
open our hearts and our minds to help the vulnerable. This 
social innovated project would help the people of this province. 
The member from Kelvington-Wadena, my current seatmate, 
has put much heart and effort into working towards this 
wonderful project, and I would like to thank her. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, child and family services will have active 
involvement with children to ensure their safety through an 

open child protection file and regular visits to the home, while 
we’re talking about the Sweet Dreams project. 
 
The SIB helps our families regain their footing. It keeps 
families together, and it’s affordable. For those of us that have 
had contact with the foster care system throughout our lives, 
whether helping out as a caregiver or being its recipient, we 
realize the value of families being kept together. We realize the 
value of children having good mentors and having their families 
with them, who are educated in learning how to progress and 
become better citizens of the great province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So it is a win-win situation. Investors receive a risk-adjusted 
commercial return and foundations achieve greater leverage for 
their dollars while achieving a desired social income. Social 
success notes are just one idea and, investing that together, have 
the potential to raise money in that we are taking on the 
challenges facing Saskatchewan and other developing nations. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s a very exciting method, and certainly 
for Saskatchewan, to use the social impact bonds. 
 
I think it needs to be said one more time what the impact of 
having a social bond is. Children and families of Saskatchewan 
will have better outcomes, better quality of life. The current 
information is showing improved social activity, safety for our 
vulnerable citizens, social innovation. Whether through our 
examples of Hub and COR [centre of responsibility] or Sweet 
Dreams, our government has a responsibility, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to listen to the people. 
 
We are pioneers of social financing with a social conscience. 
Our story is mirrored in many places in Canada in the 
workplace, and the concept of helping others in Saskatchewan 
is not a foreign concept to us. Our pioneers and forefathers were 
raised on social innovation and sharing to help others, such as 
the vulnerable, and keeping communities strong in 
Saskatchewan. The social impact bond can play a key role in 
bringing about lasting and transformative solutions. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, under social impact bonds, governments 
set a specific social outcome it wants achieved. It acquires the 
money to achieve the social outcome from private investors and 
promises to pay the investors a pre-arranged sum if, and only if, 
the service provider achieves the outcome after a specific period 
of time. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the public has engaged in conversation 
with our government regarding SIBs. Never doubt that a group 
of thorough, thoughtful, committed citizens can change the 
world. And the public has been telling us this is what they want. 
 
Even Murray Mandryk, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from The 
StarPhoenix, May 13, 2014:  
 

It does seem rather difficult to criticize the concept of 
finding ways to provide single mothers at risk of requiring 
services from Child and Family Services with affordable 
housing while helping them complete their education, 
secure employment and participate in life skills training 
and parenting classes. 

 
Another quote from Murray Mandryk, The StarPhoenix, May 



November 5, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7647 

13, 2014:  
 

So what’s wrong with business quite literally investing in 
those at risk? If anything, it might actually help bridge the 
class divide in this province. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as people, we face a lot of things in our 
life that we have no control over. Some of these things might be 
mother nature, accidents, sickness, hunger, poverty. However, 
we must learn to meet our problems and find solutions. Have 
courage and faith, we’ve been told throughout generations in 
this country. The social impact bonds have the potential to 
improve lives of countless vulnerable people in Saskatchewan. 
And children can reach their full potential in this great province 
if we use SIBs. Mr. Deputy Speaker, some people are asking, 
who uses social impact bonds? Since 2010 more than 20 social 
impact bonds have been developed around the world. They’ve 
been introduced in the United Kingdom, Australia, and the 
United States to fund interventions that otherwise would not 
exist, and bring together parties that otherwise would not work 
together. 
 
In 2010 the world’s first social impact bond intervention 
program was implemented in the United Kingdom, to reduce 
the reoffending rates of short-sentencing male prisoners leaving 
Peterborough. Their four-year agreement ends this fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a new social policy . . . [inaudible] . . . 
SIBs have the potential to improve the social sector’s 
effectiveness by rewarding programs that work, encourage 
innovation, validate progress, and attract private capital to the 
anti-poverty cause. These ones were first advocated in 1988 by 
the New Zealand government, who called them social policy 
bonds. I would like to quote, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from the 
report dated January 2015, the Canadian Centre for Policy 
Alternatives in Manitoba discussing social impact bonds. 
 

Matthew Burpee, CFO of Finance For Good Ltd., 
concludes that the results from the UK social impact bonds 
targeting youth education and prisoner . . . “are incredibly 
promising and appear to suggest that the SIB model is an 
effective way to drive positive social outcomes.” 
 

Another article I came about and I found interesting and 
informative was from Bloomberg View dated September 
25th,’15. Entitled, “Save the World, Turn a Profit”.  
 

At next week’s General Assembly meetings, the United 
Nations will formally announce 17 ambitious new 
sustainable development goals. The 15-year program will 
tackle . . . issues ranging from global poverty to women’s 
rights to sustainable energy. The first question the world 
will ask is: “How do you expect to pay for them?” 

 
Countries are proposing to implement social impact bonds 
where private investors can provide upfront cash for legislators 
to address challenges in childhood care, education, public 
safety, and health services. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the three Cs in life I have come across: 
choice, chance, and change. You must make the choice to take 
the chance if you want anything in life to change. But whatever 
change you’re dealing with or trying to accomplish, know that 

you can cope with that change and it will have an impact on 
Saskatchewan people’s future. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
winds of change have come to Saskatchewan. Our government 
has been here eight years. We’ve seen a federal election and I 
hope that the winds of change will come here for the opposition 
and that they will believe in the power of the SIBs, the power of 
the people and their belief in Saskatchewan. 
 
I would again like to read the motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

That this Assembly supports the use of social impact 
bonds to leverage private funding in order to provide 
specific services for our province’s most vulnerable. 
Furthermore, that this new type of social innovation will 
break down barriers between ministries and provide 
tangible benefits for human services. 

 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the social impact bond would be very 
valuable to the province of Saskatchewan. It’s an innovative 
funding model that leverages private capital to deliver social 
and client outcomes. We’ve had clients from our constituencies 
come to us, discuss different business proposals, and I believe 
Saskatchewan is ready. Our government will enter into an 
agreement with private investors and service delivery 
organizations that sets a specific social outcome or set of 
outcomes to be achieved, and promises to pay investors a 
pre-arranged sum if and only the service delivery organization 
is able to accomplish the desired outcomes. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have very many vulnerable children 
and families here in our great province of Saskatchewan and I 
do believe we can help them with the social impact bonds. We 
can provide mothers and children with safe, secure places to 
live. We can provide care for entire families to live together. 
We can enable mothers to educate and employ their children. 
We can increase connections with mothers in the job market 
and contribute back into society, whether it’s rural or urban. So 
we do believe in the power of social impact bonds. We have 
many constituents coming to our offices, talking to us when 
we’re at home, and actually my consistency of Saskatchewan 
Rivers has had many people. And in talking with them, they 
believe in the power of SIBs, in the power of business, in the 
power of our emotions, and the power of our government all 
coming together to help the vulnerable people in Saskatchewan. 
 
So again, I will support this very valuable motion and I 
congratulate the member from Kelvington-Wadena for having 
such a great heart to start this. So I will move to adjourn, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and thank you very much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatchewan 
Rivers has moved to adjourn the debate on the motion. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 



7648 Saskatchewan Hansard November 5, 2015 

moved that this House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until 
Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:31.] 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Exceeded Bounds of Authority 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7623 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7623 
  Ottenbreit ...................................................................................................................................................................... 7623, 7632 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7623 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7623 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7623 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7623 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7631 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7632 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7632 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7624 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7624 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7624 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7624 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7624 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7625 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 New Co-op Opens in Saskatoon 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7625 
 Moose Jaw Student Fundraises for Terry Fox Foundation 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7625 
 Accomplishments of Northern Musician 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7625 
 A Day at the Legislative Assembly 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7625 
 Students Raise Money for STARS Foundation 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7626 
 Dr. F.H. Wigmore Regional Hospital Opens in Moose Jaw 
  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7626 
 Cadets Recognition Day 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7626 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Highway Repair 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7627 
  Heppner ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7627 
 Contract with Corporation on Regina Bypass Project 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7628 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7628 
 Carbon Capture and Storage Project 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7630 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7630 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7632 
MOTIONS 
 Commemorative Proceedings  
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7632 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Carbon Capture and Storage Project 
  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7633, 7643 
  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7635 
  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 7637, 7645 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7638 
  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7640, 7644 
  Steinley ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7641, 7644 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7643 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7644 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7645 



 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 2 — Social Impact Bonds 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7645 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


