
























































Hansard: November 04, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 79A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 4, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Hon. Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7603 
 November 4, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 
Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you, I’m delighted to stand today to introduce two 
guests in your gallery. Both have had a really significant role to 
play in the creation of a new documentary called A Chance to 
Speak. And so I’d like all members to welcome Vernon Boldick 
and Faith Eagle Slippery to their legislature. 
 
Vernon has called Saskatoon home for the last eight years and 
is the producer and director for the film, A Chance to Speak. 
And Faith Eagle Slippery is actively involved with STR8 UP, 
an organization to support individuals who want to separate 
from being in gangs. And I’ll have a chance to speak more 
about the film in the next few moments, and in the interregnum, 
I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming both of these 
guests to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official 
opposition, I too would like to extend our welcome to Vern and 
Faith for coming here today. I look forward to speaking to you 
later, but really I want to encourage all members — and I know 
you’re looking for ways to spread the viewership of your 
documentary — encourage all MLAs [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] to encourage people in their 
communities to have a look at this documentary. It’s a very 
powerful piece of filmmaking, and I want to congratulate you 
on that and welcome both of you to your Legislative Assembly 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Immigration. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
welcome a friend of mine, an acquaintance and friend of many 
in this Assembly, sitting in your gallery, the Hon. Jonathan 
Denis who joins us today. Jon was a long-time friend back to 
our days in law school at the University of Saskatchewan, and I 
point out Jon was a good Saskatchewan boy as well. Jon was a 
former Alberta member of the Legislative Assembly for a 
number of years, former minister of urban affairs and a former 
minister of Justice. So I’d ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming Jonathan Denis to the Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the member in welcoming Jonathan Denis to the legislature. I 
remember many years ago when he was working here for 
people on this side of the House; I think it was how it worked 
then. But also more importantly he travelled, together with a 

number of us members of the legislature, on the parliamentary 
exchange in Germany. We learned many things, and we got to 
figure out some of the politics of our provinces, and I enjoyed 
that trip. We had many things, so very much welcome. Also 
welcome to a Luther College grad. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Parks, Culture 
and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave for an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
introduce some special guests seated in your gallery today: Jess 
Moskaluke, Saskatchewan country music artist and Mike 
Denney, the president and owner of MDM Recordings Inc. 
Give us a wave there. There they are. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Jess Moskaluke is quite a distinguished young 
woman who has been making a significant mark on the country 
music industry: 2014 Canadian Country Music Association 
award for Female Artist of the Year, in addition to receiving 
two additional nominations, Rising Star of the Year and 
Interactive Artist of the Year. A notable performer on the 2014 
CCMA [Canadian Country Music Association] award show live 
broadcast, her single, “Cheap Wine and Cigarettes,” quickly 
became the highest charting song on the iTunes top 200 singles 
chart for any Canadian artist. 
 
With this second single off her new 10-track album, Light Up 
the Night, she also achieved gold record status in August 2014, 
becoming the first Canadian female solo country artist to 
surpass 40,000-plus downloads for a song since Shania Twain. 
Jess also had a single climb into the top country’s chart in the 
last week, reaching the number three spot in airplay and number 
four in sales among Canadian artists. 
 
She’s a resident of Rocanville, and I know we here in 
Saskatchewan are proud of her and her great work. True to her 
Saskatchewan roots, she participated in the Telemiracle CTV 
[Canadian Television Network Ltd.] broadcast which raised 
over $5 million for the Kinsmen Foundation and to aid 
Saskatchewan residents to access special-needs equipment and 
medical assistance. She also helped Saskatchewan causes. 
 
And we have been able to support her. Creative Saskatchewan 
has provided funding support to Jess to assist in her efforts to 
grow as an artist. Helping creative producers like Jess expands 
our creative sectors not only here in the province but also to 
reach into national and international markets. 
 
I hope Jess continues to make Saskatchewan’s name in the 
industry. I know we are all proud of what she’s accomplished. 
We look forward to seeing what she’ll continue to do in the 
future. I ask all members to join me in welcoming Jess 



7604 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2015 

Moskaluke and Mike Denney to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And on 
behalf of the official opposition, I want to join in with the 
minister to welcome Jess and Mike to the Legislative 
Assembly. We have certainly been following your career with 
great interest and great pride and are very impressed with the 
long list of accomplishments that you’ve already achieved. So 
we want to wish you all the best. Keep on making 
Saskatchewan proud, and a great big welcome to your 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in the west 
gallery, I’d like to introduce a young gentleman who farms in 
the Wolseley area. He is also an ag consultant. But he’s also the 
newly elected candidate for the Saskatchewan Party in the 
upcoming provincial election, and I know following the election 
he will have more of an opportunity to meet more of the 
members of this Legislative Chamber. So would you join me in 
welcoming to the Chamber today Steven Bonk. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure, Mr. Speaker, to introduce a young lady seated in the 
west gallery. Mr. Speaker, Jeri-Lee Romaniuk has joined us this 
afternoon in the gallery opposite. Jeri-Lee works for a company 
called ColasCanada, an Alberta company that provides 
resources to many companies across Canada. Most importantly 
of course, some of the subsidiaries that she works with are in 
Estevan, they’re in Swift Current, and they’re in North 
Battleford. Along with that she of course works with all of the 
municipalities in Saskatchewan whether they be urban or rural, 
so a pretty strong connection to Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, most importantly her late father and I are first 
cousins and the Romaniuk family grew up just a couple of miles 
away from where I live on the family farm. So I’ve known that 
family all my life, and it is with pleasure that I would like all 
members to welcome and introduce to you Jeri-Lee Romaniuk. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to this Assembly, I’d like to join with the member 
from Canora-Pelly and welcome Jeri Romaniuk to the 
Legislative Assembly. I first got to know Jeri a number of years 
ago when I had the privilege of serving as Minister of 
Highways and Infrastructure. At that time Jeri was the chief of 
staff to the Hon. Luke Ouellette, the Minister of Transportation 
in Alberta. 
 
What I didn’t know at that time, Mr. Speaker, was that she was 
related to the member from Canora-Pelly. I found that out in 
just the last year or two. But, Mr. Speaker, I shouldn’t have 
been surprised. They have a lot of characteristics in common. 
They’re both intelligent. They’re both hard-working, and they 

both have a passion for politics. But luckily, Mr. Speaker, the 
member from Canora-Pelly has some characteristics that Jeri 
doesn’t share. First of all, she’s much softer spoken. And 
second, Mr. Speaker, fortunately she’s not a Toronto Maple 
Leafs fan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask all members to please welcome Jeri 
to our Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition calling for support for GSAs [gender and sexuality 
alliance] in Saskatchewan schools. And we know this province 
is lagging behind other provinces in securing the rights of 
gender- and sexually diverse students, and we know that GSAs 
offer supports for gender- and sexually diverse students to 
assert their needs and have their voices heard, and these GSAs 
offer opportunities to improve attendance and retention rates, 
generate meaningful relationships at schools, and reduce 
homophobic and transphobic bullying. I’d like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on this 
government to take immediate and meaningful action to 
pass The Respect for Diversity — Student Bill of Rights Act 
and enshrine in legislation the right of Saskatchewan 
students to form GSAs within their schools in order to 
foster caring, accepting, inclusive environments and 
deliver equal opportunities for all students to reach their 
full potential. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from Moose 
Jaw, Mossbank, and Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
asking for this government’s support for a new long-term care 
facility for Creighton and Denare Beach. Mr. Speaker, seniors 
have done their part to build this province, and northern 
Saskatchewan is no exception. According to the 2009 Croft 
report, long-term care stats of our health region is at a code red 
level. Seniors from northern Saskatchewan and northern 
communities need immediate attention from this government, 
and many residents cannot provide private care. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 
the Saskatchewan government to treat northern 
Saskatchewan’s senior citizens with respect and dignity 
and immediately invest in a new long-term care facility in 
the Creighton and Denare Beach area. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
It is signed by many good people of Creighton and Denare 



November 4, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7605 

Beach. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once again to 
present a petition as it relates to cellphone coverage for northern 
Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To cause the provincial government to improve cell service 
coverage for northern communities like St. George’s Hill, 
Dillon, Michel Village, Dore Lake, Michel Point, and Sled 
Lake to provide similar quality of cell coverage as enjoyed 
by southern communities. Mr. Speaker, this would provide 
support to the northern industries as well as mitigate safety 
concerns associated with living in the remote North. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve mentioned time and time again, this 
petition has been signed from people from all throughout 
Saskatchewan. On this particular page they’re signed from 
Saskatoon, from Big River, and from Dore Lake. And I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition in support of better seniors’ 
care. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that it was this 
government who removed regulations requiring a minimum 
standard of care. They talk about families speaking out about 
short-staffing that’s resulted in a lack of staff to help their loved 
ones with basic needs while in care facilities. And the 
petitioners talk about chronic understaffing in seniors’ care 
facilities that’s led to things like unanswered calls for help and 
being left on a toilet for hours on end and infrequent bathing. 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the provincial 
government to immediately undertake meaningful steps to 
improve the quality of seniors’ care, including creating 
more spaces and more choices for seniors; ensuring higher 
standards of care in public facilities, private facilities, and 
home care; ensuring appropriate staffing levels in seniors’ 
care facilities; restoring regulations that provide minimum 
standards of care; and providing more support to help 
seniors remain independent in their own homes for as long 
as they desire. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Earl Grey, 
Strasbourg, Southey, Canora, and Central Butte. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the government . . . excuse me, 
the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Always nice 
to be considered for a promotion. I rise to present a petition 
from citizens in the province of Saskatchewan who are 
concerned about the high cost of post-secondary education here 
in the province of Saskatchewan. In the prayer that reads as 
follows:  
 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 
cause the provincial government to immediately increase 
the funding for post-secondary education in this province, 
with a legislated provision that this increase in funding be 
used to lower tuition rates. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular page of the petition is signed by 
citizens from Regina and Silton. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition in support of better schools. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on this 
government to immediately stop ignoring schools and start 
prioritizing students by capping classroom sizes, increasing 
support for students, and developing a transparent plan to 
build and repair our schools. 

 
And these petitions are signed by people from Saskatoon. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Agribition and Funding for Evraz Place Facility 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Many 
people across our province and in this Assembly have had the 
privilege to tour around the Agribition exhibits and barns. As an 
exhibitor with my family for over 25 years, we’ve brought 
many animals to Agribition and housed them in the barns on the 
Evraz grounds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday was a great day for exhibitors and 
attendees of Agribition and all future events being held at Evraz 
Place. I attended an event where it was announced that the 
Regina Hotel Association donated $3 million, and Canadian 
Western Agribition an additional $1 million towards the 
construction of the International Trade Centre at Evraz Place. 
The funding adds to the $33 million announced in July from our 
government, the Government of Canada, and the city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Regina Hotel Association is a non-profit 
organization that advances the interests of Regina’s destination 
hotels. They are a dynamic part of our growing tourism sector. 
 
The Canadian Western Agribition is the largest livestock show 
in the country and is a powerful and constant advocate of the 
growth, development, and interests within the agriculture sector 
of our province in Canada. Yesterday was also the official 
kickoff to this year’s Agribition. A reminder to everyone that 
Agribition will run from Nov. 23rd to the 28th this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to, and invite all members of this 



7606 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2015 

Assembly, to thank both the Regina Hotel Association and 
Canadian Western Agribition for their generous donation to this 
great project. We should all look forward to seeing the new 
opportunities this great new 150,000-square-foot facility will 
bring when the doors open in 2017. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

MacKenzie Gala 2015 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday, 
October 16th, it was my pleasure to attend MacKenzie Gala 
2015, also attended by members from Wascana Plains, 
Coronation Park, as well as the federal member for Wascana. 
This was an exceptional event: gourmet food by Crave Kitchen 
and Wine Bar, live music, and of course amazing works of art 
that were graciously donated and sold through live and silent 
auction. 
 
The funds raised at the gala support Saskatchewan’s largest 
public art gallery, which offers original art exhibitions from 
Saskatchewan, Canada, and around the world. The gala was 
held in the beautiful atrium of the T.C. Douglas Building, and 
one of the highlights was the exceptional OrangeCrush 
installation installed by the Open Design Collective. 
 
I’d like to thank the gala sponsors, attendees, and specifically 
the very impressive gala organizing committee which included 
Chair Amanda Baker, Leah Brodie, Anthony Kiendl, Brittany 
Krivoshein, Jackie Lindenbach, Johanna Salloum, Wanda 
Schmockel, Gina Sebastian, Lisa Semple, Gerri Ann Siwek, 
Cydney Toth, and Nadia Williamson. 
 
I’d also like to recognize and thank the board, staff, and 
volunteers at the MacKenzie Art Gallery for their contributions 
to our province, and supporters like the Canada Council for the 
Arts, the Saskatchewan Arts Board, SaskCulture, the city of 
Regina, and the University of Regina. 
 
I ask all members to join me in extending our thanks and 
appreciation. Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Connecting Northerners to High-Speed Internet 
 
Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to 
inform the House that earlier this year SaskTel received 
approval for assistance from Industry Canada under a federally 
funded program called Connecting Canadians to further expand 
development efforts in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskTel will be using the $7.4 million in funding 
provided under this program in addition to its own investment 
of $2.4 million to expand and enhance access to high-speed 
broadband for nearly 2,700 homes in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
This project will enable households to receive access to 
SaskTel’s DSL [digital subscriber line] high-speed basic 
Internet in the following communities and their surrounding 
areas: Bear Creek, Black Lake, Brabant Lake, Dillon, Canoe 
Narrows, Clearwater River Dene Nation, Dore Lake, Far, 

Fond-du-Lac, Grandmother’s Bay, Jans Bay, Missinipe, 
Patuanak, Red Earth, Shoal Lake, Sled Lake, Southend, Stanley 
Mission, St. George’s Hill, Stony Rapids, Sucker River, Turner 
Lake, Wadin Bay, Wahpeton, Waterhen Lake, and Wollaston 
Lake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to commend SaskTel for its 
commitment to expand broadband access to the northern part of 
our province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Remembering Bill Wuttunee 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, last Friday our country lost a 
Saskatchewan trailblazer and a strong voice for indigenous 
people and human rights. His name was Bill Wuttunee, and he 
passed away on October 30th at age 87. 
 
Mr. Wuttunee was born and raised on the Red Pheasant Cree 
Nation, just south of North Battleford. He completed his high 
school education at the Onion Lake Residential School. He 
went on to attend law school at the University of Saskatchewan, 
and in 1952, he was the first Aboriginal person to be called to 
the bar in Western Canada. After finishing law school, Bill 
Wuttunee worked with Premier Douglas to improve the life of 
First Nations peoples here in Saskatchewan. 
 
In 1958, he travelled to 56 First Nations across Saskatchewan 
on a listening tour to see how the provincial government could 
work to improve the lives of First Nations people. This led to 
the CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] government 
extending the right to vote to First Nations while retaining their 
status under The Indian Act, legislation that paved the way for 
full voting rights all across Canada. 
 
Bill Wuttunee played a critical role as well in the founding of 
the National Indian Council, which was a forerunner to the 
Assembly of First Nations. And later in life, he worked as a key 
advisor to the Truth and Reconciliation Commission and was a 
key player in helping thousands of residential school survivors 
to have their stories told. 
 
I ask all members to join me in recognizing the important 
contributions made by Bill Wuttunee through his life in law, 
politics, and public service. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 

Regina Riot Wins Championship 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to inform the 
House that on July the 4th the Regina Riot won the Western 
Women’s Canadian Football League championship. The Riot 
beat the Edmonton Storm 53 to 6 in the final game which was 
played at Investor’s Group field in Winnipeg. The game was a 
satisfying end to a successful and hard-fought season. 
 
Mr. Speaker, their biggest challenge came a week earlier when 
the Riot faced their closest rivals and four-time defending 
champions, the Saskatoon Valkyries, in the Prairie Conference 
final. In that game, the Riot were leading 28 to 7 early in the 



November 4, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7607 

fourth quarter when the Valkyries rallied and the Riot found 
themselves trailing 29-28 with just over a minute left in the 
game. The Riot then put together an impressive drive that ended 
with Morgan Turner kicking a 13-yard, game-winning field 
goal. This was a major accomplishment for the Riot who had 
lost each of their four previous conference finals to the 
dominant Valkyries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the final game against Edmonton, the Riot’s 
dominant performance was led by quarterback Aimee Kowalski 
who threw three touchdown passes to Sami Bray, Claire Dore, 
and her sister, Alex Kowalski. Running back Carmen Agar 
rushed for 104 yards, scoring two touchdowns. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating all the Regina 
Riot players, head coach Sean McCall, general manager Emma 
Hicks, and all the other team staff on a terrific season and on 
capturing their first WWCFL [Western Women’s Canadian 
Football League] championship. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 

Peacock Tornadoes Win Championship 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
congratulate the Peacock Tornadoes of A.E. Peacock Collegiate 
in Moose Jaw on winning their fourth straight High School 
Football League championship. Last Saturday the Peacock 
Tornadoes took to the field for the league championship title. 
With a heavy rain the night before, the field conditions were 
quite unfavourable; in fact, they were pretty mucky. But it 
didn’t take long for the Tornadoes to establish their game. 
 
With a 27-consecutive-game-winning streak on the line, the 
Peacock Tornadoes set the pace and battled to a 28-14 victory 
over the Central Cyclones, also of Moose Jaw. Head coach 
Colin Belsher had this to say after the game: “I’m proud of our 
guys for grinding it out. We knew it wasn’t going to be an easy 
game.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Peacock Tornadoes now have their sights set 
on the provincial title and are hoping to win three straight 3A 
provincial football championships for the second time in school 
history. They will face the Regina O’Neill Titans in the 3A 
provincial semifinal game next Saturday at Mosaic stadium. 
 
I ask members to join in congratulating coach Belsher and the 
Peacock Tornado players on a hard-fought win and their fourth 
straight Moose Jaw High School Football League title. Also, 
Mr. Speaker, we wish them good luck in the provincial 
semifinal game this Saturday. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 

A Chance to Speak Documentary 
 
Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Vern Boldick, Faith 
Eagle Slippery, and their colleagues are the creators of a 
compelling documentary, A Chance to Speak. The documentary 
draws on riveting interviews from members of Saskatoon’s 

homeless population with the aim of delving into their personal 
experiences and stories. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the director, Vern was motivated to create the 
documentary to find out why people are homeless and to help 
people across this province listen with their hearts to the stories 
which are so compelling. 
 
At the film’s release in September, over 1,000 people gathered 
at the Roxy Theatre in Saskatoon. They were lined up around 
the block, both at the 7 o’clock showing and at 9 o’clock. Given 
this interest, since then, the documentary has been shown at the 
Dubé Centre in Saskatoon and in Rainbow Cinemas here in 
Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, like Vern and his colleagues, our government 
takes the issue of fighting poverty very seriously. That’s why 
we’ve invested more than $675 million to repair or develop 
14,000 housing units across the province. We’ve doubled 
emergency shelter spaces in the province and undertaken a 
number of other initiatives. Although we’ve taken these 
concrete steps, we know that there’s a lot more to do; hence the 
significance of this film, A Chance to Speak. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask all members of this Assembly to help 
congratulate Vern, Faith, and their colleagues on the success of 
their documentary and the significance of its message. Thank 
you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Planning of Educational Facilities 
 
Mr. Broten: — The Sask Party’s P3 [public-private 
partnership] schools are being built far too small. So they’re 
already, already planning to add a whole bunch of portables to 
these brand new schools. How can the Premier justify this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
should have some understanding of how we construct schools in 
this province. For many years we have built schools so that it 
accommodates the stable enrolment within the school. During 
peak enrolment, as there would be in the early days of a new 
neighbourhood, there is usually a period of time where a 
number of portables having been added. And it’s just a matter, 
Mr. Speaker, of making good economic use of the facility and 
of the space that’s there, and we build schools for what we 
expect the long-term growth to be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this point in time the members are likely 
speculating, because we anticipate the new schools to be 
complete in fall of 2017. And, Mr. Speaker, to the people that 
are in those neighbourhoods, I’m pleased to tell them that 
everything looks like we are on time and the schools are 
progressing exactly as they should. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I guess this is what happens when 



7608 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2015 

the government enters into a ridiculous P3 arrangement for 
cookie-cutter schools. Right from the outset, these new schools 
will not meet the needs of students, of teachers, and 
communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Do you know how many portable classrooms this government 
will be adding to these nine brand new schools? Now the 
minister was talking about peak enrolment. I think people 
would think one or two portables being added, that might 
accommodate peak enrolment. Mr. Speaker, they are planning 
to add 68 portable classrooms — 38 on day one, Mr. Speaker, 
and another 30 within four years. 
 
So again to the Premier: why on earth are these new schools so 
small that the government is already planning to add 68 
portables before they are even built? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the 
Premier I’ll take that question. Mr. Speaker, I can advise the 
members opposite that these schools are going to be publicly 
owned schools with community access. They will be 
maintained through their life cycle in like-new condition and 
the schools will accommodate 11,100 students from pre-K 
[pre-kindergarten] to grade 8 at full design capacity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, unlike the members opposite who chose to close 
176 schools during their term in office, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
pleased that the province is growing, continues to grow and 
expand and, Mr. Speaker, these are the problems of growth. 
We’ll continue to work with them. I don’t know where they’re 
getting their numbers from, Mr. Speaker, but we will do 
everything we can to ensure that we’ve got schools that are 
open on time and service the needs of the citizens of our 
province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister should read his own 
briefing notes in his briefing binder and he would see, Mr. 
Speaker, that this government is planning to add 68 portable 
classrooms to these schools that aren’t even built, Mr. Speaker. 
The minister talks about planning for growth. That’s not 
planning for growth. That’s a failure to plan, Mr. Speaker, for 
what the needs are in the community. 
 
If the minister is keen to answer, I have a question for the 
minister. Does the minister agree that portable classrooms 
“don’t provide the kind of learning environment we need for 
our students and teachers”? Does he agree with that? 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, 68 portable units is 3.7 
units per school, Mr. Speaker. That means two or three or four 
units per school. Mr. Speaker, we have schools that were 
operating under the NDP [New Democratic Party] that had 10, 
12, or more portables added to them. Mr. Speaker, we have 
high-quality relocatables that will be used to handle peak 
enrolment as communities grow and communities mature. Mr. 

Speaker, we’re pleased that these schools will be able to handle 
approximately 3,300 students in Regina, 5,700 students in 
Saskatoon, and an additional 2,100 students in Warman and 
Martensville. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re pleased that we’re able to handle the 
challenges of growth. These schools will, Mr. Speaker, be state 
of the art. They will be able to service community needs and 
look after the communities for years and decades to come. Mr. 
Speaker, we won’t take lessons from the members opposite 
whose ability to build schools was only . . . had more to do with 
building schools in Alberta than building schools in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I know that members on both sides are 
interested in the subject, but perhaps the Minister for 
Government Relations would like to take the opportunity to 
answer. I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, nine new school buildings and 68 
portables, that’s this government’s brilliant plan for meeting the 
needs in growing neighbourhoods in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I gave a quote to the minister and I asked if he agreed or 
disagreed with it, and I didn’t hear a response to it. But I think 
Sask Party members should listen closely to this quote: portable 
classrooms “don’t provide the kind of learning environment we 
need for our students and teachers.” You know who said that, 
Mr. Speaker? The member who said that is the member from 
Swift Current, the Premier. That is who said that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It was the Premier that said that portable classrooms don’t meet 
the needs of students and they don’t meet the needs of teachers. 
And do you know when he said that, Mr. Speaker? He said that, 
Mr. Speaker, when he was announcing nine new schools. It’s 
absolutely ridiculous. So why on earth, Mr. Speaker, would the 
Premier not be building these new schools to an appropriate 
size? Why is he already planning to add 68 portables? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we are pleased that the 
enrolment has gone up in our province. Mr. Speaker, the 
members opposite dealt with enrolment decline. They dealt with 
decay. They dealt with waste. We will have a good program in 
place, Mr. Speaker, and we will certainly have some portables 
on the schools as they open. Relocatable classrooms, Mr. 
Speaker, are used throughout the province. They give the 
divisions flexibility. They allow for growth, and they allow the 
school to contract for its stable growth, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’ll make no apologies for trying to make plans that save 
the taxpayers money, provide good service, safe and secure 
classrooms for our citizens, Mr. Speaker. That’s the goal of this 
government. That’s something that we’re going to continue to 
do, unlike the members opposite who closed 176 schools 
because they chose to move those students to Calgary, 
Edmonton, and elsewhere in Alberta. We’re having those 
people here. They’re moving back, and we’re pleased to have 
them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 



November 4, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7609 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this is a clear example of this 
government’s cookie-cutter approach to these P3 schools 
simply not going to meet the needs of these communities. All 
right now before the schools are built, they are planning to add 
68 portables to these new buildings. Now the minister talked 
about the need for some portables, and I think most people in 
Saskatchewan would say, well maybe it’s reasonable to have 
one or two portables on a school so you can adjust. But that’s 
not the reality that we’re going to be seeing at these new 
schools. 
 
The school in Greens on Gardiner will have 10 portable 
classrooms. Hampton Village will have 12 portables. Harbour 
Landing will have 14 portables, and Stonebridge in Saskatoon 
will have 18 portables attached to it. In total, Mr. Speaker, the 
Sask Party is already planning to add 68 portable classrooms to 
nine new schools, Mr. Speaker, and all of this being planned 
before the schools are actually built. 
 
It’s incredibly ironic because, when the Premier announced 
these new schools, this is what he said about the portables: they 
“don’t provide the kind of learning environment we need for 
our students and teachers.” Straight from the Premier, Mr. 
Speaker. So how can the Premier justify building schools that 
are so inadequate that he is already planning to add 68 
portables? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, there they go again talking 
about P3s. This has nothing whatsoever to do with P3s. This has 
everything to do with education and everything to do with 
enrolment growth and population growth in our province, which 
is something we won’t apologize for because it’s something the 
members opposite never had. What they dealt with, Mr. 
Speaker, was declining enrolment, closing schools, and seeing 
the tail lights of the cars moving away from this province. 
 
That’s something that’s not happening in this province. We are 
dealing with the challenges of a growing population, and, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re doing it with P3 schools that will allow for some 
room for expansion. And, Mr. Speaker, there will be 
relocatables on some of those classrooms, approximately 3.7 
units per school. Some will have more; some will have less. But 
we plan for long-term enrolment. Peak enrolment is slightly 
higher. And that’s the way it’s been, Mr. Speaker, for decades 
in this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister needs to listen to 
what he’s saying. He says, it’s not the P3’s problem, Mr. 
Speaker, its fault. It is its fault because it’s imposing a 
cookie-cutter approach to every community, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s why you have 18 portables being added on to 
Stonebridge school before it is even built. I don’t understand 
how they can’t see how this is a problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve been told that it’s a lot more cost-effective 
just to build a school to an appropriate size rather than adding a 
bunch of portables. But the financial cost is only one 
consideration here. 
 

And I agree with what the Premier said. I agree when he said 
the portables “don’t provide the kind of learning environment 
we need for our students and teachers.” That’s straight from the 
Premier, Mr. Speaker, so I can’t understand why the Premier 
would plow ahead with a plan that means 68 portables will have 
to be added on to nine new schools. They’re planning for this 
before the schools are even built. Will he at least tell us, Mr. 
Speaker, will he at least tell us, how many students will be 
forced to learn in this substandard learning environment 
because of the Premier’s decision? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the use of relocatable 
classrooms allows significant flexibility for divisions to deal 
with changing and increasing and varying enrolment. It has 
been done for decades in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition once again has facts 
wrong and is misconstruing things. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
invite the member opposite and like to invite the Leader of the 
Opposition to go out to some of the schools where there are 
new relocatables in place. The teachers and the students like 
and are comfortable in them because they have their own 
independent heating system, their own electrical system, Mr. 
Speaker. They are roomy. They are comfortable, and we don’t 
have complaints from the people that are there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can advise the members opposite: they closed 
176 schools. They neglected the schools that they didn’t close. 
We’ve invested almost four times what the NDP did into 
schools across the province. Mr. Speaker, when they were in 
government, they drove 35,000 students out of the province — 
35,000 students that aren’t in this province anymore because 
they left under that government. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, earlier on I read a quote from the 
Premier. I asked the minister if he agreed with it or not. The 
Premier said, about portable classrooms, “don’t provide the 
kind of learning environment we need for our students and 
teachers.” My question is to the Education minister. Does he 
agree with that? Yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
underfunded school divisions to the point where there were tax 
revolts in the province. The ratepayer had to pick up the 
education tab. The total budget line for Education has more than 
doubled since 2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re pleased and we’re proud to be adding 18 
new joint-use schools and yes, Mr. Speaker, for a period of time 
there will be relocatable classrooms added to those schools. Mr. 
Speaker, we built those for what we project the long-term 
enrolment of those school divisions to be, and what those 
schools and what those neighbourhoods will contain. And, Mr. 
Speaker, what we have in those neighbourhoods is something 
that’s viable and will work well and service those communities 
for generations to come, Mr. Speaker, unlike the members 
opposite that chose to close and move out 176 schools across 



7610 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2015 

our province. Mr. Speaker, the flexibility that’s there is 
something that needs to be there for the divisions and we’ll 
continue to provide it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Promotion of Carbon Capture and Storage 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday yet again the Premier 
and the SaskPower minister refused to go out to the rotunda to 
face reporters and answer questions on the 1.5 billion carbon 
capture project. Well they’ve got a lot of bluster in the House, 
Mr. Speaker, when they’re surrounded by their pals, but then 
they hide under their desks after question period. 
 
So if they won’t answer the media’s questions, hopefully, 
hopefully they’ll answer questions now. So I have a very 
specific question for the SaskPower minister. What exactly is 
the head of carbon capture selling when he travels the world on 
our dime? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, what Mr. Monea is selling or 
what he is talking to people about around the world is the 
technology that is in use down at Boundary dam 3, Mr. 
Speaker. He’s talking to them about the choices that the 
Government of Saskatchewan took in terms of making a 
decision around this project. 
 
About 44 per cent of the electricity in Saskatchewan is 
generated using coal, Mr. Speaker. So the government and 
SaskPower had a choice to make: do we continue the use of that 
electricity generated with coal or do we shut it down, Mr. 
Speaker? The decision was taken at that point to use the 
technology that’s available, that has been developed, that has 
been brought together by SaskPower through a number of 
sources, Mr. Speaker, to clean up that coal emissions — to 
capture the CO2, to use it in enhanced oil recovery, Mr. 
Speaker, and to demonstrate to the world that the technology, 
while it has some problems, definitely works, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, here’s what we know. We know 
that this government’s head of carbon capture is in Saudi 
Arabia right now and we know that he’s travelled to China, 
Peru, Germany, Poland, the United Kingdom, Holland, Norway, 
Tokyo, the Philippines, Korea, Belgium, Las Vegas, and a 
whole lot more. And we, the people of Saskatchewan, have paid 
for those trips. 
 
This is the explanation for all the trips given by SaskPower, 
their president, yesterday. Now get this, Mr. Speaker. He said, 
“Someday there will be someone who comes knocking on our 
door.” Someday there will be someone who comes knocking on 
our door? To the minister: when this imaginary someone 
knocks on your door someday, what exactly will they be 
buying? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, there have been over 260 
organizations that have sent people to Boundary dam 3, from 
academics to universities from around the world, from small 
companies, from multinational companies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
BHP Billiton just signed an MOU [memorandum of 
understanding] with SaskPower here recently around the 
promotion and the development of carbon capture and storage, 
Mr. Speaker. Obviously I think they would be considered pretty 
significant players in terms of energy generation, electricity 
generation around the world. 
 
If you look at . . . The list goes on and on of companies from 
General Electric, from Global CCS Institute, from the 
international agency, from JCOAL [Japan Coal Energy Center], 
from Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, from the National Energy 
Administration in China, Mr. Speaker. All of those companies 
have come to Saskatchewan, have talked to SaskPower about 
the development of CCS [carbon capture and storage] 
technology, Mr. Speaker. And I think it’s something that the 
province of Saskatchewan is very proud of, the fact that we 
have that type of development going on in Saskatchewan, and 
that we have made that choice, Mr. Speaker, to clean coal up 
rather than shut it down like the NDP will. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the minister can refer to all these 
MOUs, but what’s the bottom line? What are we selling, is the 
question. Where is the money? We know that SaskPower 
doesn’t own the carbon capture technology so we can’t market 
that. And we don’t even have the expertise in making the 
technology work. In fact, we know that the performance of the 
carbon capture plant throughout 2015 has been much worse 
than it was in 2014. So the only real expertise that this 
government had was in spinning this project and pretending that 
everything was on target and going well. And we know that 
bubble burst big time last week when the truth finally came out. 
 
So to the minister: what was sold? What was sold on all those 
international trips, and how much money has been collected for 
the Saskatchewan people as a result? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Well, Mr. Speaker, again what was sold 
was the development of the technology, Mr. Speaker. What was 
sold was the choice that the people of Saskatchewan made 
given the facts that we have 44 per cent of our electricity is 
generated from coal, Mr. Speaker. So we have a choice to make 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Well the choice is obvious, Mr. Speaker. Either we use coal and 
use the technology, carbon capture and storage, sell the CO2 to 
the oil industry and enhance oil recovery, Mr. Speaker, or we 
shut it down. Those are the choices that are before the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Monea’s job is to go around the world at the invitation of 
company after company after company. In Saudi Arabia, in 



November 4, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7611 

Saudi Arabia for example he’s at the invitation of the Saudi 
Arabian government. They’re paying about 75 per cent of the 
cost of his travel and accommodations, Mr. Speaker, attached to 
that travel that he is doing with respect to it. He is talking to 
them about the development of it. He’s talking to them about 
the problems associated with it, and he’s talking to them about 
the future of the project going forward — one that this 
government supports directly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — The government’s head of carbon capture has 
been jet-setting around the world, and the explanation from this 
government is that “someday someone will knock on our door.” 
This is absolutely ludicrous. Why won’t the minister just agree 
to put an end to these wasteful trips immediately, until the 
technology actually works and we have real knowledge and real 
expertise to sell? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the NDP opposite can 
chide the technology all they want. You know, yesterday in the 
legislature, yesterday in the legislature we received a copy of a 
letter that was sent to the Leader of the Opposition from the 
IBEW [International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers] and 
they were asking some very important questions, Mr. Speaker. 
Are the NDP in favour of the use of the technology or would 
they rather shut it down? 
 
And if you go on from there, Mr. Speaker, and you look at 
what’s taking place, well it’s just not the IBEW. It’s not the 
Government of Saskatchewan. In addition to that, in the most 
recent issue of The Estevan Mercury, they talk about a whole 
number of choices that this government has and that they’re 
wondering where the NDP sits. Would you shut it down or 
would you use coal? Would you throw all of those people out of 
a job, Mr. Speaker, or would you keep them employed using the 
technology that’s available, Mr. Speaker? Would you have 
invested those kinds of dollars in this facility, Mr. Speaker, or 
would you not invest those dollars, Mr. Speaker? And what 
would you use to generate electricity in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, if you shut down coal here, resulting in a loss of 44 per 
cent of the electricity that is generated in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In regards to the 
letter the minister refers to from yesterday, we need to make 
something very clear. We do not accept the false choice, 
whether it comes in from a union or from the government, 
because we know that Saskatchewan people know we can clean 
up our electricity sector and deliver tons of good jobs for 
Saskatchewan workers. It’s not an either/or. 
 
The question is, where is the business plan for this project? And 
we have asked, and we’ll ask again. Will this government 
reconvene the Crown and Central Agencies Committee so we 
can get to the bottom of the business plan and where the 
money’s going on this project? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Nutana can be as dismissive of the importance of the jobs to the 
people down at the . . . that are represented by the IBEW as she 
would like to be. 
 
When she talks about false choices, there’s no false choice at 
all, Mr. Speaker. The choice is very simple. Do we continue the 
use of coal? Do we continue the use of coal for generating 
electricity in Saskatchewan as the IBEW supports, Mr. 
Speaker? Or do we make a different choice, and that’s shut it 
down, throw all those people out of work, Mr. Speaker, at 
Estevan down there, make sure that they don’t have a job into 
the future, Mr. Speaker. Make the choice. 
 
That’s the choice that’s before the people of Saskatchewan. Do 
we create . . . Do we add 120,000 new wind turbines or 200,000 
acres of solar panels as is suggested in The Estevan Mercury? 
That’s the choice that the people of Saskatchewan have in front 
of them, Mr. Speaker. That’s the choice that we accept, Mr. 
Speaker. We chose Boundary dam carbon capture and storage, 
and we’ll continue to make that choice. The NDP have a choice 
to make as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Usage of Health Facilities 
 
Ms. Chartier: — City Hospital was designed to have 309 beds. 
It now has just 173 beds, the vast majority of which are 
transitional care, convalescent, and rehabilitation beds. This has 
long been a major irritant for the people of Saskatoon and 
throughout Saskatchewan. But it’s especially frustrating when 
we hear that, instead of properly using City Hospital, this 
government’s solution to hospital overcrowding is to send 
seniors far away, including to Wadena, 208 kilometres from 
Saskatoon. How can the Health minister justify this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would just say that the offer that has been made to some people 
that are waiting in Saskatoon in an acute care bed that have 
been deemed to be long-term care residents and are awaiting 
long-term care placement, they are being offered space. And 
they, in fact, are being offered some additional incentive 
including mileage for a family member to visit them once a 
week, a reduction or no fees for long-term care — I believe up 
to including a month; I’ve heard as high as perhaps three 
months — which, Mr. Speaker, actually is a better offer than 
what was offered under the NDP when they actually 
implemented the first-available bed policy in this province. 
 
This is the policy that goes back to the NDP. It’s a policy that’s 
been put in place in every single constituency that members on 
this side of the House represent, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
want to ensure that people, that residents in long-term care have 
the care that they need. That care is better provided in long-term 
care as opposed to a hospital bed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And with respect to Saskatoon City Hospital, that hospital is a 



7612 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2015 

fully functioning hospital. It serves the people of Saskatoon 
very well. If the members opposite want to see a hospital that 
isn’t a hospital anymore, I’d invite the Leader of the Opposition 
to jump into his van and take a drive down Wascana Parkway. 
He’d see a hospital that’s not properly used. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, my own dad was in the hospital 
this summer. As a family, we were able to check on him several 
times a day, making sure he had the company and the support 
that he needed. It was devastating to me to imagine how it 
would have affected him and our family if he was two hours 
away. He’s a selfless man, and like many seniors, if a health 
professional told him that someone sicker needed his bed, he 
would feel terrible. I don’t think any family should be put 
through this. 
 
To the Health minister: why won’t this government fix the 
overcrowding problem, starting by properly using City Hospital 
instead of shipping seniors 200 kilometres away? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I can say that in our major cities in this province, we 
have in fact opened up more rooms for more beds in this 
province, including in Regina where, in our hospitals, on 
average, the number of beds are up in the neighbourhood of 8 to 
12 per cent. The same is true in Saskatoon. We’ve actually 
taken rooms that were storage rooms under the NDP — prior to 
the NDP they were actually hospital rooms; they became 
storage rooms under the NDP — and we’ve actually had to 
reopen those rooms for the benefit of our patients. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it is hard to stand to listen to the NDP 
opposite talk about a policy that was put in place in Five Hills 
under the member from Lakeview; in Sun Country, my health 
region, under the member from Lakeview; in Sunrise under the 
member from Lakeview; Heartland, the member from 
Lakeview; Prairie North, the member from Lakeview; Cypress 
Health Region, the former member for The Battlefords, Len 
Taylor, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a policy that has been put in place, and the city of 
Saskatoon, Saskatoon Health Region is going to try to 
accommodate as many patients as they can in the most 
appropriate space, including using, better utilizing facilities in 
that health region. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair for the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
instructed by the Standing Committee on Human Services to 
report Bill No. 179, The MRI Facilities Licensing Act without 
amendment. 

The Speaker: — When shall the bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill, and that 
the bill be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has requested leave to 
waive consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 
179, The MRI Facilities Licensing Act without amendment, and 
that the bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . Was there a no? The minister may proceed with third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 179 — The MRI Facilities Licensing Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Health 
that Bill No. 179, The MRI Facilities Licencing Act without 
amendment be now read the third time and passed under its 
title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of PAC [Public 
Accounts Committee]. 
 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by 
the Standing Committee on Public Accounts to present its 
second report which reflects the work of the committee for the 
period December 12th, 2011 to September 17th, 2015. I move: 
 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 
Public Accounts be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of Public 
Accounts Committee: 
 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 
Public Accounts now be concurred in. 



November 4, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7613 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 187 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 187 — The 
Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 2015 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
indeed as always it’s my honour to be able to rise in the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan and enter into debate on 
bills that are being presented by the government for 
consideration. 
 
This bill is . . . I think there is one way to sum up this bill, and 
it’s too little too late, Mr. Speaker, and particularly the too late 
part. And I will definitely get into that in the course of my 
comments this afternoon. 
 
But firstly maybe a brief explanation from my perspective of 
what I think this bill is trying to do. We have a minister who 
decided to consult with people on a topic that’s been, you know, 
of considerable debate at least since I was elected in 2011 and I 
know before that as well. It was no surprise I think in terms of 
the results of the commentary that the government received. I 
think what was surprising is the way the government went 
about doing this, and they waited until this summer and over the 
summer period to conduct an online survey which basically told 
them what I’ve been hearing all along. 
 
And I was a bit disappointed when I think the minister was 
quoted in The Western Producer about why he didn’t want to 
go with public meetings, and he was talking about how public 
meetings were messy. And you know for me, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s what democracy’s all about is those messy conversations 
that we have to have amongst our peers, amongst our friends, 
our colleagues, amongst our clients, amongst our voters, 
amongst politicians, amongst partisan groups. And I think 
public debate is one, which we’re engaging in right now, is one 
that’s incredibly important to the advancement of ideas that 
reflect what’s going on in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve received some criticism from many different avenues on 
this bill. In general though I think the closing of the loophole to 
restrict investment entities like the Canada Pension Plan 
Investment Board is certainly one that was necessary. It was 
obviously not within the spirit of the existing law when it was 

passed back in the ’70s, nor was it in the spirit of the major 
amendments to the law when it was changed in I think 2002 or 
2003. So that is something that needed to be fixed, and we are 
in total agreement on that piece of the bill. 
 
I think what’s really questionable in this case was the fact that 
the Minister of Agriculture consulted with the Ministry of 
Justice, was advised that what the Assiniboia Farmland was 
attempting to do was within the four squares of the law, but that 
it was clearly not intended by the original mandate of this bill 
and what the farm security Act was attempting to do. 
 
[14:30] 
 
So I think, and this will always bother me, is why didn’t 
Minister Stewart introduce the regulations back three years 
ago? The Minister of Agriculture. I apologize for that, Mr. 
Speaker. The Minister of Agriculture, why didn’t he go back to 
those regulations three or four years ago? Because it was public 
knowledge that this amount of land . . . The Assiniboia 
Farmland had gathered over 100,000 acres of land at the request 
of the investment board, and the investment board were trying 
to acquire a large chunk of land. That makes sense for an 
investment board because they want large investments. That’s 
their business; that’s their mandate. 
 
But the minister knew that this was happening. He knew that 
this land was being amassed for that exact purpose, and I think 
they made probably around $40 an acre on that sale. So it’s a 
huge profit for Assiniboia Farmland, and it was happening right 
before the minister’s eyes. And he decided not to introduce 
regulations to stop that kind of activity until after the sale went 
through. 
 
And I just want to be clear on the record for that, Mr. Speaker. I 
think that was intentional and I think it was unfortunate. And I 
think it is a sign where the minister’s allegiances lie, and we 
have to really question why he didn’t step in sooner. And I 
think that was the biggest, the biggest mistake this minister has 
made as the Agriculture minister. 
 
I’m not sure who’s instructing him or who he is taking his 
advice from, but clearly that option to introduce those 
regulations could have been done years ago. It didn’t have to 
happen in May of this year, after the deal went through. So I 
think we’re going to live with that one for a long time. The 
horse is out of the barn. There’s little way for the minister to go 
back on that deal, and I think we’re stuck with having a large 
institutional investor like the Canada Pension Plan as a major 
landowner in Saskatchewan for many years to come. 
 
In terms of the bill itself, there are a number of minor changes, 
some cleanup. And I think we have to keep in mind, Mr. 
Speaker, that part VI of the farm security Act is the part where 
farm land acquisitions are dealt with. But this is about farm 
security. This is the name of the bill. And the original part of 
the bill that was dealing with farm security was back in the ’80s 
when everyone recalls the real crisis in farm finances. It was a 
terrible time. Interest rates were at 17 per cent. I remember 
working in the credit union in Lafleche in 1981, and farmers 
were paying 17 per cent interest on their mortgages and on their 
farm loans. 
 



7614 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2015 

And so as a result, and we all know the story, many people 
faced bankruptcy. And this bill was introduced for a way to 
protect farmers, to at least keep their home quarter so that they 
weren’t about to lose everything in that terrible time. So much 
of the bill really deals with farm land security in terms of 
keeping farmers on the land as best we can and helping them 
through financial crisis like the one they experienced in the 
1980s. So those are there and if, God forbid, those situations 
arise again, we know that that part of the Act is there as an 
assistance for farmers in Saskatchewan. 
 
But part VI of The Saskatchewan Farm Security Act is the part 
that deals with farm land ownership, and so most of the changes 
in the bill are — any changes other than those to part VI — are 
minor changes. There’s some gender neutral language that’s 
being introduced in quite a number of clauses. There’s some 
references, you know, corrected. Instead of Farm Credit 
Corporation, it’s now Farm Credit Canada. There’s other minor 
corrections that are being made. 
 
We know that there’s references to the Farm Tenure Arbitration 
Board now which was new, a correction to the bill. And there’s 
things like definitions of mortgage that are being changed, and a 
few other changes. But that’s the sort of side effect of having 
this bill come through. And I know often individuals in the 
Ministry of Justice take a look when a bill is being amended for 
substantive policy changes. They also go through the Act and 
see if other changes are needed. 
 
So in terms of part VI, there’s a few substantive changes that 
are being proposed here. I just want to go through them a little 
bit. First of all, the definition of agricultural corporation has 
been repealed, and that’s in section 76 of the bill. So what we 
find is that it’s actually found within the other parts of the bill 
that’s coming forward. They’ve also struck out what a 
Canadian-owned . . . Well they’ve kept “Canadian-owned 
entity” but they’ve struck out the reference to an agricultural 
corporation and now it’s just: 
 

(i) a corporation or any other entity in which . . . shares 
or interests are legally and beneficially owned, and all 
the memberships are held, by resident persons or other 
Canadian-owned entities. 

 
but does not include any person or class of persons 
prescribed in the regulations. 

 
So what we have here now is a bump from the description of 
what a Canadian-owned entity is. It’s being bumped down to 
the regulations, and again we don’t have those regulations in 
front of us today, Mr. Speaker. So we don’t exactly know what 
that meaning, what Canadian-owned entity is going to mean 
until we see the regulations that this government will introduce. 
 
One question I do have for the minister is on the definition of 
farm land, because that’s actually defined in both parts of the 
Act — the farm land security Act portion of farm land and the 
one in farm ownership. And it’s just curious to me why they 
didn’t use the same definition, and certainly that’s something 
I’ll want to raise with the minister in committee. But right now 
we see in addition to the definition of farm land in part VI, 
which includes land use primarily for sand and gravel extraction 
. . . So that’s an exemption to the definition of farm land. That 

exemption doesn’t exist in the first part, and I’m not sure if that 
was intentional or if it was an oversight. So that’s one question 
I’ll have for the minister once we get into committee on this. 
 
I think the most important change in this bill is the amendments 
to section 76(e), which is the definition of land holding. And in 
this case the land holding that we are looking at, the change is, 
in particular, in (e)(iii) where there are interests in farm land 
held under other agreements. So what this is, is the land holding 
includes — and I’m going to read this to you, Mr. Speaker — 
land holding includes: 
 

any interest in farm land held under any agreement that 
may directly or indirectly: 

 
result in vesting of title to farm land; 
 
confer the right to possession of farm land; 
 
confer any right or control ordinarily accruing to the 
owner of farm land. 

 
Now what the minister is doing is extending this. There’s two 
new sections here; (D) is the proposed amendment: “confer the 
right of obtaining the right of capital appreciation in the farm 
land.” It’s a very big change, and I think it’s one that’s an 
important change. Or “(E) confer any other right that is 
prescribed in the regulations.” 
 
So once again we have a movement from the bill to the 
regulatory realm, and again we have no opportunity to comment 
on that. So we don’t know what that other right might look like, 
but the minister is certainly reserving the right to add other 
types of interests or other types of rights in this definition of 
land holding. We don’t have any indication from the minister 
what that might look like, but once again, we’ll have to keep an 
eye on the regulations as they go through. 
 
There is also a new definition of what an entity is. And 
basically this definition describes . . . I’ll describe it for you. It 
says: 
 

“(c.1) ‘entity’ includes: 
(i) a partnership; 
(ii) a syndicate; 
(iii) a joint venture; 
(iv) a co-operative; 
(v) an association; 
(vi) a pension plan; 
(vii) a trust; and 
(viii) any other body that is prescribed in the 
regulations”. 

 
So once again we have the regulatory description as well. But 
the entity provisions were basically in the Canadian-owned 
entity description previously, but now they’re a separate 
description or definition with the regs, or within the bill itself. 
 
The other change is a change to the definition of . . . I think that 
we’re still on the definition of land holding. It’s near the end of 
land holding, and this is an exception to the definition of land 
holding. It says: 
 



November 4, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7615 

“but does not include farm land or any interest in farm land 
held by way of security for a debt or other obligations [and 
here’s a change] unless the debt or other obligation is of a 
class prescribed in the regulations.” 

 
So once again we have another reference to moving the 
definitions to the regulatory sphere, which means it is very 
difficult to enter into debate on those regulations when we have 
no opportunity to see them or get a chance to review them 
before Executive Council decides to pass them. 
 
We see that again in terms of the resident person. What is the 
definition of a resident person? For decades it has been 
someone who resides in Canada for 183 days in a year and is a 
Canadian citizen. It’s a pretty straightforward definition. But for 
some reason, the ministry is now saying, no, we don’t want the 
definition of resident person to be found within the Act, and 
they’re moving it to a definition of a person prescribed in the 
regulations. 
 
So again we have this transition of sort of the meat and potatoes 
of the bill that seems to be being moved over to the regulatory 
sphere, and that’s concerning, Mr. Speaker. We are always kind 
of trying to have the debate as public as possible, and when we 
see this happening, it’s frustrating. So it’s hard to comment on. 
 
There are a number of other changes to part VI. Section 85.1 is 
actually entirely repealed now, and it is being replaced. 
Actually it’s being repealed; 85.1, 86, and 87 are entirely 
repealed. And these were the sections that deal with an 
agricultural corporation and Saskatchewan resident, and also 
limited partnership landholding prohibited. So we’re not exactly 
sure what that means, and we’ll have many questions for the 
officials when we get to committee on this bill. 
 
And then 87.1 is also being repealed or, sorry, section 87 in its 
entirety. And this is some other exemptions that don’t apply . . . 
Or it’s exemptions to section 86. So because 86 is repealed, 
then 87 is redundant. So those are complicated sections that I 
think we need to have a good conversation with the officials on 
when it comes time to look at these bills in detail. 
 
I think another main new section that we’re talking about here 
is the new proposed section 90, which is statutory declaration 
regarding landholdings. This is one that causes me some 
concern, although, Mr. Speaker, I’m not opposed to the concept 
of having the board direct anyone to provide a statutory 
declaration, setting out anything in the regs that the board might 
require. And you know, it’s all good and right to have a fine if 
they refuse to provide the statutory declaration. 
 
What I understand when I talk to people who are involved in 
the land investment business in Saskatchewan is that there are 
very sophisticated money arrangements that can be made that 
affect the de facto control of ownership in Saskatchewan farm 
land. There are some very sophisticated schemes out there. 
They’re referred to by one of the persons I talked to as a swap. 
And I’m no financial expert, Mr. Speaker, but I trust when this 
person tells me — who is a financial expert and deals in a lot of 
farm land — that these swaps are very sophisticated but that the 
de facto control of the ownership of land may rest with 
someone other than the individual whose name is on the title. If 
people are controverting the intent of the bill to that extent, I’m 

not . . . It brings me cold comfort to know that they provide a 
statutory declaration to that effect. 
 
So I was hoping to see more tools for the Farm Land Security 
Board to actually peer behind the title and into the financial 
arrangements to have a better sense of how the arrangements 
are being handled. And we don’t see it going that far. As I say, 
having a statutory declaration is a step in the right direction. 
And I know that when I spoke to Mr. Folk from the Farm Land 
Security Board that they’re feeling that this is a very useful tool 
for them. And I appreciate that, but I still think, based on the 
discussions I’ve had, that there has to be a way to peer behind 
the curtain of the title and see exactly where the arrangements 
are, because these stories are out there. 
 
And I know the minister hired a special investigator a couple of 
years ago. Sadly we haven’t been able to see the report. The 
minister won’t release it. Although the special investigator said 
they could find no wrongdoing, I think part of the problem is 
because there was no way for them to find the wrongdoing. 
They didn’t have the tools they needed to examine these really 
complex financial arrangements and these swaps that are 
alleged to be in place in Saskatchewan. 
 
When you have something as valuable as our farm land out 
there, I think it’s attractive to all kinds of investors who want to 
make sure that they can get in on the action. So people are 
sophisticated. There are many ways to subvert the law. We saw 
that with the investment board for Canada Pension Plan where 
they found a way to use a loophole to be able to purchase a lot 
of land in Saskatchewan all in one fell swoop. And certainly the 
commentary from all sides of the political spectrum questioned 
whether or not or why not, I mean, that these things should be 
happening. 
 
I just have a collection of a number of comments that we’ve 
received, and I’m hoping I brought them with me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another concern that we’ve heard and is one thing this 
government avoided completely was talking about the 
exemptions that are available for potash mines right now. And 
we have two examples here, well more than two, but 
particularly BHP and Yancoal, both of whom have received 
exemptions to purchase really large chunks of land, I think up 
over 6,000 or close to 6,000 acres. This is well beyond the 320 
or 160 acres — I can’t remember if it’s two quarters or one 
quarter — exemption that currently exists for that type of 
purchase. And of course this is all in the name of potash mining 
and expanding it. 
 
[14:45] 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it’s been suggested to me that there’s a bit of 
a backwards approach to this and perhaps the potash industry 
should have to demonstrate the project to the community first 
before being granted the exemption. I get emails frequently on 
these. The Yancoal proposal, I think the people, the local people 
in those communities like Strasbourg are feeling very left out of 
the discussion and very much concerned about what they see as 
being rammed down their throats in terms of a very large 
organization, very large potash mine, being plunked down in 
the middle of their community. 
 



7616 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2015 

Secondly, when you’re able to buy that amount of land, 
obviously there’s a profit and there’s a competition factor that 
would be very difficult for young farmers in the area to be able 
to compete with BHP, one of the world’s most financially 
successful mining companies. Yancoal, as we know, is also a 
huge financial operation, a mining operation. And so for a 
young farmer from Strasbourg to be able to stand up to BHP 
and enter a bidding war on land, it’s really hard to imagine that 
that creates a level playing field in any stretch of the 
imagination. 
 
Another thing that I think we’re concerned about, and we didn’t 
see any changes in this bill, is the huge benefit that these 
investment-type purchases get from buying Saskatchewan farm 
land. We know that in I think it was 2011, this government 
introduced changes to our education taxes so that farm land 
owners get a benefit or are no longer required to pay the 
education portion of their property taxes in the same way they 
did before. So we are benefiting and it’s okay to benefit 
Saskatchewan farmers with Saskatchewan taxpayers’ dollars 
and for Saskatchewan education, but I find it hard to understand 
how that is something that’s made available to investors from 
outside of Saskatchewan. So that’s something I think that we’re 
going to have to ask the minister about when we get this into 
committee as well. 
 
I don’t think I brought with me the commentaries that I received 
. . . Oh no, here they are. There’s some concerns. This is from 
the chamber of commerce actually who wrote a letter to the 
minister back in October, just recently on October 21st, once 
they’ve had an opportunity. Now this is typically a group that is 
aligned closely with this government but they have a number of 
concerns themselves about this bill, and I’m just not sure why 
the minister wouldn’t be responding to their concerns. Not that 
I’m saying I’m concerned about it, but I think it’s of great 
interest that the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce is very 
concerned about this bill, and it sort of makes you wonder about 
the popular type of approach this government takes to its 
decision making. 
 
So we have here a challenge raised by the chamber of 
commerce, and they’re asking the minister, they’re saying, 
“Agriculture is capital-intense and needs access to investment 
pools . . .” I’m quoting this, by the way: 
 

Agriculture is capital-intense and needs access to 
investment pools to evolve and achieve its natural 
potential. Do we have good estimates of the possible 
capital requirements of the farm and ranch sector over the 
next 15 years, and an understanding of what restrictions 
may mean? 

 
I think this is a very good question, and what it asks is, has the 
government done its homework? Has it done the research to 
understand exactly what is going to happen to available sources 
of capital for farmers to take up farming? And although, you 
know, there’s a flip side to that question definitely, Mr. 
Speaker, I think it’s an interesting question for them to be 
asking. 
 
There’s also concerns expressed by the Saskatchewan Chamber 
of Commerce on the principles of limitation, and I’ll quote this 
one. This is a quote: “Creating a new restriction raises the 

question of how future demands to regulate or modify other 
large investors interested in farm land could anticipate being 
treated.” So they’re worried about that. That’s the end of the 
quote. I’ll go on; I’ll continue to quote: 
 

Should they be concerned about possible further changes 
impacting their financial commitment to the province, we 
begin to risk a chill on inflow of capital that could clearly 
be required to support the development and 
competitiveness of a major industry. A further concern is 
the signal that additional restrictions sends to investors in 
other sectors of the economy. It’s important to invest 
political capital in principles that lead to good outcomes 
rather than to hoard that capital and concede in the contest 
for public opinion. 

 
So we see the chamber of commerce challenging this 
government on their concession to public opinion and certainly, 
you know, one has to ask the question, has the government 
actually done their homework? Do they understand the impact 
of these changes on future acquisitions and the capital pool and 
the access to capital? So these are concerns that are being raised 
by the chamber of commerce. This again is a letter of October 
21st to the minister. 
 
There is another one that I could share with you, and this is a 
quote regarding younger farmers: 
 

Renting is a common strategy among those entering 
farming. Roughly a third of land in production now is 
rented. Stable, non-interventionist investors would seem an 
ideal source of capital for new farmers to call on as they 
begin to establish their own operations. We do not see how 
this move will help address the lack of equity in young 
farmers — seen by many to be the most significant 
challenge — and their respective growth plans. 

 
So again, Mr. Speaker, I don’t necessarily agree with these 
comments but I want to raise them for the record in terms of my 
role in raising the questions that are being positioned to the 
government of the day. 
 
And another letter that just came in on November . . . It was I 
think a little earlier, October 20th. And this is from a farmer in 
the Colonsay area, and he is concerned about the changes that 
are being proposed as well. He says that . . . Here’s the quote. 
This is from a farmer in Colonsay: 
 

After trying to have discussions with elected officials and 
the Farm Land Security Board, I always received the 
generic responses and the lack of willingness to admit 
there was a problem or willingness to do something about 
it. With the survey I was hopeful but from the first page I 
knew this wasn’t what it should be intended for as the 
“statistics” tried too hard to prove it was still Saskatchewan 
land. 

 
And I’m going to carry on quoting: 
 

One “statistic” that sticks out is that 80 per cent of the land 
sold was farmer to farmer, but looking at the fine print it 
was taken from three individual months. Three chosen 
months by someone does not make a reliable statistic. In 



November 4, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7617 

my RM, I would bet non-farmers own close to 50 per cent 
of it. Alberta has relaxed rules and look what has happened 
there. The family farms got sold to larger corporations for 
excessive amounts of money and they come here, buy 
more, and do it all over again. On Saskatchewan people’s 
back. 

 
This farmer goes on to say: 
 

Do you have any idea how disheartening it is to have a 
non-local business make forever lasting decisions on the 
area and landscape of fourth generation homesteads? As 
Mark Folk from the Farm Land Security Board said when 
questioned about the dissatisfaction of locals having BHP 
come into the area to yet forever change the landscape [this 
is from Mark Folk now, a quote within a quote], “If they 
aren’t wanted there, then I suppose locals won’t sell to 
them.” 

 
He goes on to say: 
 

Theoretically this could be true, [but] not when you have 
an investor owning a large portion of land. Part of the tract 
of land BHP wanted was over a homesteaded yard site 
where all three boys actively farm. When they refused, 
BHP went to the Alberta investor (majority owned parcel) 
and moved half a mile over. Their landscape is lost, their 
expansion dreams are lost, the aesthetics of their land is 
lost, and they and everyone else around will have to put up 
with noise, light, and environmental pollution. All because 
of the decision of someone in another province. 

 
This letter goes on. I know that the Premier responded to this 
farmer in a letter on November 2nd. It talked about balancing 
the competing interests here. This certainly is an issue about 
balancing of competing interests. But I think I’m not sure the 
government has done enough homework to really understand 
the impact of these. 
 
I know that there was a paper released I think in early of this 
year, maybe February, by some researchers, and I’m going to 
try and find the reference to that paper. And what they’re saying 
is that . . . Yes, this is a paper that was presented in Saskatoon 
and it was published in the January edition of the Canadian 
journal of food studies. 
 
And what these people have found . . . And this is just the 
beginning of the research. When we met with them earlier this 
year, Mr. Speaker, that was their main concern is that there just 
isn’t enough analysis of the data. This phenomenon of farm 
land purchasing for investment purposes really started around 
2007, 2008. And so there isn’t enough time or research 
available yet to really understand the impact of this 
phenomenon and that’s the concern that these researchers have 
raised. 
 
What the Leader-Post story on November 28th of 2014 said 
was that . . . And this is by, from the Leader-Post, Jason 
Warick. It says, “Some rural municipalities have seen a 20-fold 
increase in corporate land ownership since 1994. Three 
corporations each now own more than 100,000 acres [of land].” 
 
And we know who those folks are — this is no surprise — and 

certainly they’re well known in many communities in 
Saskatchewan. It’s also well known that they don’t live in 
Saskatchewan and that creates concerns for community 
continuity and community strengths. And that’s part of the 
research that needs to be undertaken. 
 
The researcher, Annette Desmarais, said, “We’re just beginning 
to understand what the impacts are. It makes it very difficult to 
build community in that environment.” And they go on to say, 
for example, “In the RMs of Harris, Lajord and Excel, less than 
3,200 acres were owned by investors or ‘farmer/investor 
hybrids’ in 1994.” So only 3,200 acres in 1994. Twenty years 
later it’s 59,000 acres. So from 3,000 to 59,000 acres. 
 
These people are alleging that this type of growth in the farm 
lands obviously “. . . exacerbates the decline of some rural 
communities. [Generally] the investors don’t live in the areas 
where they own land, their kids don’t go to the local school, 
they don’t contribute as much to the local economy, and they 
aren’t part of the town’s social life.” 
 
And these are the kinds of comments that came out quite clearly 
in the online survey that the minister sanctioned as well. We 
know that the one largest landowner that we know of in 
Saskatchewan is Robert Andjelic, and he holds in Saskatchewan 
161,000 acres, Mr. Speaker. That’s a very, very large area. And 
when he was interviewed he actually said he now owns around 
180,000 acres. He’s from Manitoba, lives in Alberta, but he has 
180,000 acres in Saskatchewan. He doesn’t live here. And he’s 
defending what he’s done but he’s talking about efficiencies, 
and we know those are important for our farms, and certainly 
that’s been happening since farming started in Saskatchewan 
over 100 years ago. 
 
At any rate, there’s lots of questions being raised. I think the 
point is there’s a lot of research that still needs to be done. 
There are a lot of questions that need to be asked. There are 
concerns from all sides of the political spectrum for sure about 
this issue. It’s an important issue to Saskatchewan people. And 
we heard the minister talk about farm land being a strategic 
resource. So we know this government has declared potash as a 
strategic resource. Now we see farm land being treated as a 
strategic resource, but it’s in a very different context, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And again I would like to, you know, suggest that this 
government needs to do a little more research, that maybe this 
is only the beginning of the investigation into the farm land 
sales and the impact to Saskatchewan. We know that most land 
in Saskatchewan is still owned by Saskatchewan farms. My 
brothers were a corporate farm because they incorporated as 
two shareholders, and they owned their own farm. 
 
An Hon. Member: — In Lafleche. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — In Lafleche, Saskatchewan. That’s right. And 
you know, took over the farm from my dad, who took it over 
from his dad, came out in 1909 to homestead here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And so it’s not about the fact that they chose that business 
vehicle to become, to conduct their business. They were a 
corporate farm. It was MGD Farms. Merle, Garth, and David 



7618 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2015 

was the name of my dad and my two brothers, so MGD Farms 
Inc. was the vehicle they chose to do their business. But they’re 
not . . . I think their maximum holdings may have been around 
15 or 20 quarter sections of land, some of which was land bank 
land that actually got my brother into farming successfully in 
the ’70s. So we’re ever thankful for that as well and that 
program. So it was a successful career for my brother and a 
very good procedure for them to be able to enter into farming, 
and we’re very thankful for that. 
 
So in some ways, you know, these changes I think were 
necessary. As I said at the very outset, it was too late. We 
needed these changes much sooner, and it’s unfortunate that 
Assiniboia Farmland got the loophole that they did. They made 
several million dollars off this deal, and plus they continue to 
make money off of it by being the vehicle . . . Obviously the 
investment board doesn’t have a lot of farmers kicking around 
on their investment board, so we have the Assiniboia Farmland 
continuing to farm the land, continuing to make money off of it 
because they happened to find an investment board that was 
willing to take on that kind of capital investment. They had the 
money. And you know, when you think about it, it’s taxpayers’ 
after-tax dollars that are being used to invest in farm land which 
creates a bit of an inequity in and of itself. 
 
We are glad to see that the loophole’s closed. It certainly better 
reflects on the spirit and intent of the original bill and the 
changes in 2002. I certainly want to thank all the people who 
have contacted me and raised this issue with me. I think there’s 
a lot of people who care passionately about this issue. And 
we’ll continue to see further debate as we go along, but I think 
it’s time for us to take a very close look at the changes with the 
officials and the minister and to make sure that we ask the right 
questions in committee. So, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s the 
extent of my comments at this point in time. 
 
[15:00] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the Minister of Agriculture that Bill No. 187, The 
Saskatchewan Farm Security Act, 2015 be now read a second 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move that this bill be referred to the Committee on 
the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 188 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 188 — The Best 
Value in Procurement Act, 2015 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
[Applause] 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — It’s an honour to be recognized by those 
members in this way, Mr. Speaker, and I’m happy to get over 
the boards and go for a skate on Bill No. 188, An Act to amend 
certain Acts respecting Awarding of Contracts. 
 
Now this bill in essence is dealing with the debate around 
procurement, Mr. Speaker, and this has been an important 
debate in this province. I know the discussion that was just 
being had by the member from Nutana related to foreign 
acquisition of farm land and the concern that had long been 
dismissed, and then the delayed action of this government 
relating to concerns around foreign entities, foreign 
corporations purchasing farm land, finding certain structures, 
swaps, and schemes that allowed them to skirt the Farm Land 
Security Board rules, a Farm Land Security Board that hadn’t 
been given the tools that they required to enforce the law of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And we had a government that stubbornly refused to listen to 
Saskatchewan people who were talking about this matter all 
across Saskatchewan and dismissal, dismissal, and then a delay 
of action. Meanwhile the entities and the foreign acquisitions 
that were being alleged could have had a significant impact, 
may have had a significant impact in the province. And 
certainly those quite close to members opposite, quite close to 
cabinet members opposite acquired, you know, well over 
100,000 acres and then had the Canada Pension Plan acquire 
those lands, all in . . . that certainly have some outstanding 
questions for the government opposite. 
 
So we see that same sort of approach relate to the simplistic, 
naive approach of procurement from this government. What we 
saw for a long period of time, as Saskatchewan companies were 
making calls and speaking out and calling for a more effective 
procurement model, we saw a government dismiss the issue for 
a long period of time, delay the action that was required, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But what I’d like to say to Saskatchewan companies and to 
industry groups: it’s been a pleasure to work directly with you 
on this matter. You know, certainly we’ve had many, many 
conversations and meetings with those in all sorts of different 
industry, specific businesses and industry leaders, businesses, 
Mr. Speaker, that have skin in the game, that are driving, key 
drivers within this economy, who have made investments in this 
province, who have workers in this province, who also pay 
taxes in this province, Mr. Speaker, and who are building their 
lives in communities across Saskatchewan. 
 
And it was more than troubling, Mr. Speaker, to see a 
government dismiss their concerns that they’ve been noting 
with this government as it relates to the current government’s 
approach to procurement, Mr. Speaker, at a time where we 
should have been ensuring there was at least a fair shot, a level 
playing field for Saskatchewan companies, Mr. Speaker. 
 



November 4, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7619 

So this file goes back a little bit. You know, there’s some 
progress that we can note and we’ll spend some time in 
committee and certainly will give credit where credit is due and 
when it’s due. But I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, it’s been incredibly 
frustrating to watch a government dig in and to dismiss the real 
and valid concerns of businesses across this province and to 
delay actions, all while that government has doled out contract 
after contract after contract, Mr. Speaker. And we’re not talking 
small dollars, Mr. Speaker. We’re talking industries all across 
this province and we’re talking about communities and 
businesses that haven’t had the opportunity to bid, haven’t had 
the opportunity to participate in building Saskatchewan the way 
that they should be. 
 
We’ve seen a government that’s been far too willing to adopt a 
model of selling out that opportunity that’s rightfully deserved 
to Saskatchewan businesses and Saskatchewan workers, Mr. 
Speaker, that haven’t been focused on what truly matters in 
ensuring we can build the strength in this economy that we 
deserve and, most importantly, Mr. Speaker, deliver best value 
for taxpayers. 
 
And I would commend, I would commend all of those 
individuals that have made the phone call and spent the time 
and sat down with myself or others within the opposition, and 
certainly those as well, and these are companies and also 
industry groups, but also those that participated in the recent 
process of government and had provided input to improve 
procurement in Saskatchewan and to arrive at the bill that we 
have here today. 
 
And you know, I’d certainly like to recognize some of these 
industry groups. I’ll leave specific businesses out of mention 
because I know they don’t appreciate necessarily having, you 
know, being noted or singled out. There are sometimes 
concerns when they’re speaking out that government may act in 
a vindictive way, and I respect that. And I wouldn’t and I would 
never urge an individual business to do anything in a public 
way outside of what their comforts are. 
 
But the industry groups that have certainly spoken out and 
worked with government to arrive at this bill, I’d like to 
recognize and thank their efforts, and certainly the member 
companies within those associations: the Saskatchewan 
Construction Association, the Saskatchewan Heavy 
Construction Association, the Manufacturing Council, the 
NSBA [North Saskatoon Business Association], Mr. Speaker, 
the Consulting Engineers, Merit consulting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The list goes on for the industry groups who represent their 
members that have contributed to this process. And I say thank 
you to them. I also say thank you to them for the work they do 
in this province representing their members day in, day out — 
key drivers within our economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I do want to recognize the businesses that have spoken out and 
identified key concerns with procurement over the past number 
of years — the reality of businesses that are still phoning and 
still reaching out to share the reality of what’s going on under 
this current government, Mr. Speaker, and all of the concern 
over this government putting taxpayers on the hook to foreign 
corporation after foreign corporation after foreign corporation 
with literally hundreds of millions of dollars of taxpayers’ 

money, Mr. Speaker, when we have Saskatchewan companies, 
Mr. Speaker, who deserve a fair shot and deserve to be a part of 
that process. 
 
So this matter needs a resolution. It needs a government that’s 
going to look to Saskatchewan companies with the respect that 
they deserve. And taxpayers deserve a government that’s going 
to ensure value for taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We can see that this is a government, Mr. Speaker, that 
dismissed action on this issue, dismissed the concern, delayed 
action, all while letting contract after contract after contract. 
And we can think of just some of those, Mr. Speaker, massive 
contracts. We’ve got this Paris outfit, Mr. Speaker, from Paris, 
France, if you can imagine, connected into this massive bypass 
contract, Mr. Speaker, which isn’t yet delivering the safety that 
those on Highway No. 1 East deserve, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A contract, Mr. Speaker, you know, that just a couple years ago 
the government opposite said that it would be $400 million. 
And they said they’ve studied the project to death, Mr. Speaker, 
to death. So you’d think that they’d have pretty good numbers 
at that point. But that project, Mr. Speaker, has gone from $400 
million to $2 billion and counting, Mr. Speaker, with the lead 
proponent being a company from Paris, France, if you can 
imagine, Mr. Speaker — Paris, France. 
 
You know, and a plan that doesn’t make any sense when it 
comes to which snowplow has jurisdiction on which mile and, 
you know, who is going to effectively respond to winter 
weather at a time when lives are at risk, Mr. Speaker. And a 
government that just can’t provide a reasonable explanation 
about why they can’t manage their project, why they’re placing 
this bypass itself in this Tower Road location, Mr. Speaker, 
built within the city itself and not effectively moving truck 
traffic off that artery. And putting taxpayers on the hook, Mr. 
Speaker, for $2 billion and counting, with a large proponent 
being from Paris, France. Talk about falling out of touch with 
Saskatchewan people and businesses, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We see the same in the schools, where the government itself has 
created its infrastructure scheme that actually prevents many 
Saskatchewan companies from actually bidding on those 
projects. And I know the government opposite will say, oh, well 
they’re going to include a few businesses in that. You know 
what? Saskatchewan businesses have the exceptional ability of 
delivering on their contracts. They can build the infrastructure 
and schools that we need, Mr. Speaker. What they don’t need is 
bits and scraps and to be subcontracted from large, international 
consortiums, Mr. Speaker, with the profits left outside these 
borders. What we need is to work with the exceptional builders 
and companies of this province in all trades and all industries to 
build the infrastructure that this province deserves. 
 
And it’s a reminder as well, Mr. Speaker. Sadly we’re dealing 
with a lower oil price environment which doesn’t assist many 
that are working within that sector, Mr. Speaker. Certainly 
we’ve seen layoffs. We see some difficult circumstances. We 
see companies that may not be as engaged in projects that they 
would have just a short while ago, Mr. Speaker. Now while we 
can’t control oil price, we can certainly make sure that the 
policies of government are getting the job done, certainly for 
taxpayers of this province when it comes to value, but also for 



7620 Saskatchewan Hansard November 4, 2015 

the businesses of this province. 
 
We see a massive contract that’s been doled out to a company 
from Milwaukee to come in and apparently take care of the P3 
rent-a-schools of this government. We have workers here in this 
province that can get that job done, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know 
why, Mr. Speaker, we see a government that is so relentless on 
sending . . . inking large contracts with corporations from the 
United Kingdom, Mr. Speaker; from Paris, France; from 
Milwaukee; from Texas, Mr. Speaker, when we have workers 
and we have businesses here who deserve that opportunity. And 
that fulfills value for taxpayers but also strengthens our 
economy. 
 
I mean one example that’s often noted, Mr. Speaker, by so 
many across this province, and it just defies common sense, that 
this government, you know, they’re so relentless on their 
out-of-country outsourcing, Mr. Speaker, that even when it 
comes to your fishing and hunting licence, Mr. Speaker — I 
know you’re an avid hunter just like I am, Mr. Speaker — it just 
makes absolutely no sense that we have some company down in 
the United States, Mr. Speaker, in the southern United States 
who are collecting dollars and taking those jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
And we have companies and people right here in Regina and all 
across Saskatchewan who could be delivering that for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
That’s the approach of this government. Profits for companies 
in other jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker, maybe lower wage 
strategies here at home, when what we need is good 
mortgage-paying jobs, Mr. Speaker, and what we need is 
companies fully engaged in the building of the infrastructure 
and delivering the services that we need here in the province. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we’ve brought forward, we’ve urged 
government to act on this. Government delayed actions. We’ve 
raised it in question period. We pushed government. We 
brought forward a piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, private 
member’s legislation. We called on government constructively 
to work with that legislation. We said, hey listen, if you need to 
amend aspects of that legislation, we will advance this. 
 
Well instead, Mr. Speaker, they sat on their hands and doled out 
contract after contract after contract, hundreds of millions and 
billions, Mr. Speaker, that are committed and that will be 
flowing outside this province for many years forward. 
 
You know, and I’ve heard from construction companies. I’ve 
heard from electrical contractors. I’ve heard from engineers and 
architects, Mr. Speaker. I’ve heard from trade after trade, Mr. 
Speaker, the nonsensical approach, an approach that’s really not 
fair and certainly not in the best economic interests of our 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With that being said, you know, we have a bill before us. It’s a 
tad ill-defined around what sort of criteria will be utilized 
within the . . . for project to project. What’s going to be 
important on that front is clarity from government directly to 
industries and businesses related. There needs to be a fair, 
objective process and there needs to be the fair shot for 
Saskatchewan companies, the one that they deserve, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Now we’ll spend some time in committee to flesh out some of 
the detail of this legislation. But, Mr. Speaker, I want to . . . and 
there we’ll deal with it from a, you know, more of a technical 
perspective. But it would be wrong, Mr. Speaker, for me not to 
take my feet and to put onto the record the frustration of 
businesses and workers all across this province, Mr. Speaker, 
with a government that’s dismissed this very important issue, 
that’s held onto a simplistic and naive boy-scoutish 
procurement policy, Mr. Speaker, selling out the opportunity 
rightfully deserved by the fine businesses and entrepreneurs of 
this province and the exceptional workers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:15] 
 
But with that being said, I do want to recognize once again the 
businesses across Saskatchewan that have reached out, that 
have had their voice, whether it be with opposition, whether it 
be with government. And I definitely want to recognize as well 
those that have been a part of guiding this process, Mr. Speaker, 
and I want to recognize those industry groups as well. 
 
What we need to see though, Mr. Speaker, is meaningful action. 
We have a government, as I say, that’s doled out big contract 
after big contract, not delivering the best value for 
Saskatchewan taxpayers, Mr. Speaker, and not ensuring a fair 
shot for Saskatchewan companies and workers or our economy, 
Mr. Speaker, but some sort of simplistic, naive policy that 
defies serving the people of this province. 
 
With that being said, Mr. Speaker, I look forward to questions 
and some time within committee. Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the Minister of Justice and Attorney General that Bill No. 
188, The Best Value in Procurement Act, 2015 be now read a 
second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move that this bill be referred to the Committee on 
the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



November 4, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7621 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 10 
a.m. tomorrow morning. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:18.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7603 
  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7603, 7604 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7603 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7603 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7603 
  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7604 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7604 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7604 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7604 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7604 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7605 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7605 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7605 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7605 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Agribition and Funding for Evraz Place Facility 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7605 
 MacKenzie Gala 2015 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7606 
 Connecting Northerners to High-Speed Internet 
  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7606 
 Remembering Bill Wuttunee 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7606 
 Regina Riot Wins Championship 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 7606 
 Peacock Tornadoes Win Championship 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7607 
 A Chance to Speak Documentary 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7607 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Planning of Educational Facilities 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7607 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7607 
 Promotion of Carbon Capture and Storage 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7610 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7610 
 Usage of Health Facilities 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7611 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7611 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7612 
 Standing Committee on Public Accounts 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7612 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 179 — The MRI Facilities Licensing Act 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7612 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 187 — The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 2015 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7613 
  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 7618 
 Bill No. 188 — The Best Value in Procurement Act, 2015 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7618 
  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 7620 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


