






















































Hansard: November 26, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 90A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 26, 2015, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Hon. Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7855 
 November 26, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
Salvation Army is a prominent organization that’s been serving 
the people of Saskatchewan for over 100 years. So, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s truly my honour to introduce some members of the 
Salvation Army that are seated in your gallery. We have with us 
today Ivy Scobie, who’s the executive director of William 
Booth Special Care Home and Regina Wascana Grace Hospice. 
We have Major Bruce MacKenzie, the corps officer of Haven 
of Hope Ministries, Regina; Major Kristiana MacKenzie, corps 
officer of Haven of Hope Ministries of Regina; Lieutenant Kyla 
MacKenzie, the executive director of Grace Haven and Gemma 
House in Regina; and Major Mike Hoeft, the area commander 
of Prairie West and emergency and disaster services director for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we truly appreciate the amazing work that the 
Salvation and their volunteers do to support the most vulnerable 
citizens within our province and to all of those that need 
assistance, Mr. Speaker. And recently they started their annual 
Christmas Kettle Campaign in Regina, so I encourage everyone 
to help with donations because they’re used to help fund the 
programs that the Salvation Army runs year round. So, Mr. 
Speaker, could all members join with me to welcome these 
great citizens to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the government in welcoming this delegation of folks from the 
Salvation Army, and take this chance to thank them for the 
important work that they do all throughout Saskatchewan and 
really throughout Canada and internationally as well, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a pleasure to have them here in the Assembly 
today with the start of the kettle campaign. As we are into the 
holiday season, Mr. Speaker, I would encourage all members 
and all viewers to, when they hear those bells in the malls and 
different spots around the province, to dig deep, pull out a bit 
more than a few coins and give generously, Mr. Speaker. So I 
thank these individuals for their work and welcome them here, 
and I wish them a Merry Christmas. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 
honour to be able to introduce to you and through you, to all the 
members of the Assembly today, someone who doesn’t need 
any introduction to this House. Mr. Speaker, later this day, 
we’re going to be paying tribute to members on both sides of 
the House that have decided not to run again. I think four of 
those members are founding members of our party. 
 
And we’re joined today by someone who has already retired 

from politics but is still active in the life of the province at 
STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] in a leadership 
position, who is also a founding member. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
always very good to see the former member for Melfort, the 
former Finance minister, Rod Gantefoer. And I want to 
welcome him back to his Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on my 
day of sitting in this honourable Assembly, it is my pleasure, to 
you and through you, to welcome 50 grade 7 and 8 students 
from Sacred Heart School in Estevan. And they are 
accompanied by their teacher, Ms. Megan Vanstone, and 
chaperones, Mr. Moriarty, Ms. Bourbonnais, and Mrs. Mack. 
And I look forward to meeting with them later for a photo and 
just a short visit. But I ask all members to welcome them to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to 
take this opportunity to welcome a very special friend of mine, 
Al Brigden, seated in your gallery, to this legislature. Please 
join me. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a special day in 
the history of the legislature and this session as it’ll be the final 
day for speeches for a number of people. So I do also want to 
join with the government in welcoming a former legislative 
colleague, Mr. Gantefoer, to the Assembly. It’s good to see his 
face in the Assembly here, Mr. Speaker. And a welcome to the 
many other people who have come to mark this occasion and to 
witness the proceedings of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And among them are two individuals seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s my mom and dad who are here, Chris and 
Anne Broten who are here in the Assembly today. It was a bit 
of a surprise visit. Mom and Dad have actually been in the UK 
[United Kingdom] for about the last month where my middle 
sister lives, helping out with grandkids. And so they arrived last 
night in Saskatoon and apparently were jet-lagged, up early and 
said, well why not drive to Regina and witness question period? 
Maybe they wanted to see the member from Greystone, their 
MLA’s [Member of the Legislative Assembly] speech. That 
could be part of it, but it was a pleasant surprise to see them in 
the Speaker’s gallery today, Mr. Speaker. And I love you very 
much. 
 
And you know, all of us in this Assembly, we can’t do what we 
do without family. And I want to say a special thanks to Mom 
and Dad for their help, especially with the kids back home in 
times when I’m not there. So thank you, Mom and Dad. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And to 
you and through you, I’d like to welcome my family to the 
Legislative Assembly today. I know that there’s a lot of 
farewells today but this is a welcome because of the three 
people . . . I’ve introduced my wife Larissa and my son Nickson 



7856 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2015 

before, but this is the first introduction for my baby girl Claire, 
Claire Emma Steinley. So it’s her first trip to the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
And as the Leader of the Opposition said, you can’t do much 
without family, a strong supportive team right beside you. I 
always say, beside every good man is a great woman and that’s 
no exception here. My Larissa has done so much to help with 
our job and make sure everything at home is okay in raising two 
beautiful, beautiful kids who, thank goodness, look like their 
mom. And my son already is tired of listening to the dad talk, so 
with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d like all the members to welcome 
Larissa, Nickson, and Claire to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 
Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I also am lucky enough to have my family with me. Today 
I have my parents, Eleanor and Vic Tochor in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. And a new introduction for me is James, which is nine 
months old, sitting with my wife, Danielle. And Jacob’s about 
to go see where Nickson went so I’ll wrap this up. And I’m just 
so thankful and, as mentioned, we can’t do what we do without 
our loving support of our spouses and families. So thank you, 
Mr. Speaker, and I would like everyone to welcome them to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 
Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you I’d like to make two sets of introductions. First 
and foremost, I’d like to follow the lead of the Leader of the 
Official Opposition in recognizing Chris and Anne Broten. I 
just want to say that they have treated their MLA gently and 
with great respect and great courtesy. And we appreciate the 
leadership that you’ve shown in Saskatoon Greystone and right 
across Saskatoon, and so it’s a privilege to be able to recognize 
these special constituents and for their many efforts. And so I’d 
ask all members to help again to reinforce that welcome offered 
by the Leader of the Official Opposition. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m especially delighted to welcome four 
people to their Legislative Assembly, all back to their 
Legislative Assembly, and we know previously two have been 
here, the Barriault brothers, Hayden and Emmett. Hayden has 
taken on increasing mastery of things governmental. That’s 
according to his teacher and his report card, and so he wanted to 
make sure he was back. And except for the spilled milk on his 
shirt, he’s ready to go today. I think he’s ready to take a seat 
down here. Emmett of course is continuing with his snowboard 
and his fascination with one Mr. McMorris. I’m not quoting a 
name from the Assembly, just a Canadian star. 
 
I’m especially delighted that Jacqueline is here. She’s no 
stranger to her Legislative Assembly. I think she was as happy 
to get a day away from school as she was to join her dad. And 
someone who’s really special to me, Carol Drury is also here, 
and so I’d ask all members to welcome my family to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members of the House I’ve had the opportunity in the 
last month to introduce some of my family. And today I have 
another one of my children with me. She isn’t really a child but 
for me she’ll always be. My oldest daughter, Angela Draude. 
She’s come back from BC [British Columbia] yesterday to be 
with me today. She’s the provincial executive director of 
Forensic and Mental Health. And with her is her friend Sukh 
Salh and he’s a key account manager for BC Hydro. Angie is 
known not only for her excellent work, but for her beautiful 
voice. And I so much miss you when you’re in BC. 
 
And with her today is my CA [constituency assistant] Anne 
Sanderson and her husband Ivan. Anne, you do such a good job. 
It’s not easy being me, and when you’re in my office, I ask you 
to be me. So thank you very much for what you do. You do a 
terrific job. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, lastly but not least is my husband Marty. I 
met him when I was 16 years old, and next year we’ll celebrate 
our 49th wedding anniversary. He’s not always been in the 
House, not very often, but he’s always there for me. And I can’t 
tell you how much it means to me, and thank you very much. I 
love you. Everybody, please welcome my family to the 
legislature. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition asking for better cell service for 
northern communities. Residents in Weyakwin, Ramsey Bay, 
Sucker River, and Wadin Bay want to have the same level of 
cell service offered in southern communities. Reliable cell 
service is important for the tourism, trapping, and resource 
industry in the North. And northerners want to be able to call 
for help when they need it. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray in the prayer that 
reads as follows, respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly cause the Government of Saskatchewan to 
deliver cell service to the communities of Weyakwin, 
Ramsey Bay, Sucker River, and Wadin Bay so they can 
promote economic growth and improve the quality of life 
for northerners. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again I rise in the Assembly today to present a petition as it 
relates to cellphone coverage in northwestern Saskatchewan. 
And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To cause the provincial government to improve cell 
service coverage for northern communities like St. 
George’s Hill, Dillon, Michel Village, Dore Lake, Michel 
Point, and Sled Lake to provide similar quality of cell 
coverage as southern communities currently enjoy. [Mr. 



November 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7857 

Speaker], this would provide support for our northern 
industries as well as mitigate safety concerns associated 
with living in the remote North. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have been presenting petitions day in 
and day out here at the Assembly. This petition has been signed 
by many people from all throughout Saskatchewan, and on 
these particular pages, people from Sled Lake, people from 
North Battleford, from all throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan have signed this petition in support of the 
cellphone coverage. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition in support of the government 
establishing a human milk bank here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The petitioners point out that the Canadian Paediatric Society 
endorses the use of breast milk as the exclusive source of 
nutrition for the first six months of life. They talk about 
breast-milk-fed babies in neonatal intensive care are shown to 
having fewer severe infections, shorter hospital stays, fewer 
readmissions, and better long-term outcomes. And they point 
out that, unfortunately, illness and distance can prevent 
newborns from receiving their own mother’s milk directly. So 
to help these babies, the Canadian Paediatric Society 
recommends that pasteurized donor human milk be available. 
And in places like Calgary, Mr. Speaker, and Vancouver, those 
are two places that do in fact have human milk banks, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan lead an 
initiative in reopening a donor human milk bank for use in 
Saskatchewan. This donor bank would be a life-saving 
measure to support premature infants in this province and 
a resource to assist breastfeeding women to initiate 
exclusive breastfeeding. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there are more than 300 signatures on this petition, 
and most of them are from Saskatoon in this case. I so submit. 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition for real action on climate change. The individuals who 
have signed this petition wish to point out that Saskatchewan 
produces the highest greenhouse gas emissions per capita in all 
of Canada, and that slashing programs such as the Go Green 
Fund and Energuide for Houses energy efficiency program will 
set the province on a backwards course, and since 2009 the 
Government of Saskatchewan has reduced climate change 
funding by 83 per cent. So I’d like to read the prayer. They 
respectfully request: 
 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enacts a 
real plan, allocate appropriate funding in the provincial 
budget to tackle climate change by reducing greenhouse 

gas emissions, helping families transition to 
energy-efficient homes, and encouraging everyone in the 
province to take real action to protect the environment. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

Recognizing the Denesuline Nation 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise in 
my place today in recognition of the Denesuline Nation all 
across Saskatchewan and beyond. In the Dene language, 
Denesuline means “the people of the land.” It’s important to 
make sure that members of the Denesuline Nation be 
recognized in Saskatchewan for their close relationship with the 
land; in fact their identity as indigenous people in many ways is 
defined by their relationship with the land. 
 
Members of the Denesuline Nation continue to live off the land 
in our province, as they have since time immemorial. Elders 
gather traditional medicines from the forest to heal injuries and 
sicknesses. Fishers harvest the bounty of our lakes and rivers, 
including the mighty Clearwater River, the Desnethé in the 
Dene language. Hunters also provide moose and caribou meat 
for their families, and trappers collect the furs that keep people 
safe and warm through the cold northern nights. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this relationship with the land is why we, the 
members of this Assembly, have to remember our duty to 
uphold the treaty relationships. The leaders of the Denesuline 
Nation signed on to Treaty 10 and Treaty 8 to preserve their 
way of life and build a bright future for their children and 
grandchildren. We must always respect their treaty and inherent 
rights. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 
recognizing the importance of the Denesuline Nation — the 
people of the land — to the province of Saskatchewan. Merci 
cho, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 

Completion of Renovation of Saskatoon Schools 
 
Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today to speak about the completion of the renovations at Holy 
Cross High School in Saskatoon Eastview and Georges Vanier 
Catholic Fine Arts, also in Saskatoon Eastview. Mr. Speaker, it 
is important that the youth of our province have access to the 
best educational facilities so that we can achieve their full 
potential. 
 
The renovations and additions at Holy Cross High School have 
added a new entrance, a new office, new industrial arts 
classroom, five classrooms, and a new gym, Mr. Speaker. The 
renovations at Georges Vanier included a new gym, dance 
studio, music room, art room, learning centre, and science lab. 
The government has committed more than $29 million towards 
Holy Cross High School and $13 million towards Georges 



7858 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2015 

Vanier. Mr. Speaker, these renovations are an example of how 
our government is helping build a brighter future for 
Saskatchewan students. 
 
Since 2007 we have committed approximately $966 million 
towards 65 major school capital projects and numerous smaller 
projects which include renewal and maintenance, Mr. Speaker. 
It is my pleasure to also remind the House that there are 18 new 
elementary schools now under way in Saskatoon, Warman, 
Martensville, and Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased with all the amazing work that 
has been done on both schools, and I am excited to learn that 
the students now have the opportunity to learn in this great, 
upgraded facility. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Climate Change March 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan people 
are increasingly concerned about the impacts of climate change, 
and at the same time people are becoming more aware of the 
economic and social opportunities which a clean energy 
economy would offer. They want to see their government take 
decisive action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
So this Sunday afternoon, November 29th, people will be 
rallying in Saskatoon in advance of the Paris COP [Conference 
of Parties] 21 Climate Conference. They represent a wide 
spectrum of organizations including faith groups; labour, justice 
and peace coalitions; and the Council of Canadians. These 
climate change activists from all across the bridge city will be 
meeting at Vimy Memorial at 1 o’clock to begin their march to 
Oskâyak School. 
 
There will be an impressive list of speakers including Bishop 
Don Bolen, Idle No More co-founder Nina Wilson, and 
SEIU-West [Service Employees International Union-West] 
president Barbara Cape, Rachel Melana-Chan, and Jenna Gall, 
who’s going to Paris as a member of the Canadian Youth 
Delegation. 
 
Saskatonians will be calling on government leaders, including 
our own Premier, to co-operate with the worldwide move 
towards a low-carbon economy, to recognize the opportunities 
which this shift can offer to our economy, and to enable 
Saskatchewan to once again become a leader on the world 
stage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking everyone 
involved in organizing this event and to those who will be there 
marching, demanding real action to address the climate change 
crisis here in Saskatchewan and throughout the world. Thank 
you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 

New Computerized Tomography Scanner in Estevan 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, come 
January the people of southeast Saskatchewan will no longer 
have to make the trip to Regina to access CT [computerized 

tomography] scanning services. The new CT scan unit in 
Estevan will provide patients with advanced diagnostic services 
right at home. Mr. Speaker, our government is following 
through on its promise to partner with health regions, 
foundations, and communities to improve access to quality 
health services. 
 
Since 2007, capacity for CT services in Saskatchewan has 
increased by 36 per cent. In 2015-16, about 101,500 patients 
will receive CT services, up from 74,500 patients in ’07-08. 
This expansion of CT capacity will increase our ability to meet 
increasing demand for advanced diagnostic services while 
reducing wait times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, individuals, families, and the corporate 
community have shown their support for this improvement of 
health services in southern Saskatchewan. I’d like to highlight 
one especially generous donation of $500,000 by Ron and 
Shirley Carson from Lampman that energized the St. Joseph’s 
Hospital Foundation fundraising campaign. It is fitting that the 
medical imaging area will be named the Ron and Shirley 
Carson Diagnostic Centre. 
 
The detailed three-dimensional images provided by a CT scan 
will guide the treatment of people who have been injured in a 
vehicle collision or on the job. With critical injuries or illnesses, 
every minute counts. Mr. Speaker, we thank all those who have 
made this amazing addition to our southern hospital services 
possible. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Saskatoon Police Constable Wins Award 
 
Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
congratulate Saskatoon police Constable Ryan Beerling, a 
member of the Saskatoon police crisis negotiation team, on 
receiving the 2015 National Tactical Officers Association Crisis 
Negotiators Award. 
 
In 2014, the Saskatoon police crisis negotiation team and 
Constable Ryan Beerling as lead negotiator, responded to two 
active shooter standoffs within a 10-day period. Mr. Speaker, 
on August 12th, 2015, the crisis negotiation team responded to 
a call with an individual armed with a rifle and suffering from 
serious mental health and addictions issues. The suspect 
intended to commit suicide by having the police shoot him. The 
suspect continued to fire his rifle whenever he became agitated 
and fired between 15 and 20 shots over the standoff. Mr. 
Speaker, Constable Beerling successfully negotiated for 13 
hours to bring the situation to a peaceful and safe resolution, 
with the suspect eventually surrendering to police. 
 
On August 22nd, 2015, four adults and two children managed 
to escape from a home before a suspect barricaded himself and 
started to fire as police arrived on the scene. Like the previous 
incident, Mr. Speaker, the police, the Saskatoon police relied on 
his negotiation skills. Constable Beerling was able to talk the 
suspect out of the residence and to surrender to police with no 
harm to himself and police or the public. 
 
I want all members to congratulate Constable Ryan Beerling on 



November 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7859 

his award and his commitment to community safety that saves 
lives. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Government Investment in Northern Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, it is a privilege to 
rise in this House today and bring attention to some of the 
exciting things happening in Prince Albert and Saskatchewan’s 
North. 
 
If you listen to the members opposite talk about the North, well 
so often it leaves you feeling depressed. Mr. Speaker, that 
sentiment could not be further from reality. According to 
Statistics Canada, the employment rate in Prince Albert is 
trending steadily upward and has been for months. Just driving 
through P.A. [Prince Albert], you can see an optimism like I’ve 
never seen before. There are many new small- and 
medium-sized businesses popping up. When I speak to 
constituents, they are excited about what lies ahead for our 
region. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is working hard to fix the 
infrastructure deficit left by the NDP [New Democratic Party]. 
A few examples of how our government has invested in Prince 
Albert and our North are: we built the equivalent of eight city 
blocks of housing for affordable housing. We are investing in 
fire services. We have spent millions on building and fixing 
highways, and we’ve expanded correctional facilities. 
 
Prince Albert is an attractive place for investment and a great 
community to raise a family. While the NDP keep talking down 
Saskatchewan’s success, the people of this province and P.A. 
are optimistic. They know we are better off under this 
government. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Record of Government and Opposition 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, as today is the last day of 
session before the election in the spring, many voters will be 
looking at both sides’ records. We are happy to lay out our 
record next to the NDP’s. Even with challenges facing our 
resource sector, Saskatchewan is still growing and creating 
jobs, thanks to our diversified economy. 
 
In this fall session alone, our government has invested in 
Saskatchewan by opening the Biggar & District Health Centre; 
the Southwest Integrated Healthcare Facility; the Kerrobert and 
District Health Centre; the Dr. F.H. Wigmore Regional 
Hospital; Newmarket Place, a long-term care addition in 
Tisdale; the Canora Health and Wellness Centre; the new 
Hudson Bay community school; major renovations and 
additions to Georges Vanier school, as well as the Holy Cross 
High School; and the new Estevan truck bypass. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s look at the NDP’s record when they were in 
government. They closed 52 hospitals and 19 long-term care 
facilities. They closed 176 schools, and they created a $1 billion 

pothole by not investing in Saskatchewan’s highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite demonstrated this session 
they don’t have a plan for the province. When it comes time to 
mark that X on the ballot, I think it’s pretty clear which party 
has invested in the people of Saskatchewan. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Health Care Expenditures 
 
Mr. Broten: — We’ve just learned that our province’s largest 
health region will be cutting front-line workers. Can the 
Premier tell us how deep these cuts will be? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I thank 
the member for the question. I know the Health minister will 
want to be a part of this debate in answering some of the 
questions. And so do I, Mr. Speaker, because the record of the 
government has been a . . . has been this: that we have 
significantly increased the number of front-line workers in the 
province of Saskatchewan including 3,000 more nurses of every 
designation across the province, Mr. Speaker, including 800 
more new positions, more people working in terms of the front 
line on long-term care, Mr. Speaker, 500 more doctors 
practicing in the province than when members opposite were in 
government. 
 
So you know, Mr. Speaker, we know the regions will be 
making decisions to get to balanced budgets, Mr. Speaker, just 
as the government is doing that work to get to a balanced 
budget. We know how important that is for the growth agenda 
and the overall health of the province of Saskatchewan. We also 
have requested — I know the region’s going to do that, Mr. 
Speaker, in an optimal way — that it doesn’t affect front-line 
services. They’re going to strike those balances. That’s the 
request we’ve made, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And even with changes that might be coming in Saskatoon, the 
bottom line is this: there will be many, many, many more 
front-line workers continuing to work in health care — nurses, 
doctors, care aids — under this government than there ever 
were under members opposite. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I asked specifically how deep 
these cuts will be. No clear answer from the Premier, Mr. 
Speaker. I hearken back to the crazy responses we had from the 
Finance minister saying, Mr. Speaker, that he wasn’t aware of 
the cuts going on. Very clearly we see that cuts are happening, 
Mr. Speaker, and this government should be clear about that 
with the Saskatchewan people. 
 
The Saskatoon Health Region has a $45 million deficit as a 
direct result of the Sask Party withholding funding for 
demographic increases. So the CEO [chief executive officer] of 
the region, the former deputy minister of Health, says, “There 



7860 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2015 

will be job cuts.” He also says they’re looking to cut the number 
of surgeries because “we’re $3 million overspent on surgical 
budgets, year to date.” So my simple question, two questions to 
the Premier, Mr. Speaker: how many jobs will be cut? How 
many surgeries will be cut? 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in this session as in every 
session, we have to work hard to correct the record after the 
member opposite asks a question. I wonder if the member is 
serious about his questions or is just sort of laughing through 
them. He’s all very serious about the matter when the camera is 
on him, Mr. Speaker. Then he sits down and there’s a lot of 
laughter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of demographic support, in terms of 
demographic support, this government’s record is nearly 100 
million more dollars to support population growth and 
demographic changes in the province of Saskatchewan. Now 
that increase in funding, the member for Athabasca will want to 
know, that increase in demographic funding is driven by two 
things: one, our effort to ensure health care for the people of the 
province; and two, the population is now growing in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I would also point out with respect to the Saskatoon Health 
Region that since we took office, since we took office, the 
increase to the Saskatoon Health Region operating budget has 
been 61 per cent. Sixty-one per cent increase in funding to that 
particular region, Mr. Speaker, in addition to the $100 million 
more invested because now, now finally in the province of 
Saskatchewan, the population is growing. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s rhetoric on this 
certainly doesn’t match up with what the health regions’ 
budgets show, Mr. Speaker. Once again, very clearly we have 
one story from government and another one that is actually the 
reality here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Here in Regina, the Sask Party has clawed back 57 million in 
health funding, and they’ve failed to fund 70 million in 
demographic increases since 2012. So there have been many 
job cuts here too, including more than 150 front-line health care 
jobs eliminated this year alone. The Premier and the Health 
minister can look at the numbers that are clearly on display. 
Now the Saskatoon Health Region will be slashing jobs too, and 
surgical wait times are going to continue to get longer and 
longer in the weeks and months ahead. 
 
Will the Premier at least tell us, be clear and upfront with the 
people in the province, how many front-line health care jobs 
will be chopped in the province? And will he at least tell us how 
many surgeries will be cut? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, just to be clear and to 
correct what the Leader of the Opposition has indicated here in 

the House — and the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, I 
think, has been very clear on this — is that in terms, Mr. 
Speaker, of coming in on a balanced budget for this year, 
knowing that they did receive an increase, we haven’t cut their 
funding either in Regina or Saskatoon. 
 
But Regina has indicated that they need to find efficiencies and 
find savings that would equate to roughly 150 full-time 
equivalents. And the CEO has specifically said here in Regina 
that that doesn’t mean layoffs, that people will not lose 
positions here in Regina, but it would be the equivalent. If they 
can optimize their employment by reducing overtime, by using 
more straight time, that it would be the equivalent of 150 
positions. But he’s been very clear on that. 
 
With respect to Saskatoon Health Region, Mr. Speaker, as the 
Premier has indicated, a 61 per cent increase, nearly $400 
million increase in the budget from when the members opposite 
were the government. That equates to about a 7.6 per cent 
annual increase in funding, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to help 
that region manage to their budget as we are helping all of our 
health regions. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, once again from minister to 
minister, whenever the Premier’s talking, we’ve got to look at 
the facts here. A fact check, Mr. Speaker. Overtime in the 
Regina Qu’Appelle’s budget, as was indicated, is a separate line 
from what he’s talking about. Very clearly, 150 FTEs [full-time 
equivalent] not being filled when people retire, when people 
leave. And we wonder why health care workers come to the 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and say that they’re being asked to do 
more and more with less and less, Mr. Speaker, because that is 
the reality on the ground. 
 
They were straightforward questions to the Premier about how 
many jobs will be lost, about how many surgeries will be cut. 
You know, more and more we can see from this Premier and 
this government, Mr. Speaker, that it’s the government that has 
changed. And I certainly haven’t agreed with the decisions a lot 
of the time with this government. But once upon a time, once 
upon a time I could . . . you could see that they were trying to 
do the right thing. Now when we get answers, Mr. Speaker, 
they’re very defensive answers; they’re very bureaucratic 
answers and they’re very dismissive answers. We’ve seen that 
time and time again this sitting. 
 
Again, a very specific question to the Premier. Saskatoon 
Health Region says that they’ve been working with 
government, they’ve been working with government around 
these cuts. So surely he knows the answer: what exactly will be 
cut? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, once again we are working with Saskatoon Health 
Region. They haven’t put forward proposals to the ministry for 
us to have a look at it yet. They’re working through a process 
with their board and with their executive all across the health 
region. 
 



November 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7861 

But, Mr. Speaker, I want to be very clear, because the Leader of 
the Opposition just got up again with respect to Regina 
Qu’Appelle Health Region saying that people are going to lose 
employment in Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region to the tune of 
about 150 people. Mr. Speaker, this is what Keith Dewar, the 
CEO had to say. And I think I’ve said this before, but I think I 
have to remind the member opposite: “The commitment here 
. . .” And this is Keith Dewar, the CEO of Regina Qu’Appelle: 
“The commitment here is that no one’s going to be laid off.” 
 
It is 150, roughly 150 full-time equivalents. That is what they 
are trying to achieve in terms of savings, but that will not be 
done through anybody losing a position, Mr. Speaker. And I 
think the CEO has been very clear, and I hope the member 
opposite understands what in fact the plan here is in Regina 
Qu’Appelle. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Quality of Care in Long-Term Care Facilities 
 
Ms. Chartier: — That Premier has at least 120 lean promoters 
in health care, but he is content to chop front-line workers who 
actually deliver patient care. That is not acceptable. The internal 
reports about seniors’ care that the government finally released 
yesterday clearly don’t reflect the true reality, but even though 
they’re watered down, those reports show huge infrastructure 
problems and major short-staffing problems. Does the Premier 
regret saying no to the eight and a half million dollars in urgent 
requests? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I think the record needs to reflect the fact that this 
government has made significant investments in seniors’ care 
over the last seven years. We came from a time, Mr. Speaker, 
where the government of the day was closing facilities and 
closing beds all across this province — 1,200 beds in this 
province, 19 facilities. And, Mr. Speaker, we just heard the 
member from Carrot River speak. During this session alone 
we’ve opened the Biggar & District Health Centre, the 
Southwest Integrated Healthcare Centre, the Kerrobert and 
District Health Centre and, Mr. Speaker, Newmarket Place, a 
long-term care addition in Tisdale, Mr. Speaker, as well as other 
facilities, including a new hospital in Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are seeing from this side of the House record 
investment into our health care system. Mr. Speaker, we are 
seeing this year alone $5.1 billion being invested into health 
care. That means that we are able to see, Mr. Speaker, 
continued investment into the maintenance of our long-term 
care facilities as well as the building, the constructing, and the 
planning of new facilities across this province. 
 
The Speaker: — Perhaps the member for Athabasca would like 
to take the opportunity to ask a question, because he has lots to 
say when other members are speaking. So please respect the 
rights of the members of the House on both sides to be able to 
speak in this House without interruption. I recognize the 
member for Saskatoon Nutana. Oh, Saskatoon Riversdale, 
sorry. 

Ms. Chartier: — In many of the care homes, including places 
like Cudworth and Circle Drive in Saskatoon, residents who 
ring a call bell are still waiting 30 minutes for someone to come 
and check on them. Thirty minutes, Mr. Speaker. That is not 
acceptable. In many care homes, including Central Parkland 
Lodge, there are reports of serious staff shortages and they say, 
“There is concern from families for residents’ welfare.” In Gull 
Lake, residents are left in wheelchairs from 7 a.m. to 9 p.m. 
 
There was a time when the Premier would have thought that 
this was completely unacceptable. He would have regretted the 
fact that he rejected eight and a half million dollars in urgent 
requests from care facilities. To the Premier: why won’t he just 
admit that was a mistake? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s interesting yesterday the Leader of the Opposition was 
calling those CEO tour reports a whitewash. Mr. Speaker, now 
today they’re quoting from them to somehow try to make their 
case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have made record investments into long-term 
care, Mr. Speaker. The Health budget alone, close to 50 per cent 
of the health care budget goes directly to providing supports for 
seniors, Mr. Speaker. I can’t imagine what, I can’t imagine 
what the state of seniors’ care would have been like seven years 
ago under the NDP for the same number of residents where 
there were actually 800 fewer full-time equivalents working, 
where there wasn’t the maintenance going into facilities, where 
we weren’t building new facilities in this province, where we 
weren’t providing support for seniors living in personal care 
homes that had low income, Mr. Speaker, that perhaps didn’t 
have enough income to actually support themselves, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And the one example that I would give just to illustrate the 
difference between the members opposite and us, under this 
government, Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region in one facility, 
Grenfell, we’ve spent close to $1 million repairing that facility. 
You know what the members opposite spent in seven years in 
that facility? $50,000 on a 50-year-old building, including 
$5,000 in their last year of government, Mr. Speaker. That’s the 
record of the members opposite. We have a much different 
record and a better record on this side. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Government’s Fiscal Management 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s clear yesterday that 
even the watered-down reports were very troubling, Mr. 
Speaker. And yesterday we also tried to extend the fall sitting, 
in part because we still haven’t seen a mid-year update from 
that deficit-running government. The Sask Party of course 
refused to extend this sitting, and it’s pretty clear that they’re 
hiding from accountability and no longer willing to have the 
scrutiny that Saskatchewan people deserve. 
 
You know, they used to talk about wanting to be the most 
transparent government in the universe, Mr. Speaker. Well that 
certainly has changed. Doesn’t the Premier think the mid-year 



7862 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2015 

update deserves some scrutiny from this Legislative Assembly? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting coming 
from that member and that party over there about extending the 
sitting when they didn’t use up all the hours they had available 
to them when legislation was before this House, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s interesting. On an issue, on an issue as important as the 
Trans-Pacific Partnership, Mr. Speaker, they would have one 
member filibuster for I think about eight hours on one motion 
that supports the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They 
could have used that time to ask questions about the financial 
situation of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will be bringing out the media report by the 
end of this month, like it’s traditionally done every single time 
in this legislature, Mr. Speaker, with respect to reporting to the 
province of Saskatchewan, the people of Saskatchewan, what 
the financial situation is of the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the arrogance 
from that deficit-running Finance minister is beyond troubling 
in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. There’s a lot of reason for 
concern. The Finance minister hasn’t been forthright about the 
cuts and clawbacks that he’s presiding over, all while spending 
wastefully on their misplaced priorities. 
 
They’ve blown through unprecedented revenues, drained the 
rainy day fund, launched us into deficit, and racked up billions 
of new debt. And now they’re cutting and clawing money back 
on things that matter, all while spending wildly on their 
misplaced priorities and refusing to be transparent, Mr. Speaker. 
To the Premier: how can he possibly justify this? Saskatchewan 
people deserve so, so much better. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now this 
member’s concerned about a deficit, Mr. Speaker. We just 
heard the Leader of the Opposition and the Health critic ask for 
more money to be spent in this province, Mr. Speaker, and now 
they’re worried about a deficit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell you what the credit rating agencies say 
about the financial management of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
As recently as October 5th, Standard & Poor’s said the rating 
. . . AAA credit rating. They reaffirmed the AAA credit rating 
of this province — one of only three provinces in Canada, Mr. 
Speaker, to have a AAA credit rating. They said, “The ratings 
also reflect the province’s strong financial management, strong 
budgetary flexibility, and low contingent liabilities.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the debt as a percentage of GDP [gross domestic 
product] in this province at the end of this fiscal year will be 
about 16 per cent. When we took office from those members 
over there, it was at 24 per cent, Mr. Speaker. We are investing 
in infrastructure in this province like health care facilities, 
schools, highways, and infrastructure. Mr. Speaker, the time . . . 
They were closing hospitals and closing schools and still had 
the debt at 24 per cent of GDP. Mr. Speaker, the people of this 

province don’t want to go back with the NDP. They want to 
move forward with the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, he can yell all he wants, 
Mr. Speaker, but it’s time that that Finance minister is forthright 
with Saskatchewan people. It’s time, Mr. Speaker, that that 
Finance minister cuts the massive waste of this government on 
their misplaced priorities and stop asking Saskatchewan people 
to pick up the tab for their mismanagement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — I’m not quite sure what the question was 
there, Mr. Speaker, but perhaps he’s trying to make a statement 
over there. Perhaps finally the Deputy Leader of the NDP — 
because we know the Leader of the Opposition won’t do it — 
perhaps finally the Deputy Leader of the NDP will muster up 
the courage of his convictions, Mr. Speaker, and stand here in 
this Assembly and tell the people of this province what exactly 
. . . what you would do. What exactly would you do if you were 
to be on this side of the House? What would that Leader of the 
Opposition do? He aspires to the highest office in government 
in this province, Mr. Speaker. We’re four months away from an 
election. He has yet to tell the people of Saskatchewan what he 
would do with respect to running this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the real member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Carbon Capture and Storage Project 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have learned 
during this fall session that we just can’t trust what the Premier 
is saying. At the start of this session, we all believed that the 
$1.5 billion carbon capture project was exceeding expectations. 
Why did we think that? Well because the Premier told us it was 
true, even though it wasn’t. 
 
Just yesterday the Premier was bragging that since the 
Boundary dam project was restarted after a two-month repair, it 
has been functioning at “very near optimal targets,” but has 
captured an average of just 59 per cent since it was turned back 
on. Now, Mr. Speaker, if your son came home with a report 
card with a 59 per cent average, would you pat him on the back 
and say, well done; that’s very near optimal? It’s not very near 
optimal. How has the Premier still not learned his lesson on 
this, and why is he still spouting off utter nonsense about the 
carbon capture project? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, our government made the 
decision in terms of carbon capture and storage a long time ago. 
We have committed a large amount of taxpayers’ dollars to this 
facility, and we have taken the counsel of people from around 
the world that are experts in this area because they believe that 
this is the right thing to do for the province of Saskatchewan. 
And if you look at experts like Carolyn Preston, she has said, 
and in just recent days, that: 



November 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7863 

I’m wholly supportive of the project, and I believe that 
SaskPower made the right decision for Saskatchewan 
when it undertook the planning, design, and construction 
of the power plant retrofit to incorporate carbon capture 
and storage to assure environmental sustainability of 
coal-fired generation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, and expert after expert — not people that have 
backgrounds in history or in English, Mr. Speaker, but people 
who are actually experts in this area around the world — have 
said time and time again that they believe that this is the right 
thing for the province of Saskatchewan to do. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, in recent days the plant has 
been performing at much better levels than it has been initially. 
I’ll go through a number of days if you like, starting we’ll say 
around Remembrance Day. It captured about 2300 tonnes on 
that day. The next day, 2200 tonnes. The next day, 2800 tonnes. 
The next day, 3100 tonnes, and so on and so on . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — And so on and so on indeed, Mr. Speaker. We 
keep hearing this kind of language when we know that 59 per 
cent is not optimal, and yet we have a minister and a Premier 
who keep telling us that they think that’s optimal. Despite all of 
this, despite all of this, and they’re giving all of us, the people 
of Saskatchewan, inaccurate information for well over a year 
about the true state of the $1.5 billion carbon capture project, 
the Premier has never apologized for that. Will he finally 
apologize today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, we have said on a number of 
occasions that we were unhappy with the performance in the 
first year of the facility, Mr. Speaker, the commissioning year 
of the facility where about 400 000 tonnes was captured during 
that time frame, Mr. Speaker, way off of what we had hoped 
would be the case. 
 
However, since the plant has been restarted, it’s capturing at a 
much more sufficient level that we think is very, very important 
— at 2200 tonnes, 2800 tonnes, 3100 tonnes, 3200 tonnes, 3200 
tonnes, 2700 tonnes, Mr. Speaker, in recent days. I think that’s 
a very, very important step forward. And since the plant was 
restarted, we have captured about another 40 000 tonnes total 
over the last three weeks, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s a very, 
very important step forward in terms of climate mitigation, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Government’s Fiscal Management and 
Provision of Medical Treatments 

 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if that minister thinks that they 
have been open and transparent about the carbon capture 
project, they are absolutely dreaming, Mr. Speaker. If that 
Premier thinks they’ve been open and transparent about it, he 
too is dreaming, Mr. Speaker. 
 

You know, this Premier, this Premier has changed. He has 
changed. There was a time, there was a time when he would 
have apologized to the people of this province, Mr. Speaker, for 
sending out information for well over a year that isn’t accurate, 
Mr. Speaker. But we see his refusal to stand up and talk about 
this, Mr. Speaker. We see a stubbornness there, and a 
dismissiveness that does not bode well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was a time when this Premier would have 
insisted that a mid-year financial report was delivered in the 
Assembly for proper scrutiny. He would have promoted that. 
He would have wanted that, Mr. Speaker, once upon a time. But 
not any more. 
 
There was a time, Mr. Speaker, when this Premier would have 
seen the compassion and the common sense to fund little 
Kayden Kot’s $14,000 treatment, Mr. Speaker, instead of 
forcing his parents to come to the legislature to plead and beg 
for support, and then to leave them hanging, blowing in the 
wind, Mr. Speaker, without an answer about the treatment for 
their little son. 
 
My question to the Premier: what is taking so long? Why has 
this government not reversed its decision to fund the treatment 
for little Kayden Kot? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, my understanding is that 
earlier this week the minister provided an answer to that 
specific question in terms of timelines where the decision is at. 
 
You know, it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, on the last day of the 
session, the Leader of the Opposition and the NDP have, with 
one day to go, changed their tactic. Now their new tactic is to 
say somehow that the government has changed. Mr. Speaker, I 
would share with members of the House and the Leader of the 
Opposition that things have most assuredly changed in the last 
eight years, Mr. Speaker, because when we took over, we had a 
nursing shortage of 1,000 nurses short in the province. There 
are now 3,000 more nurses of every designation practising. We 
had a doctor shortage. There are now 500 more doctors 
practising. That has changed. We had an NDP government that 
closed down long-term care facilities. We are replacing them 
and opening new beds. That has changed. 
 
We had a government under the NDP that closed 176 schools in 
the province of Saskatchewan. We are opening 40 brand new 
schools. That is a change. Mr. Speaker, we had a government 
that talked about those with intellectual disabilities but left a 
wait-list behind of 440 of those people waiting for a group 
home space. We’ve eliminated that wait-list. That has changed. 
We had an NDP government, Mr. Speaker, that presided over 
out-migration, and now we have more people living in the 
province than ever before. 
 
There have been many changes since 2007, Mr. Speaker, and 
it’s why on the 4th of April people are going to say, we are not 
going back to the NDP. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — You know, Mr. Speaker, time and time again 



7864 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2015 

this sitting, what the government has been saying — sometimes 
very loudly as we just saw, Mr. Speaker — what we’ve seen is 
what they’ve been saying does not match up with the reality. 
They said carbon capture was going great, Mr. Speaker. Well it 
sure hasn’t been. They’ve said, Mr. Speaker, in the past the 
Premier talked about eliminating emergency room wait times. 
Well they quietly walked away from that promise. They talked 
about reducing the wait for specialists, Mr. Speaker. Quietly 
walked away from that promise, Mr. Speaker. Time and time 
again, we’ve seen in seniors’ care again yesterday as well when 
people came to the legislature, Mr. Speaker, how their 
experience in caring for their loved ones doesn’t match up with 
the bluster, with the noise that we see from government. 
 
You know, little Kayden is four years old. He suffered a brain 
injury and paralysis due to a medical error, and his doctors say 
that he desperately needs to go to Denver for treatment. This is 
what Kayden’s mom says. She says, “We feel neglected and 
dismissed as we continue to wait for a decision.” You know, the 
original application went in over six months ago, Mr. Speaker. 
The latest message, they’ve heard nothing. They’ve heard 
nothing. So I’m sure the Premier’s bluster is cold comfort to 
Kayden’s mom. And they hide behind red tape. They hide 
behind red tape. 
 
Once upon a time the Premier would not have done that, Mr. 
Speaker. He would have acted and he would have fixed this, 
and he would have seen the decency and the common sense to 
do so. My question to the Premier: what does he have to say to 
Kayden’s mom? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
what I would say is what I said earlier. What I would say to the 
Kot family — who I’ve indicated in this House that I have 
known the Kot family for many years, Mr. Speaker — is that 
we’re going through a process that frankly, Mr. Speaker, before 
this government was elected in 2000, never existed. Before this 
government was elected, when the government of the day 
would deny people in this instance out-of-country coverage for 
health care, there was no appeal mechanism. You got the 
answer from the NDP. The answer was no, and that was it. You 
had nothing else. No recourse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve put in place, yes, a process that people can 
appeal to. Mr. Speaker, we are going through that process. We 
are looking at the recommendations made by that appeal and we 
will be delivering an answer to the Kot family, Mr. Speaker. As 
I’ve indicated, the Minister for Rural and Remote is going to as 
well. I have a set of eyes on that because I’ve known Kayden’s 
father since we were seven years old. I think that that’s 
appropriate, Mr. Speaker. But we are going through that 
process, and that shows another change, Mr. Speaker. Members 
opposite never had this process in place. We have this process. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 

answers to questions 1,099 through 1,103. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered responses 
to questions 1,099 through 1,103. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I ask for leave for retiring members to make personal 
statements. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to allow retiring members to make personal statements. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave is granted. I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

PERSONAL STATEMENTS 
 

Farewells 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thanks to 
my colleagues this morning. I know the members opposite are 
going to really appreciate this because I’m not going to raise my 
voice once today. This is going to be just nice and fluffy and 
saying a lot of thank yous . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . It’s 
tempting. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there’s so many people that I have to thank 
over a 20-plus year span of being elected to this Assembly. But 
I want to start with my family today, Mr. Speaker. Without our 
families at home to keep the fires burning and looking after 
things there, we couldn’t stay in here and do our jobs to the 
extent that we do. And I owe them everything for that, so I 
thank them very much. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thank the people of the Saltcoats constituency — 
the old Saltcoats constituency and now the Melville-Saltcoats 
constituency — for having their faith in me for the last 20 years, 
five elections, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank 
the executives who helped me get elected and represented me 
out there also when it come to election time and raising funds 
and things like that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk for a second about, or a minute or 
so, about my constituency assistants. My first constituency 
assistant was Sharon Elmy who worked with me for a while and 
then went on to better things and moved. And then I had 
Lauretta Ritchie, Mr. Speaker, who worked for me for a number 
of years, and then actually works for the member for Yorkton 
now.  
 
And, Mr. Speaker, then now for the last many years, I’ve had 
Barry Dilts, Mr. Speaker, who was an ex-RCMP [Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police] and was looking for a new venture 
in life and went on and hired on as my constituency assistant. 
He has done just tremendous work in helping represent the 
people of the Melville-Saltcoats constituency. And I owe him a 
lot because when I’m not there, he represents me and represents 
the government and does a lot of work on behalf of constituents 
in the Melville-Saltcoats constituency. 



November 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7865 

Mr. Speaker, I know all my colleagues will talk about this 
today, but I want to mention . . . I won’t mention names and the 
staff in the legislature, but I want to thank all of them for what 
they’ve done for us over the years, and what they’ve done for 
me. But I do want to make some special mention of a few 
people, Mr. Speaker, and I want to start with Reg Downs and 
Kathy Young. When we started this party, the Saskatchewan 
Party, Kathy was our communications gal. And she’s here today 
and still doing a yeoman’s job. 
 
Reg Downs, I don’t know how you would explain Reg Downs, 
Mr. Speaker. When I was with the Liberals, he was probably 
the worst nemesis you could ever think of, and when we got 
with the Sask Party he was one of the greatest inventions I had 
ever saw. Mr. Speaker, where we were new and we were 
inexperienced and we were thinking of doing something on a 
spur of the moment, there was just that reason that come to the 
table and it was Reg. 
 
And it wasn’t that, what happens tomorrow if I say something 
today, which I did on a number of occasions. But if we did 
something today, what would happen tomorrow — that was our 
thinking. Reg’s thinking was if we did something today, what 
would happen in two weeks, a month, a year, two years down 
the road. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s probably where the saying 
kind of come from: you know, in opposition you can say 
anything you want, but not if Reg is around. So, Mr. Speaker, I 
know my colleagues share this with me, but we owe Reg 
Downs an awful lot. 
 
Another person I want to talk about for a minute because he’s 
an awfully good friend of mine — and I know, maybe not as 
well known as Reg and Kathy are — but Paul Crozier. And I 
want to tell you little stories about Paul Crozier. When we were 
with the Liberals, Paul was a researcher with the Liberal caucus. 
And when things started to go off the rail with the Liberal 
caucus in . . . well, the member for Kelvington and the member 
for Canora-Pelly and the member for . . . Well actually Rod 
Gantefoer is here today. Glad to see you, Rod. But when things 
started to go off the rail and Paul was a researcher for the 
Liberals, it’s kind of, you know, a known fact that the member 
for Kindersley and I had some really intense meetings, didn’t 
we? Yes, they were intense. 
 
[11:00] 
 
But what many people don’t know is that Paul was still working 
for the Liberals that we left behind, Mr. Speaker. And what they 
would do is if the member for Kindersley and I supposedly 
were going to have a meeting at night, they’d send Paul out to 
kind of case the meeting. What they didn’t know is Paul would 
phone me and say, I’m on duty tonight. Where are you going? 
And I would tell Paul, I would say, I think we’re going to the 
member for Kindersley’s apartment tonight, and we’re going to 
start about 7:30. So Paul said, see you there. So he would drive 
up, park outside in the trees there, in the dark a little bit. And, 
Mr. Speaker, when I come out, I’d wave to him. And he’d go 
home and report next morning, and the meeting was over. 
Unbeknown to them, probably this went on for — well, how 
long? — six, eight months probably, and I became really good 
friends. It seemed longer than that, didn’t it? Yes. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, I really wanted to make special notice of 

Paul because Paul is one that had left the province when the 
NDP were in power and came back now to work for the 
government. And he’s been a real addition for us. 
 
I want to pick out three other young people, Mr. Speaker, that I 
owe an awful lot to. In fact they’ve almost ended up like my 
sons and daughters. But when the Premier give me the 
opportunity to serve as Ag minister in this province, I had the 
very good fortune of having a young guy like Tim Highmoor 
come back from Alberta. Actually a Manitoba farm boy, and 
then come and work for the cattle association in Saskatchewan. 
Then of course, like the rest, moved on to Alberta. But when we 
formed government, Tim was one of the people that I wanted to 
come back. 
 
One of the others in that office when I was Ag minister is Jill 
Clark, Mr. Speaker, and Jill was not replaceable. Her 
knowledge of farming and her caring and concerns for people 
that called in was amazing. And the other one was Tyler Lynch, 
Mr. Speaker, and the same story can go on for Tyler: farm boy 
from Lanigan, Saskatchewan. When people called in, he knew 
what they were talking about. Jill knew what they were talking 
about, and Tim knew what they were talking about. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, I have three kids, but if I didn’t, 
they would be my kids upstairs. Mr. Speaker, that’s how close 
we grew. It wasn’t that they worked for me; it was more like we 
worked together and shared the responsibility. And I will never 
forget those three, and I thank you so much for what you’ve 
done for me. 
 
And today, Mr. Speaker, you know, it’s mixed emotions that 
we’re up here today. On the one side, I’m really looking 
forward to retirement. On the other side, I’m going to miss you 
guys. I can only speak for the members on this side right now, 
but there’s 49 Sask Party MLAs, Mr. Speaker, and the Premier 
and including myself there’s 48 Sask Party MLAs. I cannot 
imagine when this started how that many people can sit in a 
caucus, and I do not remember one time that we raised our 
voices with each other. That’s amazing when you think about 
this number of people that get along that good. We have 
disagreed, like we do I’m sure on the other side at times, and we 
had disagreements. But the way it works when you voice your 
opinion and you get your way, great. And if you don’t, that’s 
great too because the majority rules. And we get along fine. 
 
And you know when I go home, and I think it’s the same with 
many of us especially that live out of Regina and the large 
centres, but I go home, and it’s kind of like a gate you go 
through to your family at home — my kids and my partner and, 
you know, people like that. And then you go to coffee row and 
these are your friends that you’ve known all your life. And then 
you turn around on Monday morning or Sunday night and you 
come back in here and you come through, it seems like that 
same gate. I come to see my other family in here. 
 
And you know what I’m going to miss most? Not really the job. 
I mean it was great, and it was an experience that many people 
would be glad to have. It’s you people — that’s the friends that 
I’ve made over these years. And you know, payday is going to 
be a bad day because there’s no cheque coming. But I can tell 
you that it’s not the dollars that I will miss. I didn’t start for the 
dollars, and I’m not worried about it when I leave. Because it’s 



7866 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2015 

you people I’m going to miss; there’s going to be just like a 
vacuum out there. 
 
And it’s good to see Rod in here today. And you know there are 
some that aren’t here today that I think a lot about. Ben 
Heppner, the member for Martensville’s dad who was my 
officemate right beside me, just got to be super friends with 
him. And I always think how much Ben would have enjoyed 
being in here on the side of government. He did a lot of work to 
help us get over here, I wish he could have had that opportunity. 
And I know he’s so proud of his daughter to be part of the 
government right now. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, there are others that left us far too 
soon. I think most of us or many of us remember Rudi Peters 
who had the misfortune of cancer and just another super person. 
Carl Kwiatkowski, for whatever reason we’ll never know, left 
us before his time. Another person that would have looked so 
forward to being in government. He just lived for this, to be on 
this side of the House. And that’s not explainable. Serge 
LeClerc was another one that I got to be pretty good friends 
with in here, we had the opportunity to work with. Mr. Speaker, 
these people left us far too soon, but we remember that they did 
a lot to help us get to where we are today. 
 
You know, and I thought today, Mr. Speaker — and I know my 
colleagues kind of touched on it — I thought of just going over 
a little bit and touching on the NDP today, but I kind of thought 
better of it. Actually Reg thought better of it. Once again he 
come through for me probably. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the Premier 
because, as I said before, he’d given me the opportunity to be 
Ag minister. And I think I’ve even talked to the member for 
Nutana. I would love to see every farmer — I know the member 
for Thunder Creek, the current Minister of Agriculture is doing 
a great job, agrees with me — but I’d like to see every farmer in 
Saskatchewan have a week as Ag minister. It would change 
their whole perspective on how things work in this province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have a lot more to say, and I hope I 
haven’t missed someone. It’s just been a great ride. And, Mr. 
Speaker, as I drive out tonight . . . I want to tell you a little story 
about when I was a real young guy and I was still in school. 
And I didn’t go all the time, but I went some of the time. 
 
But does everybody remember the yearbooks we used to put 
together? And you know they’d do that little thing on, okay 
John Smith, what do you want to be when you get out of school 
and, you know, all the different things? I missed a lot of school 
and I missed the day when they did that, so mine was blank. So 
when they finished the yearbook they couldn’t leave it blank, so 
some of my classmates said, we’ll fill it in for Bob because I 
know he won’t mind. And the one thing that I always 
remember, it said what do you want to be when you grow up 
and go out into the world? And they filled in bartender. Now I 
know why they did it because I had on many occasions learned 
how a bartender functions. And I think I was about 17 at that 
time, and it was 21 to get in the bar. And we won’t go there, but 
that was how it worked. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, why I tell you this story today is because 
when I drive out of here today, I’m going to have the funniest, 

little sly grin on my face because some of those same 
classmates are out there, and I’ve been their MLA for 20 years. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with you included and the members across the 
way — my Norwegian friend from Lakeview who I’ve took the 
odd potshot at, and we’ve done it in good humour — I just want 
to thank all of you here that I’ve had the opportunity to meet 
and work with. And you know, we know some of us may never 
see each other again. I want to thank you for the part you’ve 
played in my life. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I think my 
seatmate might have taken some of my speech because a lot of 
what he said sounds like what I was going to say. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, seriously this week has been very bittersweet 
for me. I’m not regretful that I’ve made the decision, but boy, 
when I came up those steps this morning I just thought, this is 
the last time I will come up here for this purpose, a session. 
This is the last day I sit in this chair. So you know, it’s really 
touched my heart. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I just want to, I just want to let you know 
how this all started for me. I’ve been involved in politics since 
1977, and sometimes you’d think I’d know better. But you 
know what? In early 1998, right after the Sask Party was 
formed, a gentleman from Estevan came out to see me. His 
name was Doug Turnbull, and I’m sure several people on this 
side know Doug, or knew him, God rest his soul. But he came 
out to see me. 
 
Doug was an Imperial Oil agent in Estevan, a bulk dealership. 
And when he come out to my farm, he knew that area like the 
back of his hand. He come out to me, and I was doing 
yardwork. And he come up there, and he said to me, you know, 
can you tell me where this neighbour by the name of Louie 
lives? So I told him, and I thought it was funny because I knew 
he knew where this guy lived. And before he left he said, say 
you wouldn’t be interested in running for the Saskatchewan 
Party, would you? And I said to him, you know what? This is 
something I really have to think of because, as all MLAs know, 
it’s a huge commitment, and I wanted to make sure my family 
was okay with it. 
 
Well a couple weeks later he came back. Same thing: he’s lost; 
he can’t find Louie. And he said, have you given it any more 
thought? And I still hadn’t made up my mind. And about a few 
weeks later, he came back again and asked me again. And by 
this time, I had decided I would do it. And you know, Doug 
never got lost again. He never bothered me. 
 
But you know, the reason I mention this, Mr. Speaker, is Doug 
passed away in 2003. And I’m just so thankful he was my first 
campaign manager and a very, very astute businessman, very 
brilliant political mind. My association had a farewell for me in 
Estevan a month ago, and his son was there and I neglected to 
mention the important role Doug played in my life when his son 
was there. And I know his son was just in the legislature here a 
couple weeks ago and received an award for philanthropy, and 
that’s just the kind of family they are. So I just want to let Ed 
Turnbull know that I haven’t forgot what that family has done 



November 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7867 

for me. 
 
But my first nomination in 1999 was a contested one, and I 
went out and I worked. And of course, I was successful in that 
and went on to win the Estevan constituency in the general 
election of 1999 with, I think it was 46.7 per cent of the vote. In 
2003, I won it again, and my plurality was a little more. 
 
And then in 2007, that was the time I didn’t know if I was going 
to run again. My husband was sick at the time and I just didn’t 
know if I could do it. So I asked him, I says, what do you think? 
And he knew that, you know, we had a very good chance of 
forming government. And he said to me — and I’m not going to 
quote him, mind you — but he said to me, go for it. He says, I 
want to get rid of those guys as bad as every Sask Party person 
does. So I did that. And unfortunately, as all members know, I 
lost my husband in 2008. 
 
But I ran again of course in 2011 and won the seat with 79.2 per 
cent at that time. And, Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve been the 
longest serving MLA for the Estevan constituency. I was one of 
the first 34 women to ever sit in this Chamber, and I was the 
first woman to represent the Estevan constituency. And I know 
the replacement, the next MLA from Estevan, is going to be a 
woman and her name is Lori Carr. And I know that there will 
be room on this side of the House for her. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there are some people I would like to thank. 
And I have to thank my kids, my son and my daughter, Terry 
and Trisha, who have kept my farm going. I still have my farm. 
And they’ve done a lot of work on the farm and just helped me 
out in, you know, every way they can. And that’s, you know, 
what all the kids do, I guess. 
 
But my grandchildren too, and I’ve told this story before. My 
oldest grandson will be 21. And when I was first elected, he 
was four years old. And he’d go around with his grandpa, and 
he couldn’t figure out . . . He’d say, Papa, how come 
Grandma’s pictures are all over the place? He just couldn’t 
understand the campaign posters and that. But you know, my 
grandchildren are big now, and I want to thank them because, as 
all members know on both sides, our spouses, our kids, and our 
grandkids make huge sacrifices so that we can be here and do 
the job we are elected to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank my mom. My mom lives in an 
apartment in Estevan, and she’s an avid supporter and she’s a 
very fair critic too. I mean she lets me know when she doesn’t 
think that the things I’ve said have been right. She’s just been 
there for me right the way through, and I want to thank her and 
my siblings. They’ve been so supportive. And my friend Al 
who is in the gallery, I want to thank him. He’s been a rock for 
me, and thank you so much. 
 
[11:15] 
 
My CAs: Rosalie has been with me for over eight years. Susan 
and Wilma: Susan has been there for about a year and a half and 
Wilma is my casual girl. And I want to thank my executive as 
well, caucus staff, members of Executive Council, and my 
colleagues. My seatmate has mentioned many of them, but 
thank you all. You’ve just been so great to work with. And you 
know, all the staff in the legislature, from the maintenance to 

the people at the front desk, security, and our Sergeant-at-Arms 
who will be retiring soon as well, thank you for everything you 
have done. 
 
And I also have to thank . . . I stayed in a hotel for the first eight 
years, Mr. Speaker, and then I moved into an apartment. And 
across the hall from me lived just the finest couple you could 
ever wish for, and we’ve got to be the very good friends. And 
Gerald and Geraldine are my friends and they’re both in their 
90s and they are just amazing. They watch this every day. I 
hope they are watching now because I think the world of them. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I’m just so thankful for everything that’s 
happened in the Estevan constituency, and I want to thank the 
people of the Estevan constituency for their support. It has been 
an absolute honour to serve them for 16-plus years. We’ve 
accomplished many projects. I guess I go back to 2011 when 
we had a terrible, terrible flood in the Estevan area, and we had 
a government that cared, made changes to the PDAP [provincial 
disaster assistance program] program, ministers that came down 
and helped the people through these difficult times. So I know 
those people, and I am very appreciative of that. 
 
CT scanner that I mentioned earlier in a member’s statement. 
Of course the carbon capture at Boundary dam which 
unfortunately the members opposite wrote off before it was 
even finished construction. The Energy Training Institute. And 
something that affects this whole province, and that’s STARS. 
STARS has made many, many trips, and I’m glad that Rod 
Gantefoer, my friend and former colleague, is here today. 
STARS has made many, many trips to the Estevan area. You 
know what . . . And you never want to see that helicopter come 
in your area, but they are angels. And you know, anyone that’s 
ever dealt with them knows that they’re angels. And it’s just a 
sense of security for every area of this province — mine, where 
there’s a lot of oil field and agriculture work and, you know, 
that’s what was one of the most important things. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, also the people of my constituency are very 
happy, as were all the people in the province, that it was this 
government that dealt with the issue of the education portion of 
property tax. And that was something that had been spoken 
about since Tommy was in power. Nothing was ever done 
because, you know, the stars didn’t align or whatever, but this 
government had the fortitude to deal with that issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can also remember when we were first elected to 
government in 2007 and there was a group of people that 
wanted to meet with a minister. And I, you know, just . . . You 
know, we were new in government and kind of used to the way 
things used to be. And so, you know, I just said I would try to 
get a minister to speak with them. And I went to a minister’s 
office and he said, well of course, you know, I’ll meet with 
them; are they going to come up or do they want me to go 
down? 
 
And people have said time and time again how they cannot 
believe how accessible this government is, meeting with the 
ministers. And I’m sure there isn’t a minister on this side that 
hasn’t been to Estevan or have someone come up to meet them. 
And many, many, many trips have been made to Estevan by 
members of cabinet. And I just thank them so much because we 
have accomplished a lot of things, thanks to the openness of the 



7868 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2015 

government of this side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleagues . . . First of all the Premier: it’s 
been an absolute pleasure to serve under his leadership. I thank 
you for that leadership. And the Premier’s become a good 
friend, and I just am so honoured to have served under him and 
for the confidence he put in me when he named me as caucus 
liaison to cabinet. That was a wonderful experience. 
 
And he and the rest of my colleagues, we’ve shared some really 
good times and we’ve shared some times where they weren’t so 
good, they weren’t very happy for me. But you know what? I 
could always go to them and they supported me. And they are 
my other family and I’m just going to miss them so much. 
 
So I’m not going to be too much longer here, Mr. Speaker. But 
to the other members that are retiring, I just want to wish them 
good health and happiness. To those that are seeking 
re-election, I offer you this advice: whether you won by a 
landslide last time or whether you were in a squeaker, just get 
out there and fight like you’re in third place or last place, and 
remain humble. And for as long as you have the love of this 
province, you will be successful. 
 
And this is the last time I get to do this, so I am going to leave 
the NDP a little bit of advice too, Mr. Speaker. The people in 
my constituency wouldn’t think it was me talking if I didn’t. 
But I’m going to leave the words of Helen Keller, and I don’t 
have the exact quote, so I will just say that there’s only one 
thing worse than being blind and that’s being able to see but 
having no vision. 
 
And I just got new glasses, Mr. Speaker. And I thought, I 
should leave the Leader of the Opposition my old glasses 
because when he looks across and sees the Premier, he could 
see that the Premier isn’t there and wouldn’t focus on him and 
ask him questions in question period when he isn’t there. 
 
But with that, Mr. Speaker, I say thank you to the Premier, 
thank you to my colleagues, and thank you to you, Mr. Speaker. 
God bless our province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a rather 
unusual day I think in the history of this particular facility. I 
believe it’s quite unique to have this many people deciding not 
to run of their own free will, not the will of the people. And I 
was just looking at the list of names and the years that they have 
served in this House and, you know, there’s about 150 years of 
corporate knowledge that is going to be leaving through these 
doors today when this is all over. 
 
And that’s a pretty important segment of our history as a party 
and certainly as a government, and I’m proud to be able to say 
that I played a part and I shared in that history. Not only am I 
proud, but I know that some of my family members are pretty 
proud. I have an elderly uncle in Calgary who says, if your dad 
had been alive today he’d have been so proud he’d be popping 
the buttons off his vest. He said that half a dozen times over the 
past 16 years or so. And I believe that’s true, frankly. My dad 
was a small-town minister and didn’t have a real good 
education, but he sure was willing to live his life, sort of, 

through us. As his sons did various things, achieved new 
heights, had new opportunities, he lived through us. And he 
came from a very poor agricultural family and never did have 
much, but he lived to enjoy some of the decisions and some of 
the challenges and careers that we were able to, my brother and 
I, were able to take in our lives. 
 
You know, I’ve known this day’s arrival was waiting for me. 
I’ve known it was coming for six months. I’ve thought about 
what I would say today, and I thought maybe I would say 
something profound. I don’t think that’s going to happen 
because I don’t think, I really don’t think anybody who follows 
politics or has been in this building is looking for the profound. 
 
I think what the people of my constituency respected most was 
plain talk and honesty and being there when they needed you — 
being at their kitchen table to talk about their problems and their 
aspirations and their dreams for the province. You know, I 
sometimes think that we don’t provide really good leadership. 
We’re a little bit behind where our constituents are. We sort of 
reflect what they want to be and what they have for aspirations 
in terms of the future of this great province. And so I lived that 
style of service, I think, and it’s served me well because the 
people kept coming to the polls and voting for me over the last 
sixteen and a half years. 
 
So if I’m going to offer any advice to anybody today, I’d say 
politics is a worthy endeavour. I might not have thought that 
when I first came here. I might have come for the wrong 
reasons. I did want to serve, but I might have had the wrong 
motivation. Now that I’ve been here long enough to have 
weighed the value of this role, I think it’s about service to 
people — nothing higher, nothing more, nothing less. And if 
you’re here for some other reason, you might make it to that 
ultimate plateau or that goal that you’ve established for 
yourself, some heightened level of responsibility or public 
recognition, but the point is, if you aren’t serving the people 
who sent you here, you’re not doing what the job was intended 
to be. 
 
I asked the House Leader how long I had to speak. He said 
about 20 minutes. I said, heck, I’m just getting warmed up in 20 
minutes. My voice won’t last a lot longer than that, so I’ll 
probably be a little more brief than usual. 
 
Nobody does this job by themselves, however. I have heard that 
comment from our previous speakers, and it’s true. You know, I 
got into politics because my wife said to me one day, I’m so 
tired of listening to you complain. If you don’t get off the couch 
and do something about that, I’m never going to listen again. So 
my wife in a way was the great motivator. 
 
Well so were the circumstances of the day, Mr. Speaker. I tried 
to address them in earlier comments: you know, when railroads 
were being abandoned and elevators were coming down and 
schools were being closed in half a dozen of the communities 
that I now represent. When you saw people packing up and 
leaving the province, and the three lanes west and the one lane 
east that I talked about previously. We lived that in southwest 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I remember after coming here, I was newly elected. And in 
my first speech I outlined all those complaints, all those things 



November 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7869 

I’d heard at those kitchen tables I’d visited. I outlined them in 
that speech and I said, we are here to serve notice on the 
government of the day, we want our due. We will not be 
ignored any longer. I’m paraphrasing that because I don’t 
remember exactly how the speech went, but that was the 
substance of the speech. 
 
And you know, I’m happy to report that even in opposition, I 
was able to make a difference for my constituents. Because of 
that three-lane-east idea, we got that highway, No. 1 Highway, 
twinned at an accelerated rate, much shorter time frame because 
of a very serious accident that took a lot of lives. And we got 
that project done. I’m very proud of that because I was in 
opposition at the time and I worked with the government to 
achieve that. I thought that was the best thing I could do for my 
constituents, not make a political issue out of it but work for a 
solution. And it has paid big dividends: lanes going west are 
only two, and lanes coming east are two. But the lanes coming 
east are a lot busier these days than they were then. 
 
[11:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to talk about the support of family and 
the support of staff because that’s equally crucial to our success 
as elected people. My wife would have been here today, I think, 
but she’s driving west, going back to a job that she’s held for 30 
years. It has shift work that’s needed to be done, and she does 
it. So she’s being responsible. She’s going to be there for her 3 
o’clock shift this afternoon. And she has done that repeatedly in 
our, you know, entire political life and previous to the political 
life. 
 
She’s put that job not first, but very high on her priority list 
because rural health care is a challenge in terms of finding 
people who will work. And if you have a job there, and 
somebody won’t come in or can’t come in, the next person on 
the line gets called and they’re expected to come in. And so a 
lot of times, she’s heading west to go to work; I’m coming east 
to represent the people of Cypress Hills. We stopped many 
times in Swift Current to meet and have coffee, and she’d be 
out there for a week and I’d be in here for a week. On the 
weekend, it would be the other way around. I’d be going west, 
and she’d be coming in. It’s an arrangement that we lived with, 
but it was part of our lives. 
 
But my wife paid a big price for me to be able to do this, and so 
did my kids. I just want that on the record, not so anybody will 
provide me an element of pity. I don’t ask for that. I don’t 
expect that. I knew what I was getting into. But there is a cost to 
this job; there is a price to be paid. And I’m not the only one 
who’s paid this price. Some of my very dear colleagues here 
today have paid a bigger price than I. And I want to 
acknowledge them, and I want to acknowledge their families 
and the contributions they have made to the success that each of 
us have enjoyed. 
 
In my office, there are constituency assistants that we all have, 
but I want to acknowledge a whole group of CAs actually I’ve 
had a number over the years. I started out newly elected with 
Sherry Webster holding down my chief CA’s position. I knew 
nothing about office organization from a political perspective. 
She’d had experience working with political people. I think Bob 
Pickering was one of the people that she worked for early on. 

After my election, she came in and organized the place and ran 
it. 
 
Beth Lundsten came in and worked there for a few years. 
Natasha Dore who is a senior admin here within the 
government now; I think she’s executive assistant to the deputy 
minister of Advance Education. Lucy Shorey, she went, joined 
the RCMP and turned out to be one of their spokesmen, public 
spokesmen in Ottawa. I mean, we had quality people in my 
office. 
 
Beth Humphrey who’s there now, she’s put up with me for 14 
years. And I don’t know what I would do without her in the 
office. Glenna Gordon served me for probably seven or eight 
years and just recently retired. Carol Miller, who I introduced 
here in the House the other day, has been with me for eight 
years. And Linda Wig is there one day a week, maybe one day 
every two weeks as needed. These are people who have 
contributed to my success in ways I’ll never be able to 
adequately address. 
 
I never had to worry about my expense accounts not balancing. 
They balanced to the penny. I never had to worry about nobody 
working, that they wouldn’t be able to staff the office. I said to 
the senior CA, this is your responsibility. You’ve got a budget. 
You’ve got an obligation. You find out who can work and who 
can’t, and I want the office covered. They did that amongst 
themselves. 
 
When you called my office and they answered, you knew you 
were going to get attended to because they paid attention to 
people when they called. They made copious notes. They made 
every effort to solve the problem before the boss got back. And 
if they couldn’t, here was the promise we made to the people of 
Cypress Hills: if they got, if we had a problem brought to us, we 
would get an answer back to them in 24 hours. If we couldn’t, 
we’d phone the constituent back and say, here’s what we’ve 
done, but we haven’t found a solution yet. Here’s what we’re 
going to do, and here’s when we’re going to try and come back 
to you with an answer. 
 
We dealt with our constituents like a good business would deal 
with its clients — provide service that they could count on. And 
I’ll tell you, I couldn’t have done that by myself. Those 
constituency assistants took that obligation as though it was sort 
of the reason they were working and the mantra of the place, 
and they abided by that standard of performance. I was well 
served by that. And I can’t tell my constituency assistants 
enough how much I appreciate their commitment and loyalty 
and determination to serve me and the constituents throughout 
Cypress Hills. It was a pleasure to work with them. 
 
I don’t think I ever had an argument or a fight with any 
constituency assistant. They offered me the greatest respect, and 
I in turn respected what they brought to my office and my 
service to the people. 
 
You know, I was pretty naive when I got involved with politics. 
I was riding a tractor, actually, one day doing some 
summerfallow, when I heard about the formation of the 
Saskatchewan Party. And I thought, man, that’s an idea whose 
time has come. I think I could support a party like that. 
 



7870 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2015 

Then the more I thought about it, the more I got to believe that 
maybe I could play a role in that party. But when the first 
convention was held, I was scared to go. I didn’t want to be 
known publicly as a political person, and I had no idea what this 
new party was going to, you know, start out with and so forth. 
So I skipped the first convention, but by the time the second one 
rolled around, I actually attended. And I listened to the speeches 
by the three people who were running for the leadership of the 
party at the time, and I was convinced that there was some real 
quality potential in this party, and that its opportunities were 
pretty real and there was maybe a future here. 
 
So I said to Elwin Hermanson, who happened to win the 
leadership, I think I might consider running for you. And Elwin 
wasn’t exactly overjoyed. I don’t know; he might have heard 
something about me. But he was kind of cautious, I’d say. He 
said, have you really thought about this? Do you know what 
this is all about? And I said, you know, I’ve followed politics 
for a long time, but no, I don’t know what it’s all about. But if 
I’m ever going to do it, it has to be now. I don’t want to, you 
know, ignore this opportunity and 10 years from now say, I 
wish I had done that. So I decided at that point I would do it and 
take whatever risks were associated with that decision. 
 
I was selling machinery in Shaunavon at the time. And of 
course that was pretty handy because my boss paid for my truck 
and gas, and while I was out making sales calls, I’d say, oh by 
the way, have you heard about this new political party? And 
you know, I was amazed at how many people thought that was, 
you know, a good idea, the creation of the Saskatchewan Party. 
So I signed up a lot of new members that way. When the day 
was done, kind of, the sales day was done, I’d use the evenings. 
If I was way out west by Govenlock and Consul and way out 
there where you can watch your dog run away for three days — 
that’s where that happens — I would go in the evenings, ranch 
to ranch, and sell memberships. 
 
And we had a contested nomination that year, but by the time it 
happened, when my opponent showed up with 40 people that he 
thought he could win the nomination with, I had 340 people in 
the hall. And I took that first nomination in a handy, clear-cut, 
simple majority — overwhelming — and that was the start of 
my political career. 
 
You know, I’ve never looked back. I’ve never regretted it. It’s 
been a great opportunity. I’ve met people that I would never 
have met before. I’ve travelled to places I had never expected I 
would be. I can’t tell you how good it’s been for me from an 
intellectual perspective. I love what I do. I love people. But I 
think I love contributing to the success of this province more 
than anything else. 
 
You know, my colleague from Estevan talked about vision. If 
you look at the stats that have developed in this province from a 
business perspective, an export perspective, over the last seven 
or eight years comparatively to the previous years, it isn’t about 
what this government has done alone. Yes, we have modified 
rules and regulations. We’ve made it simpler for people to 
prosper. It’s about vision. It’s about unfettering people’s 
abilities and desires to succeed.  
 
And I think we have brought a change of mind and a change of 
heart to this population that we haven’t seen in probably 100 

years. Maybe never. But you know, the early pioneers that came 
here had the same kind of optimism in a lot of ways, and the 
people are seeing the potential and opportunity in our province 
right now like they’ve never seen it before. And that is the 
foundation of the Saskatchewan Party government’s success. 
It’s not what we have done; it’s what they have done. We’ve 
just been sort of the mechanism by which that could be 
accomplished. 
 
Have we had highlights in my tenure in Cypress Hills? I am not 
watching the clock. I hope somebody else is. Yes, we’ve had 
lots of highlights. I said earlier that when I came to this place, 
we felt like we were the forgotten Southwest. That was the 
standard phrase anywhere west of Swift Current. Right, 
Premier? And I determined that that wouldn’t happen again. 
And so one of my objectives was to provide service and 
infrastructure to the Southwest region that I represented. And 
we were pretty successful at that. 
 
You know, we rebuilt Highway 32. That was one of our very 
first promises out of the gate. It took us three years to be able to 
do the whole project. It stills needs some upgrading now, I’m 
just saying. I think the minister said, just get in line. But you 
know, we rebuilt Highway 37 from the Frenchman River Valley 
down to Climax, beautiful highway. Most of Highway 37 is in 
really pretty good shape right now. Highway 13 from Eastend 
to Shaunavon was done. 
 
There have been a number of other projects that have been 
done, a couple of brand new schools in my constituency, a 
couple of . . . Well one very important hospital or integrated 
health centre in Maple Creek that is a fabulous facility. 
 
You know, Leader, the community of Leader has benefited 
significantly from our government. And I find that really 
interesting because the NDP had senior people in their 
government who called Leader home, and they could get 
nothing out of them — nothing. Judy Samuelson sat in the 
Premier’s office. She couldn’t convince them to spend a nickel 
in Leader. You know, we are putting a new health facility there 
in the next few years. We’ve rebuilt the highway from Leader 
up to the bridge going over the South Saskatchewan north. 
We’ve rebuilt a big section of Highway 32 coming into Leader 
from the east. You know those are the kinds of projects that 
governments need to deliver, and we’ve delivered. 
 
I saw a list the other day . . . I didn’t bring it with me, but I 
think the total money invested by our government in the 
Cypress Hills constituency alone has exceeded $136 million 
since we formed government — $136 million. Nobody can say 
that we are the forgotten Southwest anymore. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, when you come to a job like this, 
you might set out a number of goals and plans and, you know, 
when you accomplish most of what you set out to accomplish, I 
think it’s time to move on. I would say that for the most part 
I’m satisfied with what I was able to accomplish. There aren’t 
too many things left that need to be done. I mean there’s always 
more things that can be done, but things that were important to 
me and things that were immediately important to my 
constituents have by and large been provided. And I think it’s 
time for somebody else to carry that obligation on behalf of the 
people of Cypress Hills. 



November 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7871 

I’m afraid to do this, because one of my friends in the 
opposition side is going to pipe up soon and say that’s the first 
time I ever saw a windmill run on water. I do need to wind up. 
 
I want to tell my colleagues today, particularly on our side of 
the House . . . Although I don’t socialize a lot with my friends 
on the NDP side, I have a lot of respect for some of them. But I 
want to say generally speaking that in a political environment, 
this has been a really good group of people to work with. You 
know, the member from Saltcoats said he can’t ever remember 
hearing our caucus experience a raised voice. That is 
remarkable, given the tensions and the egos and all the ambition 
that sits around a table with, you know, 48 different people. 
That is amazing. And I think it’s indicative of the desire of us 
all to serve the province first and not our own interests. And I 
want to compliment my colleagues. It’s been a pleasure serving 
with them and enjoying their company and getting together 
inside and outside of session for some social gatherings, but for 
some business meetings and things. I always felt that I was well 
served by my colleagues, and I appreciate their support and the 
job that they do. 
 
[11:45] 
 
Mr. Premier, I want to thank you. You’ve been a good friend 
for a long time. I remember sitting in the office side by side 
downstairs in room 135, and the things we talked about, and 
the, you know, the possibilities of implementing those things if 
we ever became government. A lot of that has been realized. 
And I appreciated your confidence in those early years of our 
government. I enjoyed being Highways minister more than 
anything I think I could have imagined because that was 
something I really felt was important. Decent infrastructure 
supports economic opportunities like nothing else, with 
apologies to my colleague who thought Advanced Education 
was more important. We had that conversation several times. 
But you’ve provided us with sound and appropriate leadership, 
visionary leadership, and I want to thank you for that, I really 
do. 
 
And to all of my friends in the building, whether we’re talking 
about security, Pat Shaw has been, you know, a great friend, 
and his team; to the cafeteria where I spend way too much time 
but . . . And everybody in between: financial services, the 
library, wherever people work, Hansard. You know, I had a 
fellow from Hansard stop me on the street as I was walking 
here. He didn’t even tell me his name. But he said, I always like 
listening to you when you’re talking because you enunciate 
well. Well when I have a voice, I enunciate well. But I don’t 
think he’s on the job today. 
 
Nevertheless, whoever you are in this big and great building, 
this wonderfully historic building, I want to say thank you for 
the job you do. To those folks down there, the clerks, staff, 
whoever you are, thank you for doing a great job. I appreciated 
every one of you and the work you did. And we are justifiably 
proud of the quality of people that serve Saskatchewan through 
their role here in this. 
 
There’s probably many others things I should say and cover, but 
this is my final speech and my final sentence. Mr. Speaker, 
you’re a great friend. I love you dearly. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina South. 
 
Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You 
know, as one of our legislature’s retiring members, I really 
appreciate the chance to offer a few closing comments, if I 
might, on my time in provincial politics. And as other speakers 
have done, I want to begin with some well-deserved thank yous. 
First I want to acknowledge and thank my government caucus 
colleagues, the folks on this side of the House. And I want to 
commend their loyalty. I want to commend their camaraderie 
and their good humour over the years. It means a lot to me. I 
appreciate it very, very much. You’re just the greatest group of 
people ever. 
 
I also want to congratulate the folks on the other side of the 
aisle for holding our government accountable for its decisions 
and its programs, which is exactly what Her Majesty’s Loyal 
Opposition is supposed to do. 
 
Second I sincerely thank the legislative staff in all the many 
departments, as has been mentioned before, for all their hard 
work and their dedicated efforts to support us as elected 
members. They provide us with exemplary service each and 
every day, as we all know. 
 
In addition I welcome this opportunity to thank two very, very 
special people who have made my time here both much more 
enjoyable and much less difficult than it otherwise would have 
been. And that of course is my wonderful wife, Jocelyn, whose 
love and support I’ve always been to count on — it means the 
world to me — and also my very competent and remarkably 
patient constituency assistant, Kyle Leonard who’s in the west 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. And to him I simply want to say, it’s been 
great, buddy. Thanks. You’re absolutely awesome. 
 
I’d also like to thank the constituents, the good people of 
Regina South for their continuing support as well through eight 
years and two elections. Their support has been very gratifying 
indeed. 
 
Like all the parting MLAs, I’m going to leave this place with a 
great many memories of serving with the people in this 
particular room, this Assembly. Together we’ve worked hard, 
we’ve accomplished a lot, and we’ve certainly found ways to 
enjoy the experience along the way. This is very, very 
important, to be sure. 
 
But in the few minutes that’s available to me today, I’d rather 
focus on another very significant aspect of our activities here, 
and that is the impact of our work on the people that we are 
elected to serve. Three brief examples will serve to illustrate the 
point. 
 
I recall working very closely with our partners in municipal 
government to design and implement a brand new provincial 
revenue-sharing program, something that they had been waiting 
to see for a long, long time, as we all know. There was an 
enormous amount of consultation as we considered all the 
available options and eventually selected the one that we knew 
served everybody’s needs the best. 
 
I remember the day that we announced the program allocating 
the equivalent of a full 1 per cent of PST [provincial sales tax] 



7872 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2015 

to Saskatchewan’s municipalities. We did it right here in this 
room. And afterward we welcomed members of SUMA 
[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] and SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] and the 
New North just outside this room in the rotunda. It was an 
extraordinary day. It was an historic day. 
 
I met my old buddy, Allan Earle, SUMA’s president at the time, 
and with excitement clearly evident in his eyes, he declared that 
the new financial partnership changed everything and would 
allow municipalities to move forward on their agendas for 
renewal and growth in a way that up until this time had simply 
not been possible. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, even now, years later, municipal 
leaders still confirm that the extra funding continues to make a 
great big difference in their communities, but they quickly add 
that the predictability of this revenue stream has significantly 
increased their ability to plan for the future of their 
communities and the constituents that they represent. So on this 
key file, our work here clearly made a difference in people’s 
lives. And as a result, this is indeed one of my happiest 
memories. 
 
Here’s another one. I had the honour of attending the 20th 
anniversary I believe of the federal government’s treaty 
commission that celebrates the important relationship between 
First Nations and the Crown. Special guests at this event 
included a delegation from the First Nations Veterans’ 
Association of Saskatchewan, a wonderful group of mostly 
older vets who had served in the Korean War. We got talking. 
They mentioned an upcoming fundraising dinner that was going 
to be held for their association in North Battleford, and they 
asked me if I would like to attend. Yes, I said, I’d really like to 
be there with you for your special evening, and so it was. The 
Premier thought it was a great idea as well and immediately 
provided a letter which would be read as part of my remarks to 
the group. If I remember correctly, the final sentence was 
something like this: on behalf of a very grateful province, 
please accept our sincere thanks for your service and your 
sacrifice to your communities and to Saskatchewan. 
 
It was pretty tough to read the faces of these very reserved and 
extremely modest veterans attending the dinner. So I wasn’t 
really sure about their reaction to my remarks and the Premier’s 
letter. Had I done the right thing, I wondered, or had I somehow 
missed the mark? Well it didn’t take long to find out. When I 
returned to my table, all doubts disappeared in an instant as one 
of the stoic old vets, with a tear trickling down his cheek, said, 
that was good; thank you very much. Obviously our gesture of 
thanks and respect made a difference in the lives of these truly 
exceptional people and left me with another fantastic memory. 
 
Here’s my third and final example. It was my great pleasure, 
with some encouragement from the member from Swift 
Current, if I remember, to provide a significant increase in the 
Tourism, Parks, Culture and Sport budget to assist 
Saskatchewan’s regional park system. Now as members from 
both sides of the House will know, regional parks are operated 
by our province’s rural municipalities and, heck, they do a 
splendid job. They really do. It’s an amazing system that they 
run. It provides quality recreational opportunities for residents 
from Saskatchewan and a lot of visitors from adjacent provinces 

and states as well. 
 
And the RMs [rural municipality] have a way of stretching any 
dollars that they receive from government two- and three-fold 
through local contributions of labour, materials, and funding of 
their own. That’s just the way it is in rural Saskatchewan. When 
I arrived at the association’s annual general meeting to bring 
greetings, John Froese, their president, pulled me aside. He 
confided that his executive committee was fully aware of the 
new provincial contribution and they were pretty excited about 
it. But he figured I might enjoy passing along the really good 
news to the general membership myself. Wow, I thought, what 
an opportunity. You’ve got to like the way this guy thinks. 
 
However after I finished my speech and made my 
announcement about the funding, the room went unexpectedly 
dead quiet. It was actually kind of eerie. It actually was kind of 
scary. And then suddenly everyone rose to their feet and I got a 
standing ovation. How cool is that, Mr. Speaker? Another day 
where our work as MLAs made a big different in people’s lives, 
and yet another great memory. 
 
What’s the point here? Well the point, Mr. Speaker, is that 
regardless of how difficult scrums can be, regardless of how 
raucous question period can be — and here I want to offer my 
apologies for occasional transgressions, Mr. Speaker — and no 
matter how taxing committee work and adjourned debates often 
are, our work both in and I might say most especially outside 
this building can make a big, big difference in the lives of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Sometimes it takes a lot of money, sometimes it doesn’t take 
much money at all, and sometimes it takes no money 
whatsoever. But regardless of cost, making a difference in 
people’s lives is the reason that we’re all here. And I’m 
completely confident that members will continue in the future, 
just as they have in the past, to work with this understanding 
foremost in their minds. 
 
Finally, colleagues, when you reach, as I have, the end of your 
career as a member of this Legislative Assembly, may each and 
every one of you retire with as many happy and satisfying 
memories as I know that I will. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, as one of the few people ever to roller 
skate in this fine building, as probably the only MLA ever to eat 
sandwiches in caucus meetings, and — absolutely no doubt 
about it — the only person ever to bring his dogs into the 
building and have their names read into Hansard, thank you so 
much for a wonderful time. All the best to each and every one 
of you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s an honour to rise in the Assembly today and 
deliver some remarks as the first and only member of 
Canora-Pelly. As everyone in the House knows, Canora-Pelly 
was created in 1995, and I’ve had the honour of serving that 
constituency since 1995, so that’s the reason for that comment 
about first and only. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I begin though I would like to, with the . . . 



November 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7873 

I don’t know if I need your permission, Mr. Speaker, but I’m 
just going to bypass that and move directly to some 
introductions in the Assembly. Mr. Speaker, you’ve 
reprimanded me many times in this Assembly, so I will look 
forward to that next reprimand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seated in the gallery are, of course, a number of 
friends and family, a number of constituents. And I want to 
introduce Sylvester Hrynkiw. Little wave there please, 
Sylvester; sorry I had to wake you up. Terry Dennis. Terry 
Dennis is the former mayor of Canora-Pelly, of Canora and will 
be the next member representing Canora-Pelly. And of course 
Carol Sleeva. Carol Sleeva is my current constituency assistant 
and just does a yeoman’s work for me. But I also want to 
introduce a friend who was my first constituency assistant, and 
that is Jeff Hryhoriw. Jeff, thank you so much for coming down 
from Saskatoon. 
 
Also seated in the gallery is a lady who has controlled my last 
seven and a half years when I was part of this government, and 
that’s Jane Johnson. Not my wife, no, sorry. Jane Johnson has 
been a great office manager for me when I served as the 
minister of Education and the minister of Finance, and I want to 
thank you, Jane. But also, the most important lady in my life is 
my spouse, Gail. Thank you so much for being here. 
 
[12:00] 
 
Over the past 20 years, 20-plus years, I’ve had the privilege of 
working in this magnificent building. Its grandeur has never 
failed to impress me. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to begin 
with a set of thank yous by saying thank you to the architects 
and the engineers of this great building. I’ve somehow had the 
reputation of having a very forceful voice. I want acknowledge 
the fact that the architects and the engineers who designed this 
building and the great acoustics have allowed me to develop 
that responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Chamber also reminds me of the important 
work that goes on within these walls. This Chamber which 
houses sincere and often spirited debate lies at the core of what 
makes this province and this country so great. Democracy is not 
always pretty, not always easy, not always perfect but always 
by far the best alternative to any other form of governing a 
people. And I am proud and honoured to have been a part of 
that democratic process. 
 
My earliest days in this place were as an opposition MLA and I 
learned a great deal about how things work and what things 
needed to work better. And I must say that I much prefer sitting 
on this side of the House rather than on that side of the House, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I do want to comment about one election, Mr. Speaker, the 
election of 2003. You know, after reflecting . . . We were of 
course expecting to win that election and become the 
government of the province of Saskatchewan in 2003. But as I 
look back, and I’m sure many others in this Assembly have 
looked back at that election, probably not winning that election 
is maybe the best thing that could have ever happened to the 
Saskatchewan Party because what it did, it allowed us as 
opposition to grow, to develop strong policy, to ensure that we 
understood what the people of Saskatchewan needed. And I 

think the rest is history, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The formation of the Saskatchewan Party was one of the most 
challenging but rewarding times in my political career. During 
our time in office and under the leadership of our Premier, 
Saskatchewan’s population has grown significantly and our 
province has become a leader in Canada. I have greatly enjoyed 
serving not only the constituents of Canora-Pelly but also all the 
citizens of this great province. I will miss that interaction and I 
will miss being part of the team. My time in caucus, my time in 
cabinet, as a committee member, as a treasury board member — 
and I know my treasury board colleagues will know how great 
that group is that are in treasury board — it has resulted in so 
many friendships. 
 
I want to take some time today to put a few things on the record 
though, Mr. Speaker. It’s my last opportunity to do so and I’ve 
found as I’ve travelled around the province, even just going 
back home to Canora-Pelly, not everyone watches the 
Assembly. Not everyone watches televisions. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Say it isn’t so. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — I know. My colleague, the member from 
Kindersley — say it isn’t so. But unfortunately it is. And 
sometimes you do have to correct a record. You do have to 
ensure that the record is accurate. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to begin by using a quote from a 
British journalist and politician. He was a politician for a 
number of years, decades and decades ago. His name is Charles 
P. Scott. And he said this, and I quote, “Comment is free but 
facts are sacred.” Mr. Speaker, I like that quote because I like to 
have things accurate. I like to have facts on the record. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I do want to spend a little bit of time, and I 
hope I don’t take too much time, because, Mr. Speaker, one of 
the areas . . . And I’m not going to talk about all of the areas 
that we have, you know, accomplished so much, whether it’s in 
Health or whether it’s in Highways or whether it’s in other 
areas of government, but I do want to spend some time talking 
about education. 
 
As everyone knows, education has been my life. I’ve spent 11 
years as a teacher/principal. I’ve spent nine years as an elected 
school board member. And then when I was over there in 
opposition, I served as the Education critic for a while, and of 
course I served for two and a half years as the minister of 
Education. So I think I have a little bit of an understanding of 
education. But I have a lot of passion about education. 
 
So I’m going to just put a couple of things on the record, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when we came into office in 2007, there 
was no graduate retention program. There was no Saskatchewan 
Advantage Scholarship. There was no Saskatchewan advantage 
grant for education savings. None of those things existed, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And you know what also didn’t exist in post-secondary 
education? The rebuilt campus at Weyburn, Southeast Regional 
College; the rebuilt campus at Humboldt, the Carlton Trail 
Regional College. The affiliated college over in Muenster, St. 
Peter’s College, didn’t have its current standings. And most 



7874 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2015 

importantly in my area, I know the members from the east side 
of the province — the member for Yorkton, the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats — will recognize that the Parkland Regional 
College in Yorkton didn’t exist as it currently did. Mr. Speaker, 
over $60 million was spent just on those regional colleges. So 
some people ask, okay, so where did you spend some of your 
money as Finance minister? Well I can tell you that those 
colleges are there because of what our government did. 
 
Now I’m going to turn to the Education portfolio, the pre-K to 
12 [pre-kindergarten to grade 12]. Mr. Speaker, having been a 
teacher . . . And I know there are teachers on both sides of the 
Assembly. Many will understand that the earliest intervention is 
the best for recognizing what we can do for our children. And 
one of the situations that really intrigued me, Mr. Speaker, was 
the fact that the minister of Education was responsible for child 
care spaces. 2007 there were 8,850 child care spaces. We were 
last in the provinces and we were last, not because we wanted to 
be but because of government decision. And I’m not being 
critical of former member for Nutana, Pat Atkinson, but this is 
what Pat Atkinson said. She said: 
 

Saskatchewan has the poorest record when it comes to 
child daycare, and, Mr. Speaker, I take some responsibility 
for that because I was part of a government that did not 
put a lot of new resources into child care. 

 
So you can see, Mr. Speaker, that indeed 8,850 spots were not 
sufficient. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, when we include the numbers that we will 
have at our nine joint-use spots where we’re putting in 90 child 
care spaces in each of those nine, we will have 15,173 spots. 
 
And the other statistic, Mr. Speaker, is about pre-K. In 2007, we 
had 155 pre-K situations in schools, 155. Today we have 316, 
double the amount. Much more to do, of course, but we needed 
to ensure that those spaces were there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to put a long list on the record now, not 
for the purpose of in any way criticizing what has come from 
the NDP in the way of petitions because petitions are a way of 
the electorate to bring forward concerns. But for those people 
who don’t watch question period and don’t watch this 
Legislative Assembly, I want them to be able to turn to a list 
that tells them what has happened in the K to 12 system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I began as minister of Education, a couple 
of people over in the Regina Public board made this comment, 
and I’m quoting verbatim from Don Hoium who was director of 
education. He says, “We haven’t had a new build in Regina for 
over a decade so we’re looking forward to what is quite an 
expansive capital development in Regina public schools.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I hear people say that there hasn’t been 
much done in schools — we saw Prairie Spirit come forward 
demanding that, you know, they take materials out of a school 
because the ceilings were falling down, even though they 
received $1 million of emergency funding from the Minister of 
Education — it bothers me. It bothers me that someone isn’t 
looking at the whole picture. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, here’s some names: the Oxbow Prairie 

Heights School, the Elrose Composite School, the Leader 
Composite School, Maple Creek Composite High School, 
Langenburg School, St. Brieux School, Hafford Central School, 
Hudson Bay School, Porcupine Plains Composite — you can 
see the member over there in Carrot River Valley’s pretty 
pleased with that Hudson Bay School — Hillmond School, 
Gravelbourg School, Lumsden Elementary, Balcarres School, 
Birch Ridge School in Turnor Lake, Churchill Community High 
School in La Ronge, Stobart Community High School in Duck 
Lake, Emerald Ridge Elementary School in White City, 
Humboldt Elementary School, Humboldt Collegiate Institute. 
 
École St. Thomas, Lloydminster; College Park Elementary, 
Lloydminster; St. Michael School, Weyburn; Weyburn 
Comprehensive School; All Saints Catholic, Swift Current; 
École Centennial, Swift Current; École St. Anne, Prince Albert; 
Carlton Comprehensive, Prince Albert; Sacred Heart School, 
Moose Jaw; Warman Middle Years; Warman Public; Warman 
Catholic Elementary; Martensville Catholic; Martensville 
Public Elementary; Sacred Heart Community School, Regina; 
École St. Andrew, Regina; École Connaught Community 
School, Regina; Seven Stones, Regina; Douglas Park, Regina; 
Arcola, Regina; Campbell Collegiate, Regina. 
 
Scott Collegiate, Regina; Coopertown Public Elementary, 
Regina; Coopertown Catholic, Regina; Greens on Gardiner 
Public, Regina; Greens on Gardiner Catholic, Regina; Harbour 
Landing Public, Regina; Harbour Landing Catholic, Regina; 
Nutana Collegiate, Saskatoon; Willow Grove Elementary, 
Saskatoon; Holy Family School, Saskatoon; Georges Vanier 
Catholic, Saskatoon; Holy Cross Catholic, Saskatoon; St. 
Mary’s, Saskatoon; E.D. Feehan Catholic High School, 
Saskatoon; Rosewood Public, Saskatoon; Rosewood Catholic, 
Saskatoon; Hampton Village Public, Saskatoon; Hampton 
Village Catholic, Saskatoon; Evergreen Public, Saskatoon; 
Evergreen Catholic, Saskatoon; Stonebridge Public, Saskatoon; 
Stonebridge Catholic, Saskatoon. And the last, Mr. Speaker — 
the 65th either new school, rebuilt school, renovated school — 
is what occurred here in Regina at the École Monseigneur de 
Laval at the former Usher Collegiate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So you see, Mr. Speaker, the reason for putting that on the 
record is for the public of this great province to understand that 
there has been a lot done. This list, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 
Education may correct my numbers, but I doubt it. He will 
recognize, he will recognize that this has meant over $1 billion 
worth of expenditure on schools. 
 
As many in this Assembly know, education is that passion and I 
feel very strongly about it because it’s something that we 
needed to do. And I want to thank all of my colleagues, those 
who were there in ’07 who began in cabinet and said, you 
know, we need to do something. We need to do something 
about our education infrastructure. It’s falling down. Yes, 
there’s more work to do, and I know the critic over there will 
indicate that there’s more work to do. Of course there is, but 
this is $1 billion worth of spend  on 65 schools. 
 
And I’m not going to get into comparing the NDP record from 
the previous 10 because I think Don Hoium, as director of 
education and Regina Public’s director, made the very same 
comment. He said, we haven’t had anything for 10 years. We 
haven’t had a major school building in 10 years, when I made 



November 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7875 

that announcement in 2008. So I think this speaks for itself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to extend . . . I want to take some time to 
express my sincere gratitude to a number of individuals and 
groups who have helped me out in so many ways. And this will 
be the tough part. Talking about education is fun and easy, but 
this will be the tough time. 
 
I want to begin by talking about people of Canora-Pelly. I’m 
not going to spend a lot of time saying thank you because, as 
I’ve said in my bit of retirement, honoured banquet back in 
Canora, I don’t know who those 50 people were in 1995. 
Because you have to remember I had that . . . I was known as a 
landslide winner because I won with the smallest plurality in 
1995. I wasn’t given a chance to win, but I did. And I won by 
50 votes. 
 
So Canora-Pelly, the area has changed a little bit. But I want to 
thank all of the people of Canora-Pelly for electing me, for 
re-electing me and, you know, ensuring that I understood, that I 
understood the needs of Canora-Pelly and the needs of this 
great province because that’s what we’re here for. We’re here to 
serve. 
 
[12:15] 
 
I’ve already mentioned my constituency assistants, my first one 
of course being Jeff Hryhoriw. Now my current one of course is 
Carol Sleeva, but I also want to thank Bob Blahay. I’ve only 
had three constituency assistants, full-time assistants, in my 
entire almost twenty and a half years, and I want to thank those 
three individuals for all their guidance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here we have a lot of legislative teams. My 
colleagues have referred to the family here, and the legislative 
team is strong in this building. And I’m not going to single out 
anybody other than Jane Johnson for that tremendous support 
here in the building. As I indicated, Jane has been here, she 
came over from Education, I think it was November of 2007. 
And she didn’t know what she was getting into when she 
realized that I was going to be her boss, but we’ve had a great 
working relationship for seven and a half years. So thank you 
very much. 
 
To my Education colleagues — whether it be Audrey 
Roadhouse or all of the other people that worked in Education 
for my two and a half years, many of them of course are still 
there working with the current minister — thank you. 
 
Finance. Finance was a joy to be involved in, I can say that, Mr. 
Premier, and I thank you for allowing me to serve for even that 
extra year beyond that announcement that I made over a year 
and a half ago. Tremendous work done by so many in not 
always easy times, not always easy times. But I want to thank 
all of the people in Finance: Karen and Clare and all of the 
other assistant leaders over there for their hard work. 
 
The member from Melville-Saltcoats mentioned Reg Downs 
and Kathy Young. I too want to extend my appreciation to them 
and also to Joe Donlevy. And I’m not going to indicate many 
other names because the people in Exec Council, when you’re 
in cabinet or even when you’re not, they’re very, very helpful 
because you have to . . . If you don’t know, you should be 

asking. As an MLA, whether or not you are in cabinet, you 
should be asking. And these are the people that will ensure that 
we knew  what was going on, that we knew as MLAs, that we 
knew as cabinet ministers, even members in opposition. I recall 
having to do a particular response to something called the wheat 
sheaf, and I can tell you I didn’t have a clue what I was talking 
about, but that’s for another day to explain that one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to thank the Premier for the leadership 
that he’s shown to all of the people in the province of 
Saskatchewan, but most especially here to us as MLAs. Thank 
you to my fellow MLAs for allowing me to be part of your 
team. 
 
I want to extend my appreciation to family, and of course much 
changes over 21 years. I think probably my becoming a member 
of the Saskatchewan Party is maybe due to my late dad. I also 
. . . I want to extend my appreciation to all of my siblings: my 
brothers and sisters and their families. I’ve had the privilege of 
having nieces and nephews here when I was delivering the 
budget on behalf of the province of Saskatchewan, and that’s 
always, always appreciated. 
 
My two children, to Lindsay in Calgary, soon to be married. Of 
course I think most of you already know that Lindsay and her 
fiancé were engaged back a few months ago in the summer, and 
we’re planning a family wedding. But also to BOWS, to 
B-O-W-S — Bryce, Olivia, Willow, and Scarlett — thank you 
to them. 
 
When I was elected in 1995, both Lindsay and Bryce were, I 
think, 11 and 16 respectively. So when you have two children, 
you miss a lot of things. You miss a lot of things back at home. 
And I want to thank Gail for doing all of that hard work, still 
being the teacher and principal and finishing off 36 years of 
education, I think it is, and still ensuring that our kids did what 
they needed to do. Gosh, this is tough. 
 
Politics at any level is a difficult job because everybody has 
different expectations and needs, and decisions and choices 
have to be made — tough choices, choices not everyone agrees 
with. But in all my dealings, I have endeavoured to be fair and 
prudent and mindful of how best to serve the people of this 
province. 
 
Despite what some people might think, I know from my years 
here that MLAs on both sides of this House worked diligently 
and with great integrity for the greater good of this province and 
country. It is a job that requires a thick skin at times — one I 
don’t have right now — but it is also a job that brings 
tremendous satisfaction when you are able to improve people’s 
lives. As I leave, I have no regrets for the past 20 years. I have 
greatly enjoyed building a better province and a brighter future 
for all. God bless Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I want to thank 
you and your colleague, the Deputy Speaker, for listening to me 
very carefully for two full days. And I think when I heard my 
colleague, the former Finance minister talking now, I 
recognized that we all need a lot of time to try to correct the 
record different times. And I appreciate his comments there. 



7876 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2015 

But today I think I’m going to do something different. I’m 
going to talk about how as a legislator I’m here because of the 
people of Regina Lakeview but the people of Saskatchewan. 
And I’m here because people have trusted me to present their 
questions, their issues to government when I was in government 
and to government when I’m now in opposition. And that’s a 
very special task that every one of us has. 
 
And I know that there are very few people who get to sit in 
these chairs and, as we’ve heard today, there are very few 
people that get to be here almost 21 years. And I really do 
register that bittersweet emotion about the fact that I’m going to 
some other role where I will listen carefully to people and help 
them. The next Government of Saskatchewan will see me 
regularly, whether it’s the government from this side of the 
House or a government from that side of the House, because 
that’s part of who I’ve always been, but even more so now that 
I understand how this place works. 
 
There are so many aspects of how public policy is made. And 
all of us know that the word politics means power, right? And 
power is both a blessing and a curse because you can do things. 
You can fix problems. But often you don’t have the resources to 
do that, so how do you make that balance? And I think that’s 
how those of us who have been here for a long time are still 
here because we’ve tried to maintain that kind of balance. 
 
And I’ve very much appreciated the speeches that have been 
given so far, and I look forward to the ones that are coming 
because we’re at one of those days where we can be positive 
about what it is to be a politician. We can be very, very positive 
about the future of our province, and we can be very, very 
positive about the long-term relationships that we’ve developed 
here. And I know that many of the members across the way I’ve 
had chances to visit with socially and also in developing and 
working on policy things. And I know that, much as we’ve had 
disagreements for almost 21 years on a number of things, we’ve 
also had many things where we’ve worked together. 
 
And it’s interesting how you have a special bond with those 
people who are your critics. And I was thinking about that when 
we were talking about Mr. Heppner, because Mr. Heppner was 
a burr in my side when I was the Justice minister, but he was 
also that high school teacher who made sure people did the best 
they could. I think about the critics in my role as Health and the 
Deputy Premier. He was pretty tough on me for a long time. I 
know Mr. Gantefoer back there, he was pretty tough on me for 
a long time. But especially the Deputy Premier, he got to see 
the other side of that. And as I said to him, and I say to my 
present person that I’m kind of tough on, is that we put together 
a plan in December 2001, with the assistance of many people, 
including the present Health minister, and in many ways we’ve 
stuck with that. 
 
And it’s when they’ve been freelancing over there that we get 
into trouble, and so I continue to say that. But also what I know 
is that we all have to remember, in this place, that we’re 
standing on the shoulders of the women and men who have 
been before us. And if you can remember that, you can make a 
very, very . . . I guess you can do positive things for the 
province. 
 
Now unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I’ve gotten quite used to being 

able to talk forever so I’m going to have to come back to some 
very specific things here. 
 
I want to say some thank yous. My colleagues who are part of 
this caucus and our leader are my super-family, if I can put it 
that way, and each one of them has contributed to who I am. 
They supported me when I stepped into a role of being the 
leader as we sorted out what happened after 2011, and we’ve 
stuck together very well. I think even the members opposite 
would agree that we’ve figured out some very good ways to ask 
questions and raise issues, and I think that this ability to work 
together has been amazing. 
 
And so I want to say thank you to each one of you. And if I had 
my seven hours, Mr. Speaker, I would talk about 10 minutes on 
each one of them, but I won’t do that. But thank you very much 
to each of you. And I want to thank the Premier and the 
members across the way for answering questions when they 
can, but also for the leadership you’ve shown over the last 
number of years. There are obviously some . . . There’s some 
fraying at the edges, if I can put it that way, and we’ll see what 
the public thinks next April, but that’s a factor as well. 
 
I also want to thank some of the people who got me into politics 
— and that’s Premier Romanow and his wife, Eleanore, 
Premier Calvert, his wife, Betty, and Dwain Lingenfelter, and 
Louise Simard who was my predecessor — because they said, 
you can do this job. I mean you’re somebody who can come 
forward and represent Regina Lakeview. 
 
I want to also thank . . . There’s a whole number of people who 
helped me at the very beginning of getting started, and one of 
them was the member from Regina South. And I’ll say thank 
you to him for good advice that he gave me in 1995. 
 
At the same time, I also had a very, after I got elected, a very 
tough taskmaster, a guy named Brian Topp. And all of us know 
Brian Topp, ran against Mr. Mulcair, and didn’t get the national 
leadership but he’s over working hard in Alberta. But more 
especially his wife, Rebecca Elbourne, was very much a part of 
my campaign team. 
 
[12:30] 
 
I also want to talk just briefly about one person who was elected 
with me in ’95, and the other members who were elected in ’95 
also have really good feelings about him, and that’s Lindy 
Kasperski. And Lindy ended up having all kinds of adversity in 
his life as it moved to the end, and then he died. But he always 
had a sense of optimism that encapsulated what it means to be a 
Saskatchewan person. And I thought of that as we were 
celebrating the, I don’t know what . . . I think it was the 40th 
anniversary of all of the multicultural work in Saskatchewan, 
and that’s where he started his career. So I want to say a special 
mention of Lindy Kasperski. 
 
Now also in this place we can’t do our work unless we have 
very good staff in our caucus office. And I have a number of the 
caucus members upstairs, and I want to say thank you to them 
individually: Linsay Martens, Cheryl Stecyk, Erin Morrison, 
Jannet Shanks, Eric Anderson, Doyle Fox, Katherine Norton, 
Melissa Bendig, Mitchell Bonokoski, and Eric Bell. All of you 
have been incredible supports for us as individuals, but also as a 



November 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7877 

team. 
 
And I can say too that the government has thanked some of the 
people that are working behind us. And I was especially pleased 
to hear about Reg Downs because his sister used to live next 
door to me. And Reg was a young guy who was interested in 
law and things, and I’ve followed his career for a long time. 
 
But what I want to say is that when you’re brought in to work 
on these kinds of jobs, you also, as staff, both sides of the 
House, have that special task of trust. There’s people that come 
to you in trust, and I say that you have done an excellent job of 
working with the trust that people give us, and then also you. 
 
I want to say thank you to my constituency assistants that I have 
right now. That’s Conni Yakimchuk, Cory Oxelgren, and Judy 
Kerr. Elaine Wood was my first constituency assistant, and she 
provided very good advice for me for a long time. I think I’d 
have to say that probably most, at least well probably three or 
four of the elections, that’s how I got re-elected was Elaine was 
working with me. Also Karen Pattison worked with me, and 
Bernie Yakimchuk. 
 
When I was a minister, and I was thinking, well it’s exactly 20 
years ago on November 22nd that I was appointed the minister 
of Justice. And I want to say thank you to Judy Samuelson for 
making sure I had very good staff. And my very first executive 
secretary and sort of a team of secretaries were Wendy 
Hollinger and Elaine Maksymiw, and all the years I was a 
minister, those were the main people who kept me out of 
trouble on all kinds of levels but also were absolutely 
supportive. My chiefs of staff, I only had three of them: Betty 
Ann Cox, Heather Nord, and Conni Yakimchuk, and then 
Michele Kobayashi who also worked. I want to say thank you 
to them as well for the kind of work that they were able to 
provide me in Justice, Crown Investments, Health, and then 
Environment. 
 
Now there’s also a sense of working here in this place. And, 
Mr. Speaker, you’re very much a leader of this organization, 
and we don’t always agree with you here or outside of the place 
but many times we do. I mean we always I think appreciate 
finally the kinds of things that result, and so I want to thank you 
for patience, even though you show a lot of impatience 
sometimes. And then to the Table, the Clerks and all of the 
Pages, and especially to Pat Shaw and all of the staff that work 
with him. And as I had a chance to say last week, there are 
many situations that Pat helped me and my family, and I 
appreciate that. 
 
Also I want to say a special thank you to the press. And I think 
Murray Mandryk’s been here my whole career, Stefani 
Langenegger for a long, long time, Emma Graney more 
recently, and Sarah Mills. And there’s a whole bunch of others 
who I’m not naming out, but I’m going to say Wayne Mantyka 
has also been here my whole career. 
 
And one person I want to say a special thank you to who’s now 
in the background but taught me a lot about how to deal 
graciously with the press was John Weidlich at CBC [Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation]. And so I hope you’ll pass that on to 
Mr. Weidlich, Stefani. 
 

Now one of the other factors for me clearly has been my family. 
And I get teased fairly regularly that I seem to have family in 
every corner of the province, but I’m proud to say that I do. 
And I have very many connections that have been very helpful 
in this job as a politician. I’m not going to name them all, but 
I’m going to say that I’m here because of that. 
 
I want to put it on the record that when my great-grandfather 
Ole and his son John Farden came to Saskatchewan in 1903 to 
Macrorie, just near Outlook, they were the first ones that came. 
But they came very specifically because they wanted their 
children and grandchildren to have an education and be part of 
society. My grandfather John married Anna who then my 
mother, Randi, and Gertrude were born in that family, and those 
are my roots on my mother’s side. 
 
My father’s mother came up to Saskatchewan and arrived in 
Regina on July 4th, 1912, four days after the tornado. And she 
would tell us about what it looked like to see the worst disaster 
from a tornado in Canadian history. A couple of years later she 
married my grandfather — that was Josefine Jacobson. She 
married my grandfather Andrew Nilson who had actually 
worked for the fellow who later became the governor of South 
Dakota before he came up to Saskatchewan, but he came from 
Norway as well. All of these were Norwegians. But they ended 
up then living near Parkbeg, Saskatchewan, and that’s still 
where I have my roots on my dad’s side. Those are places that 
are important for me. 
 
I’m going to give a short little poetry piece from my favourite 
poem by one of the poets from down at Wood Mountain, 
Andrew Suknaski. And I’m just going to say this last line of this 
poem: 
 

I claim these things, my ancestral space to move through 
and beyond 
Chronicling the meaning of these vast plains in a 
geography of blood and failure 
Making them live. 

 
We all are connected in some way to this place, and that’s why 
we’re here. And we need to remind ourselves that we do that. 
 
My geography of blood, my roots, are my parents who are still 
alive and just live over across the lake — they can see the dome 
from their condominium — Tom and Randi Nilson. And 
they’re very much a part of my life still and provide lots of 
advice on a regular basis. 
 
My mother’s sister Gertrude and her husband Curtis were my 
godparents. And my godfather died in the spring in Saskatoon 
and Gertrude still lives in Saskatoon, but they have provided 
guidance to me my whole life. 
 
When I moved back to Saskatchewan for one year in 1978, my 
wife Linda came with me and we’ve been together now 41 
years, and she has been providing a very good, stable influence 
on my life all of these years. I remember when I said I was 
thinking about running, she said, well we’ve been married for 
over 20 years and I did promise for good or bad, and I’m not 
sure what this is. I think in the long run she’ll look back and 
say, well there were many, many good things. 
 



7878 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2015 

And that I think is important to remember for all of us, and 
especially for some of the younger members or some of the new 
people who are going to come in. It is hard on your family. You 
know, our kids have done well but they also missed out on 
certain things; but they gain on certain things. 
 
But Linda has been very steadfast. She’s not here today because 
she’s over at the cancer clinic seeing patients, and that’s what 
comes first in her life. 
 
My daughter Ingrid has basically blossomed into an actor and 
she’s living in Vancouver, although she’s in Toronto today 
because one of her films is at the BITS Film Festival tomorrow 
night. For those who don’t what BITS means, that means Blood 
in the Snow, Canadian horror movies. So I’m not so sure about 
this one, but we’ll find out. 
 
But she also does a lot of things that are really interesting 
around voice acting, so Barbie, Strawberry Shortcake, My Little 
Pony. If you hear a Regina accent when you’re listening to 
those cartoons, that’s probably Ingrid’s voice that’s there. 
 
My younger daughter Solveig, as you all know, is a great 
student, a great athlete here in Regina, and she’s just going to 
graduate from medical school in Calgary. And I need to thank 
her as well. She hopes to come and boost the numbers of 
doctors in Saskatchewan, and so we’re waiting to see how that 
sorts itself out over the next year. 
 
My wife’s parents are still alive too. They’re in their 90s, and 
they’re also people that have supported us over the years. When 
I was first elected, they came to be here to help take care of the 
kids, to assist my parents. So Stan and Betty Lee of Everett, 
Washington, I want to acknowledge them. 
 
My brother, Ralph Nilson, who many of you know, is now 
president of Vancouver Island University and his wife, Suzie, is 
a professor there, and they send all their good wishes to me, but 
I think to all of us who are serving. And I think from Ralph’s 
perspective, a special message to the member from 
Canora-Pelly because he worked with him over many, many 
years. And their children, Anna and Bethany, have benefited 
well from schooling in Saskatchewan and other places and are 
well on their careers. But they were all very much a part of my 
support. 
 
My sister JoAnn lives in Saskatoon and works at University 
Hospital, deals with the hemophiliac people as a 
physiotherapist, and her husband, James, an ag economist at the 
University of Saskatchewan, and their four boys, Nils, Olaf, 
Torbjorn, and Knut — you can guess where those names came 
from — they also have been a big part of my support over the 
years, and so I want to make a special point of thanking them. 
 
And finally, very good friends in Regina who many of you 
know, Rick Hordern and Nancy Talsness Hordern, and their 
family, have been incredible supports. 
 
So I mention all these people that are kind of close family in 
this context because that’s how this place works, and it’s their 
sacrifice as well that has helped me. Now I think I’m finished 
with that kind of a thank you. 
 

There’s one special thank you — and I think everybody will 
understand when I say this right now — and that’s to the 
library, the Legislative Library. I know that they’ve told me that 
they’re worried that their budget might have to change when 
I’m not around here anymore. But I’ve spent a lot of time 
working with the librarians. They are incredibly helpful. I 
recommend to every member that there’s no other profession 
really that has a personal librarian and many times people don’t 
use that. Well I’ve used your personal librarians on many 
occasions. So I want to say a special thank you to all of the 
people within the library. 
 
[12:45] 
 
Now it’s hard to sum up a political career, and you’re always 
inadequate to describe it in words. But I for years have said 
there are two things that are important when you’re a politician, 
and those two things were: number one, be good. Everybody’s 
watching you, and if you’re doing something crazy, 
somebody’s going to find out about it and it’ll cause you all 
kinds of difficulty. Second thing is you can’t do these jobs 
unless you have a really good laugh at least once a day. And 
even in the direst circumstances, it’s really good to laugh. 
 
I’ve added a third thing in the last, you know, couple of years, 
and that’s the fact that as a politician, you have to listen. Too 
many politicians blare at people. And when you sit and when 
you go to talk to people and that’s all you do is you talk and you 
don’t listen, you’re not doing your job. And I think that it’s a 
lesson for me. It’s a lesson for all of us to remember that point 
about listening because what people want from us is the fact 
that we have heard their particular issue, we’ve heard their 
particular problem, and we’re going to attempt to sort it out. 
And so if I have any advice to new politicians and the ones that 
are going to continue for many years to come, it’s those three 
things — be good, laugh every day at least once, and listen. 
 
I want to say thank you to the people of Saskatchewan, thank 
you to all of you who have worked with me. Thank you 
especially to my colleagues here in this caucus and our leader, 
Cam Broten. I’m going to miss all of you greatly. But I will be 
in the neighbourhood, and I’m sure for another 20 years you’ll 
see my ’93 Suburban going around the block. So wave me 
down, I’ll give you a ride, and we’ll have a visit. Anyway thank 
you very much for everything. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 
Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and following in the 
steps of so many august speakers is a humbling experience. But 
when I say thank you, I especially mean that for you, sir, for 
your leadership and your friendship and your patience which I 
may try once again today. 
 
This is a real and rare opportunity. My story is probably a little 
different than most here. I’m an adopted son of this province, so 
when I think about my presence here, I would say when I was 
young it would have been an unlikely thought. I had envisioned 
myself probably being maybe in a different legislature, but in a 
way that makes this all the more special. 
 
Notions of Saskatchewan came in glimpses, fragments. A place 



November 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7879 

of great innovation, hard work, remarkable in its sense of 
community, but also great fun, known for its athletes and 
athleticism. I was intrigued by Saskatchewan, as Peter Gzowski 
said, this most Canadian of provinces. And I was given stories 
and glimpses on occasion by playing sports tournaments here, 
playing hockey, but mostly by some key individuals. 
 
Bob Lemieux who was my first boss at Bhl lumber in Sylvan 
Lake, he grew up in Willow Bunch. Bob was a terrific athlete. 
I’ve since come to know a number of people from Willow 
Bunch that have independently confirmed that. I maybe believe 
his stories a little more now. But he demonstrated to me when I 
was 14 and taught me how to drive a forklift and a 1-ton truck. I 
probably shouldn’t have said that I was 14 doing that. He taught 
me about a work ethic and a spirit of generosity. 
 
The McCowan family. Wayne McCowan  was a graduate from 
Bedford Road. And again I had that sense that there was 
something special. Al Schachterle, my first industrial arts 
teacher. He grew up in Govan and allowed me to grow pretty 
significantly along the way, and Bob Mills who was ultimately 
our Member of Parliament who allowed and encouraged me to 
actually work with him in Ottawa. These were individuals from 
Saskatchewan, among others, that were truly remarkable 
community leaders in and around Red Deer and they offered 
glimpses of this province, early glimpses. That helps to get in 
part what brought me here, a graduate program at the University 
of Saskatchewan and a truly wonderful woman who is up in that 
gallery today. 
 
You know, I had anticipated that as I went to Ottawa, life would 
change. And I was given the opportunity, an invitation because 
of another Saskatchewan great, Dr. Gordon Barnhart who, in 
co-operation with Dr. Asit Sarkar, they took me for dinner one 
night in Ottawa. And Gordon called me the next day and said, 
that was a pretty good job interview. Maybe you should come 
back. And I am forever grateful for that conversation and that 
act of generosity. 
 
I arrived at the University of Saskatchewan, U of S international 
at a very, very special time. Peter MacKinnon was just taking 
over as president, the synchrotron was just announced, and the 
prospects for the future were incredible almost. But there were 
some things that didn’t add up and I caught on to them early on 
and they were tangible. 
 
So one of our senior deputy ministers today, I met him at the 
early construction site of the CLS [Canadian Light Source] and 
I gave him my business card. And he said, we actually don’t 
have a budget for our business cards within the government and 
I thought, well that’s strange. We’ve got the largest science 
project in the country. It’s just under way and he’s doing his 
job. But something’s wrong. Something doesn’t add up. 
 
And then I began to hear from and learn about the experiences 
of students. What should have been remarkable times of their 
lives as they were planning their futures, and they were special 
times, but too often the glance was back west. I began to work 
with a number of Aboriginal students whose opportunities were, 
even those within the post-secondary sector, they were 
truncated. There were things that were going to have to change 
in Saskatchewan, and that became ever more clear. 
 

And so I had the opportunity to run for the Liberals in 2003 in 
the provincial election. And so to David Karwacki and Doug 
Richardson and Tracy Muggli and Nikki Hipkin and Evatt 
Merchant, a number of others, most especially Curtis Kimpton 
who has never skipped a beat and never deviated in his support 
for me, and we just had a great run. And at 27 per cent on 
election day, I thought, boy, I should probably look to do 
something else. This is a good idea. It’s probably a good idea 
for someone else. 
 
And so I had essentially come up with my own career plan that 
that was terrific, but now it was time to focus back on the 
academics and finish my master’s degree and maybe start a 
doctorate. The work at the university was going very, very well. 
 
And I guess along the way I reflected on something that 
happened in that 2003 election campaign, which was fortuitous. 
At the time, it didn’t seem fortuitous; it seemed rather 
intimidating. There was a member, an MLA from Swift 
Current, and Eric Cline having essentially a head-on debate in 
the school of business. And I think Karwacki and company at 
the last moment realized we should have a Liberal participant in 
that debate or deliberation and so, with little notice, I was able 
to go over. And the member from Swift Current was sitting on 
the bench sipping a coffee and looked up with great 
nonchalance as I was absolutely terrified with the prospect of 
participating in this debate and deliberation. It proved to be 
fortuitous because I saw two remarkable orators go at it, and in 
a sense I was able to learn a lot by watching those two. There 
might have been a little bit of room up the middle as they were 
going, and maybe I was able to see a little bit of that. 
 
I didn’t think much of that event until the opening of the 
College Building in 2005, when the member for Swift Current 
by this time had taken on the leadership role of the 
Saskatchewan Party — a really remarkable party, and I’ll come 
back to that in a bit. I see Stefani up there, and she knows that I 
probably am truly just getting started. It makes me think of 
those early days in committee. 
 
But you know, it was at that opening of the College Building 
and the member from Swift Current, the leader of the official 
opposition said, you know, I’d like to talk to you — a lot of 
people say that — and within an hour and a half my phone rang. 
It was obvious that this was a different person. This was a 
person of integrity. This was a person who was going to act, 
whether I was involved or not. And I said that in our first 
conversation, but that the province had an opportunity to 
actually head in a new direction, and I wanted to talk about that 
direction. So why Saskatchewan? Because it’s a special place in 
Canada. And why here? Because in large measure because of 
the member from Swift Current and his outreach. 
 
And with the privilege that has been bestowed upon me to have 
a seat around various tables that have really taken decisions, not 
easy decisions, but have taken decisions to help renew and 
transform the province. So I was a policy wonk. I was. The 
member from Cypress Hills talked about plain talk, which I’ve 
come to appreciate, and his wisdom and his vision has been a 
constant, right from those early days. But I was on the other 
end. I was interested in, if you want, the technocratic approach 
to how to bring about not just good governance, but great 
policies. That was exciting, probably not for most people, but 



7880 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2015 

that was exciting. 
 
So when we think about a population that’s grown by 120,000 
people, we can think about the significance of what Tony Blair 
referred to as, are people moving out or are people moving in to 
a jurisdiction? There’s a pretty simple, straightforward 
proposition. 
 
[13:00] 
 
I was privileged to be able to serve with my many colleagues in 
helping to shape an immigration strategy that today, for 
example, allows us to help celebrate robust communities from 
around the world, including absolutely dynamic Muslim 
communities here within the province of Saskatchewan, one of 
the fastest growing provinces in the country. That’s a phrase 
that we’re now getting used to. 
 
When I think about jobs, the number of working people in 
Saskatchewan has grown by over 67,000 people since 2007 — 
24 new jobs a day, or one an hour. I am of the belief that one of 
the best social programs that can be offered, one of the greatest, 
greatest mechanisms for empowerment and improvement is 
employment. And so when we think about jobs, they’re not 
ends in themselves but means for families to realize dreams. 
 
When I think about tax relief, I think about those most 
vulnerable — students and seniors and others — that we have 
helped remove off the tax rolls. The statistic can just kind of 
come across as breezy: 114,000 people. That is a remarkable 
story, not simply in economic terms but in social justice terms, 
allowing more people to have more means, again, to work 
towards a good life. 
 
Regarding doctors and nurses — and we’ll come to a little bit 
about the infrastructure investments — but when we think about 
500 additional doctors and 3,000 more nurses of all 
designations working in the province of Saskatchewan, that 
makes a difference in people’s lives. It really makes a 
difference in people’s lives when you combine that with family 
members that are here because some of the best caregivers are 
actually family members. And to have them here in the 
province, to have jobs and opportunities in the province, when 
combined with more doctors and more nurses means, again, that 
for our seniors and for others in need there’s just better care, 
stronger communities. 
 
When we think about investments in hospitals, of which there 
are many, the significance of a children’s hospital in this 
province marks a coming of age for Saskatchewan: the home of 
public medicare and medicine, as we’ve come to know it, now 
being extended with full sincerity and really remarkable 
resources, not simply from government, but across 
communities. I’ve participated in fundraising activities even in 
the North, communities that are remote and distant, where 
pledges are being taken by phone, because they know there, and 
in communities across the province, the significance not simply 
of this building, which in its own right offers great hope, but of 
the specialists and of the care that can be afforded people that 
much closer to home. 
 
We can think about long-term care, and I’ll let others speak 
about the details, but that type of investment is again about 

focusing on those, our senior citizens especially, those who 
have helped build and shape and give the spirit of 
Saskatchewan that we all know here within the province and 
well beyond. 
 
I’d be remiss if I didn’t highlight the significance of STARS. It 
was a piece that when I arrived, it was glaringly absent. We’d 
been fortunate in Alberta to move forward with STARS. To 
have Rod Gantefoer here today helps make all the difference 
because we know how critical, how vital this service is for 
families and for those in acute need. 
 
The progress we’ve made on housing, in 2014 alone there were 
over 1,600 rental starts. The numbers can be compared by 
others as far as what had happened previously. But the 
significance of housing brings me to a conversation, an image, 
that I recall on a regular basis. The conversation was with a 
three-year-old. She was in our northern most women’s shelter. I 
was on crutches, not immune to being a klutz, that wouldn’t 
surprise me. But she asked me, she said, are you okay? And 
smiled. It was her fourth time that year in that shelter. She 
didn’t have a home. Each time it took her mom six hours by 
taxi to get there. Housing matters. [Inaudible] . . . matters. 
 
I better change course quickly, so I’m happy to talk about 
post-secondary education, because it matters because that’s an 
aperture. That’s a window. That’s a doorway that can transform 
lives. Eric Howe has undertaken work that allows us and alerts 
us that without grade 12 that little girl is not likely to make 
$200,000 in her life, not likely to make $200,000 in her life, she 
and others. With post-secondary education, in fact with a 
degree, she’ll be able to make more than $1 million statistically. 
And so they’re connected. 
 
Hence the healthy conversations that we’ve had many times 
around treasury board tables and cabinet tables, and certainly 
the member from Thunder Creek offers me a great reminder. 
Because I used to come in to treasury board before I was named 
to it and he would say, here he comes again, grab your wallet. 
But those investments matter. The fact that there’s a 
Saskatchewan Advantage Scholarship now, $2,000, that 
matters. SAGES [Saskatchewan advantage grant for education 
savings], the ability of parents to invest and have that 
investment recognized early on by the province of 
Saskatchewan matters. The graduate retention program that this 
year will have nearly 60,000 people engaged and enrolled 
matters. 
 
Not simply to play defence, but also to raise and wave the 
Saskatchewan flag to say that we understand the significance of 
uranium and agriculture and natural gas and potash and gold. 
But we recognized in the 21st century, like jurisdictions around 
the world that had far fewer natural resources, that the single 
most important valuable and vital resource were the people of 
this province, people that too often had slid across borders to 
help build other communities in Canada and around the world. 
Those people now had the option to stay and make that 
difference right here at home. 
 
The investment in post-secondary education is already 
highlighted as significant. One of the most significant, and 
something I’d like to applaud the previous federal government 
for, was their infrastructure investment that included that. It 



November 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7881 

allowed us to move forward at key times on investments that 
mattered but maybe didn’t get the headlines. 
 
And so when we think about that infrastructure investment — 
$117 million, 21 different projects — it allowed Saskatchewan 
to move forward in this key sector. And the sector matters. The 
sector matters because it’s enabling and allowing our young 
people to take key positions within Saskatchewan companies, 
and those companies are helping to create wealth, increasingly. 
 
And that’s why our most recent discussion and deliberation 
about Trans-Pacific Partnership matters. We know on this side 
of the House our position because trade is the lifeblood of the 
province of Saskatchewan. It’s not simply trade. It’s recognition 
that the hard work that people do, day in and day out across the 
province, actually adds value to people’s lives. 
 
So when we think about $20 billion worth of exports in 2007 to 
that jumping up to $35 billion dollars in 2014 with a trajectory 
that continues to rise, we understand Saskatchewan is being 
noticed and taking its rightful place not simply in Canada but 
around the world. That is helping to make a difference on the 
destiny of this province. That is helping to ensure that our 
province, our province continues to grow because quite 
candidly, Canada needs a strong Saskatchewan not simply for 
today but for the future. 
 
And so I was interested in policies that would help facilitate and 
foster such outcomes. I’ll be candid; I didn’t anticipate in this 
period of time that we would see so much progress and the fact 
that we have . . . With all due respect to my colleagues, I think 
is much less about what occurs in this building than it is about 
the spirit and confidence and hope that resonates in 
communities and for families right across the province. I think 
we simply reflect that. 
 
So, policies. But along the way an elder said to me, it’s not 
simply about policies but it’s about people. Those were words 
of wisdom. Those were words that helped to open my eyes. 
Those are words today that, when I begin to think about the 
thanks I need to offer . . . and they will be insufficient. 
 
Within the constituency office, Kalle, Kathy, Kacey, and Katie 
all did remarkable work, as is Barb doing right now as she’s 
watching. They have served the people of Saskatoon Greystone 
very, very well. In fact, I think the people of Saskatoon 
Greystone actually prefer dealing with them than dealing with 
me. That probably made things a lot easier. 
 
Obviously when we think about the Saskatchewan Party . . . and 
I want to talk about this party. The party as we see it today is 
enlivened and defined by its personalities, and rightfully so, 
especially as we have so many founding voices here. But it’s 
actually the endearing feature of the party, actually about a 
philosophical convergence. That convergence is in and around a 
key principle, a fulcrum, that as long as the party remains 
focused on it, the party will be in good stead. And that fulcrum 
is opportunity and the freedom of opportunity. 
 
For most of the 20th century, we saw discussions about a 
number of issues. So we had issues that were defined by a 
freedom of rights, and those continue today and they were 
fundamental. We also saw, on the opposite side of the political 

spectrum, freedoms of condition. And we understand that for 
the most part, our colleagues from across the way are defined 
philosophically by that concern for an equality of condition. 
That is a very laudable and traditional approach. But sitting 
between equality of rights and equality of condition rests the 
equality of opportunity, and that is powerful and empowering. 
That helps to define with a very, very strong sense of a 
commitment to the grassroots to listening, to learning, and 
serving. That helps to define the Saskatchewan Party on our 
very best days and days that we need to continue to strive for 
and days that I am very optimistic about. And so to the party, 
for everyone involved, I want to say and offer my special and 
sincere thanks. Without your help, I would not have been here. 
 
[13:15] 
 
To my caucus colleagues — family — thank you. Thank you all 
for your good wishes, for your support, for your humour, the 
occasional nudge, all of which was done constructively. A 
number of you are dear, dear friends, and we will remember 
these days with the “light of abiding memories,” to quote 
Joseph Conrad. 
 
To my cabinet colleagues and those in Executive Council, what 
a pleasure and privilege to serve. Great deliberations: earnest, 
heartfelt, well-organized, and coordinated. And those stretched 
into a variety of ministries that I had the opportunity — and 
Crown corporations — of helping to oversee, but really become 
far more familiar with and engaged by the notion of 
interdependence. I relied on a lot of people. The errors I made 
are mine. The successes are shared. 
 
To the mayor of Saskatoon, the Saskatoon part of Greystone, 
and a number of community and city and civic leaders that 
opened their doors, opened their arms, and really helped to 
ensure that I could be part of interesting conversations, 
optimistic conversations, visionary conversations — not simply 
about where we were today but about where we were going, 
where we could go by working together. And so, to Mayor Don 
Atchison, I want to offer my special thanks for his friendship. 
 
The most important thanks, and there will be many along the 
way that I can offer, to my family, and to have Jacqueline here, 
it’s absolutely terrific . . . to be joined by the boys, Hayden and 
Emmett, and I missed . . . and I should have said this, because 
Emmett was part of the Babineau Warriors that won the 
Saskatoon city football championship. 
 
To have Carol here makes all the difference. We weren’t in 
contact for 18 years and I’m delighted to have her here. To my 
sister Leah who just cleans up messes after me all the time. 
She’s an older sister, so she got used to that along the way. To 
my dad and his partner, Vicki. To my mom and her partner, 
John. To my grandmother, Sheila Joan Norris. And to many, 
many others who have enabled me to be here with unwavering 
and unstinting support, I offer my sincere thanks. 
 
There are a couple more thanks, and I’m going to look up at the 
gallery now. To members of the media: Wayne, Stefani, 
Murray, Jennifer, Emma, among others. Stefani, I still have this 
little piece of paper — I use it as a bookmark — of this old, 
dead tree casting a long, dark shadow over the old 
Saskatchewan. And I want to say I appreciated your patience 



7882 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2015 

and good nature, especially at the end of the first session when 
instead of ridicule you offered, well, at least pity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve also offered my thanks to you, and I mean 
that, for your leadership and your friendship, your mentorship, 
and your open door. To everyone who serves in this legislative 
building . . . This morning I started out in a meeting with deputy 
ministers. It just reinforces how significant, the significance of 
this building, but everyone that enables it . . . Events last year in 
Ottawa reminded and reinforced, for the first time in 
contemporary Canadian history, lessons that others have 
learned along the way and are reflected by the scars of violence 
in different legislatures around the world, how privileged this 
space is and how honoured we all are to be parliamentarians 
and to earn the public trust. And so to the people of Saskatoon 
Greystone, I offer my final thanks. It has been an honour. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wasn’t sure today 
when I stood up whether I was going to be sad or what my tone 
would be, and it’s changed within the couple of hours since I’ve 
listened to my colleagues speak. Everybody has something to 
say and brings with them some different perspectives, and it’s 
an honour to be here today. 
 
And I think everyone here knows that I really don’t like 
speaking in the legislature. I never did and that’s who I am. And 
I really think it’s your fault, Mr. Speaker, because when I 
started over there and we started in the Sask Party, then Mr. 
Speaker came up to me and said, we need you to speak for two 
hours on this bill. Are you kidding? And that’s basically what I 
told him, and I never did like it. But I do appreciate the 
opportunity today to stand up, and I’m going to. Because the 
Speaker did that to me, I’m going to introduce more of my 
family without permission, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My youngest daughter, Jeanette, came in this morning a little 
bit later. She has her own company and she travels around a 
tremendous amount and she does vocational rehabilitation and 
she’s great at it. My two granddaughters. My oldest 
granddaughter, Brianne, is in university and she’s interested in 
criminology and she’s a great artist. And my second oldest 
granddaughter, Jayden, is also at the U of S and she takes 
kinesiology and she’s on the U of S Huskies volleyball team. 
 
And also with me today is my brother Alan, and he’s been in 
the legislature quite often, and my sister-in-law Cheryl Senecal. 
It’s great to see you. You’ve been an important part of my life 
for the last 20 years, and I don’t know what I would have done 
with my home being two and a half hours away if I wouldn’t 
have had some family close. So as many people have said, 
family is just so very, very important. I also have one son that 
hasn’t been able to come. He’s in Toronto. He has my two 
youngest granddaughters, and he’s an engineer and his wife is a 
public health epidemiologist, so they’re very busy people. And I 
just want to say to them that they’ve made this life for me very 
possible, and I’m truly indebted to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, unlike many of the people in this room, I’m really 
not a political geek at all. I never got involved in it. I didn’t 
know very much about it. I decided when I ran in ’95, I would 

do that just to prove that I wasn’t a socialist. I proved that I 
wanted to be independent. So I got in my little ’79, it was an old 
Daytona car, and it didn’t have a cellphone, and I wasn’t 
supposed to win because my area hadn’t been anything but 
NDP for about 55 years. And so I just drove around and 
knocked on doors and talked to people. And on election night, 
June 21st, 1995, I won by 120 votes. And after that I won by 
quite a bit more. 
 
Two years later I was part of a move. I was part of a group of 
eight that started a political party that will forever be a part of 
the history of our beautiful province. And today as I stand as a 
proud member of that political party that was in power when 
our province finally took its rightful place on the Canadian 
stage and on the national stage, I’m just, I’m honoured, and I’m 
very humbled to be part of it. 
 
Many of my colleagues and friends have talked about 
infrastructure and what we’ve done as government. And it is 
very important to me. I was on treasury board for a number of 
years. But for me, it’s also the balance between what we do 
with infrastructure and what we do for the people of the 
province. And that’s where my heart has been for a long time. 
 
There are so many people to thank when you win a term. When 
you win your seat for five terms, there’s a lot of people to 
thank. I’ve introduced and talked about my family. They are 
very, very important to me. In the last 20 years I’ve lost family. 
My dad isn’t here anymore, and my father-in-law and my 
mother-in-law and aunts and uncles. 
 
And I had one grandchild, Brianne, when I first started, and 
there are seven more since then. And there’s many things that 
have happened that, in their lives, that I didn’t have the 
opportunity to attend because I was here. And I thank them for 
being supportive and understanding that this, it helps me to be 
who I am, and I hope it’ll help make a difference in your lives 
as well. 
 
We have friends that we’ve visited and have continued to visit 
us, and they’ve played cards and they seldom talk about politics 
unless I bring it up. But I do know that they have Sask Party 
signs in their garage, and they probably are not much good but 
decorating something now, but I thank them for that. 
 
The people I’ve worked with in the last 21 years, my colleagues 
who have . . . Sometimes they’ve inspired me and sometimes 
they’ve frustrated me, and lots of times they made me think 
outside the box and think outside my comfort zone. But they 
were always there for support, and I knew it. It’s an incredible 
feeling to know that regardless of what happens, you have, 
people there will have your back. They’re a team. It’s an 
incredible team and I know there’s no I in team. 
 
I do know that the feeling that we have when we can sit around 
the table, as some of my colleagues have said, we can disagree 
and we always come out knowing that we have the best, we’ve 
made the best decision we can when we put all of our thoughts 
and minds together. 
 
It’s impossible today to not think about the people that should 
be here and aren’t. My colleague, the member from 
Martensville, her dad was an important part of who we are, one 



November 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7883 

of the original eight. And I know that he’d be very proud of her, 
as we all are. And I didn’t know him as well as some of my 
other colleagues, but I do know that he was an impressive 
presence and you could feel it when he walked in the room. 
And I’m always going to be honoured to know that he sat with 
us. 
 
I think about Rudi Peters, and I don’t know how many of you 
remember him, but there was a time when we were in 
opposition where we had a chance to defeat the then 
government in a vote, and Rudi Peters had cancer and he hadn’t 
come in for a couple of days. But that night he made a special 
effort, and his wife Shirley brought him in for the vote and we 
won that vote. But it showed to me how much the political 
world meant to him and what a difference it can make, and he’s 
on my mind. 
 
I know we’ve lost Serge LeClerc and Carl Kwiatkowski. And 
everybody that knew him knew about his hair. Carl had perfect 
hair. And he also was the president of my constituency for a 
while and I talked him into running. We had a show or a radio 
program that we did once a month called Saskatchewan 
Matters. We did it for about a year and a half, and we thought it 
was kind of unique, Saskatchewan Matters, and Saskatchewan 
matters. And we thought we’d get a whole lot of phone calls. 
We very seldom did. People just wanted to hear us talk, and we 
could banter back and forth and it was an incredible time. But I 
wish they were here today to celebrate with us because it would 
have made a difference. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and to my colleagues, I’ve had the opportunity, 
through what the Premier has offered, for me to be a member of 
cabinet and to take on some different opportunities. I’m going 
to start with the one with the Public Service Commission 
because there’s something that happens there often that I don’t 
like. In Saskatchewan we don’t have public servants. We have 
people who work in the public service. I don’t believe that we 
have servants. And I have had the honour of working with so 
very many professional people who work very hard and they, at 
the end of the day, go home wanting to be proud of their job 
and they need to know that we’re proud of them. 
 
[13:30] 
 
I also want to talk about a few of the people that I have worked 
with, that they will always be part of my life. Shelley Duke and 
Kim McKechney and Jackie and Amanda and Kristy and Cathe 
Offet, and a lot more. I know that some of my colleagues have 
mentioned Reg Downs. We’ll never forget you, Reg. It doesn’t 
matter how far we go or if we ever come back to this building, 
we won’t forget you. You’ve been just such an important part 
of our lives and of this party. 
 
And Kathy Young is just plain lovable. She made us all feel 
special. I don’t think she ever called any of us by our right 
name. The member from Canora-Pelly was Special K. I think I 
was Junie B. But she’s an important part of who we are as well. 
 
Anne is here today from my constituency. I’m so glad to see 
you. You made a trip in this morning from Wadena, and I thank 
you for all the work you’ve done and the research and caring. 
I’m just amazed, and I’m so happy Ivan, her husband, is here. 
He’s had some health issues in the last while, and I’m glad you 

could make it as well, Ivan. 
 
I’ve been kind of hard on my CAs I think in the number of 
years. I sound like the member from Cypress Hills when he 
listed his CAs. Linda started with me in 1995, election night, 
when we both knew nothing from nothing about politics. And I 
said, do you want to be my CA? And she said, sure. And we’ve 
learned with each other. Nadine, Shelley, Hope, Rhonda, 
they’ve all been an important part of our life. 
 
I know that I had the honour of being minister responsible for 
First Nations and Métis Relations, and during that time I met 
people that changed my life. They’ve accepted me into their 
lives, and it made a difference to who I am. And it’s a feeling 
that I will never forget. 
 
But probably the feeling and what I’m most proud of and will 
remember for the rest of my life is the opportunity to meet with 
vulnerable people. And they taught me something that I didn’t 
know: that sometimes vulnerable is just in your mind. It’s an 
ability . . . Everybody has abilities, and everybody has assets. 
And we can, sometimes those of us who look just about normal 
can be vulnerable, and we don’t recognize it. So foster families 
and working with group homes and sitting around with families 
that had issues, that left an impression on me. 
 
And another part of my life is the people back in 
Kelvington-Wadena who are absolutely fabulous people. They 
elected me five times after being . . . not even really knowing 
me. I was right on the edge of the constituency. I think some of 
you know that I even moved into Kelvington after they changed 
boundaries a while ago, and I got to meet a whole lot of new 
people, more people that I have to thank them for their support. 
I thank them for sometimes their criticism and their ideas and 
their concerns. But it’s been an honour. I never stand in the 
House and be recognized as the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena without feeling absolutely proud and 
knowing that it’s something that doesn’t happen to a lot of 
people. 
 
When I was elected in 1995, there had only been 27 women 
elected before me. There’s 700 and about 730 people have been 
elected overall in the province, and I was the 27th woman. And 
then when the Premier appointed me to cabinet, I was the 16th 
woman cabinet minister in 100-and-some . . . 105 years. I think 
that’s going to change and hopefully it will, and I’m looking 
forward to watching from wherever I will be in my world to see 
those changes. 
 
Some of the things that have changed for me the most is the 
road to Regina. It used to be two hours and 45 minutes long, 
and now it’s about two and a half. And I think, I don’t know if 
the road got shorter or whether my foot got heavier, but it 
doesn’t take me quite as long to get here anymore. 
 
I remember talking to the member from Humboldt and asking 
her to run for us. I remember going to her house in LeRoy and 
telling her that she would be a big asset to us. I don’t think there 
is too many of the colleagues in this room that I haven’t door 
knocked for and maybe that’s why I feel this kind of maternal 
feeling to many. 
 
I know I was the only woman that was elected, that was part of 



7884 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2015 

the beginning of the Saskatchewan Party, but I didn’t feel like 
there was anything special about that. I just felt that I was part 
of a group of people that knew that together we could make a 
difference, and I was proud to do that. 
 
So anyway when people started mentioning it, and again I’m 
going to mention the member from Martensville’s dad because 
he said to me, I don’t want you to go around talking to 
everybody about you and your seven token men. So I’m going 
to do that again today. 
 
I want to thank the Premier. Absolutely awesome. I know that 
you’re the most popular Premier in Canada, but your friendship 
and your leadership is noticed not only in our province, but at 
the national table. And you’re not intimidated by somebody 
else’s opinions or feelings that you should be looking at an 
issue from another way. 
 
And we can watch you at that table or watch you on TV 
nationally, and then we come back and come to a party the next 
night and chat and maybe listen to jokes about tattoos and . . . 
[inaudible] . . . the comments that can be made, and we see that 
you’re the real person. And that’s why there is a popularity, is 
because people know that our Premier and that my colleagues, 
all of us, we care about each other and we care about the people 
of the province. That’s why we’re here. 
 
I’m glad that the member from Melfort is here — was the 
member from Melfort, pardon me — Rod Gantefoer. Not only 
did he make a big difference in here during the party, when we 
started the party, and as Finance minister, but I have one story 
about him that I just love. He stood in the House one time and 
introduced his wife as my current wife, Carole. And then he got 
to stand up the next day and apologize because we all know that 
he only has one wife — he will only have one wife — and 
Carole and the rest of his family made sure that we were aware 
of it. 
 
There’s only one other small story I want to tell you about, and 
that was . . . I represent the northeast part of the province, and 
sometimes we did feel like things were forgotten. And when I 
was elected in ’99 and again in 2003, things were changing. The 
roads were in bad shape, and there was . . . People were 
depressed in lots of ways. And I remember somebody phoning 
me and saying, June, you know, 110 years or 105 years ago the 
province was just starting; we had no railway. All there was 
was buffaloes running around. And my neighbours last year 
raised buffalo. And they separated, and they couldn’t decide 
what to do with the buffalo, so they just let them run. So now 
we are in the part of the province where there’s no railway; 
there’s just buffalo everywhere. But that’s changed, and our 
part of, my constituency, has benefited from having our 
government and recognizing the needs from everyone. 
 
I remember the first statements, the first speeches that were 
made when we became government, and the Premier talked 
about there being no oil wells on Albert Street and we had to 
recognize that all of the province was important. And we started 
to see the difference in my constituency and right around the 
province. And I’m so thankful for that. 
 
I think that the most important thing we can remember as we go 
forward is that it’s all about the people that are here. People 

will, they might forget what you said and they might forget 
what you did, but they’ll never forget how you made them feel. 
And I think that’s the most important thing we can do. 
 
So as I go on in the next step of my life, whatever the future’s 
going to hold for me, I’m going to remember that I was part of 
this great political place. I remember the hallways when I 
walked in this morning and thought, never again will I come in 
here as the elected member and take my seat. It’s just been a 
rare experience, something that not many people get to do, and 
I’ll hold it dear forever. It’s something we can’t ever take for 
granted. So as you stay and some of us go, please try and 
remember every day that it’s a privilege, and it’s also a 
responsibility that we have to take. I’m reminded as I sit here in 
my seat the things, sometimes we take things for granted that 
other people are praying for. We can’t take for granted what 
we’ve gotten. 
 
I don’t know what else to say because I’ve determined that I 
wasn’t going to cry. I know that the Minister of Education told 
me this morning there’s a little bit of a bet going around in the 
hallways wondering who’s going to cry. And I know that the 
member from Canora-Pelly, you were on the list and I think I 
was too, but I’ve decided that that’s not how I’m going to go 
out. I want to go out knowing that I’m happy about my decision 
to not run again, that I’m happy about the difference I was able 
to make as part of a political party and part of the democracy 
that we all enjoy and sometimes take for granted. So as I leave, 
I just wish you all the very best. 
 
I think I’ve told you enough about my family to know that 
we’re pretty diverse. My oldest son had a thing about Adams. I 
don’t know if anybody of you ever read the book The 
Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy. Well what he said was, 
goodbye and thanks for all the fishes. That’s what I’ll say to 
you. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I start today, I can 
almost just say ditto. I think everyone’s saying, it’s time to sit 
down. But a pleasure for me to just take a few moments to 
extend some thank yous. And first of all, I apologize to my 
family for inviting them earlier. But my wife has joined me 
here, my wife, Lois, of 43 years — just an awesome partner and 
supporter. Thank you very much, Lois. 
 
Our son Byron with our two grandchildren, their two children, 
Anna and Caleb. Thanks for coming. Our son Graham and his 
wife, Carla, with their two youngest, Farah and Archer. Archer 
is in Graham’s arms. And then our daughter Stephanie; her 
husband, Matt. They were married in August this year, so that 
kind of completes the family. And as everyone’s mentioned, 
family is important. 
 
And I have to mention one other individual and that’s my 
brother Paul and his wife, Kate and their family. He was 
basically the real strength because he kept the farming operation 
running and has kept . . . I shouldn’t say kept, has kept and 
continues to do so. So truly grateful. 
 
As you stand here and you contemplate about everything you’re 
going to talk about and all the people you’re going to say thank 



November 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7885 

you. And last spring when we were speaking to the budget 
speech, I meant to talk about my CAs. Actually I’m thanking 
the federal government for actually having the fall election so 
that I could get one more chance to stand up and speak in this 
Assembly today. 
 
But you know there’s some great people that we’ve had around 
us. And first of all, I just want to say thank you to the legislative 
staff, the Clerks at the Table who were there for me as Speaker. 
Pat, our Sergeant-at-Arms, just a privilege working with you. 
You may not have always agreed with my decisions as Speaker 
as we tried to make this place . . . You were looking to make it a 
secure place where people could come; I wanted to make sure it 
was as open as we could have it. And I thank you so much and I 
wish you well in your retirement. And to all of the people 
working in this Legislative Assembly, whether it’s the staff of 
the Assembly or staff working in the different caucus offices, 
we have the privilege of working down here because we’ve got 
many people behind the scenes that have helped us. 
 
Constituency assistants. My first constituency assistant was 
Carolle Baskem. When I was first elected in 1986, I thought 
okay, how in the world do you start an office because no one, 
the MLAs before that didn’t really have an office outside of 
their home. And someone said, why don’t you chat with this 
lady. She just retired as a receptionist at the RCMP barracks; 
she’d be a good office manager. And she certainly was. And of 
course Beth Plewes, Tina Durbin who served me for 21 years, 
Audrey McEwen who’s part-time as of today, and current CA, 
Jeff Cole. They have certainly been a real asset in managing the 
office and making sure that constituent issues are brought to my 
attention. And as we’ve moved through the years, they’ve been 
able to pick up some of the load and make some of the contacts 
ahead of me, as the MLA, making all those contacts. 
 
I think of my first time being invited to run as a Member of the 
Legislative Assembly. Of course many will know that the 
individual who was there at the time, you had to actually work 
to get elected. But there was a time when people came knocking 
on my door. And one couple stick out in my mind, and some 
will have heard this story. The summer of 1985 and I had just 
kind of brushed aside some of the calls and encouragements to 
seek the nomination. Until this couple spent an hour on the 
road, and I happened to be working in a hot barn, and he came 
up to me and he said, I got a better job for you. Then I thought 
if they’re willing to make that drive, then maybe I should think 
a little more seriously. 
 
Then I chatted with my family and chatted with a gentleman in 
Moosomin who is, we called him Mr. Conservative at that time. 
He was not only a doctor. Not only did he assess your physical 
needs, by the time you left his office, he knew what your 
political persuasions were and where your thoughts were. So 
Barrie Davidson and his wife, Alice, who’s no longer with us, 
thank you so much. 
 
[14:45] 
 
You know, you get to meet so many friends over your term. Of 
course, I’ve had just an extra year or two. But I’ve seen three 
boundary revisions. Another one’s coming up. It’s time to go. 
 
But I’ve built great relationships through the years. And as I’ve 

seen, back in ’86, it was a significant plurality, an increase; ’91, 
thanks for the member from Canora-Pelly for coming along 
because it was landslide, Toth in ’91. But since then that 
plurality has grown substantially. And that’s because of the 
people that were willing to support me. That’s as a result of just 
getting out and meeting people where they were at. 
 
In fact, you know what I appreciated about my constituents? 
You’d be at an event and they’d say, someone would come up 
to you and say, why didn’t you come to our dinner last week? 
And I’d think, okay, what did I miss? Think for a minute. All of 
a sudden it struck me and I’d say, well you know what? We’ve 
been in session and my wife’s been hauling our boys off to play 
hockey or our daughter to play soccer, and last Friday night was 
my turn to take the boys to play hockey. And everyone to a T, I 
haven’t had one constituent criticize me for making that part of 
my life. They said, that’s who we expected you to be. Right on. 
And you know, you can’t . . . 
 
Also while I was elected first as a government member and sat 
on the bench of the opposition members, much longer than I’ve 
sat on the government side of the House, I can assure you this. I 
think a former colleague said, the poorest day in government is 
better than the best day in opposition. I think that colleague is 
sitting here this morning. 
 
But you know when you’re . . . As an MLA, I think one of the 
things that I felt was important is building relationships with all 
people. Members across the floor, I’ll be honest with you. We 
may have our differences but I believe each and every person 
that’s elected to sit in the chairs on this Chamber is there 
because their constituents felt they should be a voice, and we 
need to respect that. 
 
And as a result of building relationships. I had the privilege, 
whether in government or outside of government, to have some 
pretty good relationships with ministers. And I say to the 
member from Lakeview today, thank you. As minister of Health 
you approved the hospital in Moosomin, and those folks really 
appreciate the integrated facility. Thank you so much. 
 
The member from Cypress Hills, it took a moment when he was 
the minister of Highways and drove some of the highways, and 
he’d come to Kipling and he found out, oh, I got a good 
highway to Kipling. What in the world happened between 
Kipling and No. 9? And he came back and he said, now I know 
what you’ve been . . . the issue that you’ve been raising. We’re 
going to go ahead. I’m going to make sure that that highway 
gets approved. 
 
And then the member from Rosetown — was it 
Rosetown-Biggar at the time? — actually saw to it. And I’ll tell 
you, there’s a lot of folks appreciate what was done on 48 
between Kipling and No. 9. My only regret is the shoemaker in 
Kennedy. I’d stop by and see him and he’d say, I don’t know if 
I’m going to live long enough to drive on that highway. 
Unfortunately he didn’t, but a lot of other people did. 
 
But that’s just part of politics. And you know, being first 
elected in ’86, there were a lot of projects done in the southeast. 
And I had to realize, you know, this is a big province. So a lot 
of issues waited for a number of years, but we got there. 
 



7886 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2015 

I also must add that the Kipling integrated facility, I think the 
member, current Deputy Premier was minister at the time. And 
we did have a challenge there. It took a few years from the time 
it was announced. Unfortunately we ended up in a position 
where the Kipling community and surrounding area had to raise 
28 per cent of the funding for their facility. But I can tell you 
this: that was the right thing to do. What we have today is just a 
marvellous facility. 
 
And even though the doctors in Moosomin at one time said, 
why would you argue for a hospital in Kipling? I kept 
reminding them, because between Regina and Brandon there 
was one facility. And then when all of the patients started to 
show up in Moosomin, Kipling was suffering, and some of the 
other communities. I started hearing them saying, when are you 
going to build that facility? And we have three doctors and a 
nurse practitioner now working with us. 
 
When I was first elected, there was a sense that this province 
could be a lot more than it actually was. We had resources that 
just were not being tapped; at least, in my mind that’s what I 
saw. And so giving myself to being a voice not only for the 
public was to build a better Saskatchewan. And I think over the 
years we have certainly done that. While there will be struggles 
as we move forward, good, sound fiscal planning is imperative, 
even in the difficult times. And I think the member from 
Canora-Pelly as Finance minister, and the current Finance 
minister, they’re living out some of that. But I believe they will 
provide some of that sound leadership. 
 
We’ve seen expansions of the potash mine in Rocanville and 
we’ve seen growth in local communities. I dare say in the 
Moosomin constituency some 25 to 30 per cent of the 
population in each community now, I don’t even know who 
they are. That’s why I’m not knocking on doors again. 
 
But let me end by saying this. I have one specific request. You 
know the Canadian constitution says — I better get my glasses 
on — guarantees the following fundamental freedoms: 
 

(a) freedom of conscience and religion; 
 
(b) freedom of thought, belief, opinion and expression, 
including freedom of the press and other media of 
communication; 
 
(c) freedom of peaceful assembly; and 
 
(d) freedom of association. 

 
And I’m going to quote just the first page and a half of a 
message presented by former Lieutenant Governor Johnson 
back in 1982 to a prayer breakfast in Kipling: 
 

“Whereas Canada is founded upon principles that 
recognize the supremacy of God and the rule of law.” 
These are the opening words of the Constitution Act which 
was passed by the Parliament of Britain for Canada at her 
request, on March 29th, 1982, and which came into force 
on April 17th, 1982, on Patriation day. Thus Canada 
officially recognized God as a supreme being at the heart 
and soul of our nation. 
 

This was not the first time that God’s supremacy had been 
recognized by the Canadian government. When Canada 
was formed in 1867 and became a nation, the Fathers of 
Confederation, in searching for a title, considered a 
number of options. Should our country be called the state 
of Canada? The republic of Canada? The federation of 
Canada? No, it was called the Dominion of Canada 
because the Fathers of Confederation turned to the Bible 
and in Psalm 72, verse 8 they found the solution to their 
problem. That verse states: “He shall have dominion also 
from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the 
earth.” 
 
Later the lawgivers of our country turned to the Bible for 
text when they built the Parliament Buildings in Ottawa. 
Under the eastern masonry arch, there was engraved in 
stone the words I have just quoted: “He shall have 
dominion also from sea to sea.” For the inscription under 
the western arch, they went to the book of Proverbs, 
chapter 29, verse 18: “Where there is no vision, the people 
perish.” And for the centre arch they went to Psalm 72 
again, in verse 17: “His name shall endure for ever.” [And 
then Mr. Johnson says] So it is very clear historically that 
the nation was founded by men who believed in God and 
set its foundations firmly on principles found in the Holy 
Bible.” 

 
This is a great country. We’ve got an awesome province. We 
welcome people from around the world. We continue to do so. 
But if I could say, members — many will be back here — let’s 
not forget where we came from. Let’s keep these founding 
principles dear to our hearts because as an imam said to his 
Liberal member when the former premier of Ontario, Peterson, 
was going to remove the Lord’s Prayer from their Chamber, this 
imam said very clearly, what are you doing that for? I didn’t ask 
you to do that. It’s because of those guiding principles that 
allowed me to come, call Canada home, worship freely, and live 
freely. 
 
Ladies and gentlemen, those are some very significant 
principles. I believe we’re going to have to work hard to 
maintain them to ensure that we have a province and a country 
that our children and people from other generations can be 
proud of. 
 
I thank you all for the opportunity to serve. I’m looking forward 
to enjoying some time with my wife and family. Thanks so 
much. God bless. Merry Christmas. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there is a line I’ll 
borrow from Lincoln, I think at the end of his first inaugural 
where he said, “I am loath to close.” He didn’t want to end that 
particular message at that time. I think we’re all loath to close 
today. Those were remarkable speeches by remarkable 
individuals who have given much to this province. And so I’ll 
be very, very brief. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a quick tribute and thanks, but I do want to 
say, I do want to say just a little bit if I can, a very little bit 
about each of these retiring MLAs as they transition to other 
things and as we’re mindful of their contribution today. 



November 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7887 

To the member for Lakeview, I want to thank him. On behalf of 
the people of the province of Saskatchewan, on behalf of the 
government of the province of Saskatchewan, for more than 
two decades of service to his constituents but also to all of the 
population. 
 
When he was first elected, Mr. Speaker, the government was 
met with great, great challenge. Decisions needed to be made 
that were difficult, very difficult decisions, and quite literally 
the financial future of the province hung in the balance. And so 
we need to salute those who were on that front line, and the 
member for Lakeview was very much a part of that group. And 
so we thank him for that and then all of his service since then. 
He also approved the hospital in Swift Current when he was the 
Health minister and so, Mr. Speaker, I’d better get that on the 
record. He’s always . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Louder, louder. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — He’s saying louder, louder. But it’s all 
amplified, Mr. Speaker, the microphones, and somebody’s 
writing every word down, I understand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in no particular order to members on our side of 
the House, I’ll start with the member for Canora-Pelly. I could 
not have done any of this job without you. I probably can’t say 
any more than that, otherwise it’ll be a much longer speech 
because there will be great pauses. So thank you to the member 
for Canora-Pelly for his leadership of our party and within our 
government, with our finances, and with education as well. 
When he and I sat together there, we needed a lot more Kleenex 
than was ever available. I’m not sure . . . Both of us are like 
that, I’d offer to the member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
To the member from Melville-Saltcoats, you know, I really 
don’t know what to say just very briefly that can quite 
adequately describe how we all feel about him. Even when he’s 
frankly not being very nice to any of us, he is just a stalwart 
leader within this government and certainly within our party as 
a founding member. 
 
I’ll just tell this very quick story. When I was first elected, our 
family was quite young and the member was the Whip at the 
time appointed by Mr. Hermanson. He sought me out after the 
very first meeting because I was a little bit worried, frankly, 
about how will this balance work because we’re not moving 
from Swift Current where Tami was with our, you know, 
raising our young family. Faith was one. She had just turned 
one a couple of weeks after the election. And so he sought me 
out and said, this organization is family friendly. If you have to 
go, you just go. And he actually reinforced that with all of the 
members with young families and he reminded us all of that, 
and that let me know that his priorities and the priorities of this 
new . . . or a party that I was a part of were in the right place. 
And I thank him for that and so many other things. 
 
The member for Kelvington-Wadena said in her speech, there 
was a quote and she was referencing people and the focus that 
we should have on people, that that is where my heart has been. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the heart of our political organization, of our 
party, has been the member from Kelvington-Wadena. And the 
good news is this, Mr. Speaker, there’s been frankly a bit of a 
Kelvington-Wadena transplant because while she’s leaving, her 

heart is, at least parts of her heart are staying and we will be all 
the better for that. 
 
The member for Moosomin, you know, Mr. Speaker, we throw 
around the word honourable a lot in this Chamber and in this 
business, this honorific that we have in politics. And then there 
are — and we hope to earn that — there are some members who 
are uniquely qualified to be referred to as honourable members, 
and the member from Moosomin is one of those individuals, 
Mr. Speaker. You know, if anyone needs an example . . . And 
they’re on both sides of the House. 
 
[14:00] 
 
If anyone needs an example of how to be an MLA and how to 
remember why we’re here for many, many years . . . I was in 
third-year university when he was first elected. From that day 
forward, he has been one of the best serving, representing 
MLAs in the history of this place or, dare I say, in the 
Commonwealth. He has always put his constituents first and 
never forgotten his own faith and principles. And we thank him 
for that example and also for his leadership as Speaker for some 
time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member for Wood River did not speak today and is not 
here. Mr. Speaker, he played a seminally important role in the 
formation of our political party and has served in this House 
well. I remember well his changes and improvements that he 
made to the disaster assistance program when they were sorely 
needed, owing to disasters that were occurring around the 
province, and his many other great contributions. And so we 
also thank and acknowledge the member for Wood River. 
 
I better be careful on this next one. This is the member for 
Estevan. And though, you know, we fight a little bit, frankly, 
her and I, she is a very, very . . . She’s become a very good 
friend and I think the world of her. She’s been our caucus Chair 
for a very long, long period of time and we have been served 
mightily by her service and her leadership. I just can’t say 
enough about her, and I truly wish she . . . Well I wish this of 
all the members, that maybe they had made another decision. 
But we’re going to miss you, Doreen, the member for Estevan, 
and her leadership. 
 
I should point out, in terms of people changing their mind, one 
more thing very quickly before I move on with the list. The 
member for Canora-Pelly read a list of schools today and I am 
hopeful that he missed a school on that list because, knowing 
him, it will bother him so much that he will see fit, he will see 
the need to run again so he can come back and correct his own 
mistake. 
 
The member for Greystone forgot to share that, on that first 
occasion where we met, that debate between Mr. Cline and he 
and I in the 2003 election campaign, he won that debate quite 
handily and quite clearly. I finished a solid third in that. We all 
know Eric Cline was a very able debater. And that’s why I was 
very interested in seeing that he might consider running for us, 
and am I ever glad that he agreed to do that, to take his break 
from his academic pursuits and help lead our government in 
terms of the different files he’s held, significantly in Advanced 
Education where so much has been achieved under his watch. 
And I thank him as well for his friendship. 



7888 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2015 

The member for Regina South has already indicated his 
highlights, and his highlight certainly was . . . well there were 
many, but the revenue-sharing deal with municipalities is at the 
top of the list, Mr. Speaker. I think the municipalities would say 
that. And in advance of it, he travelled the province. And I 
knew that he would, the member who never turns down a 
meeting. 
 
And so he got in his car . . . Sometimes there were strange 
things in his car — we could get into it a little bit later on — as 
the people at CVA [central vehicle agency] will know, because 
they had to go over the cars from time to time. And he used 
every mode of transportation to get around the province and 
negotiate what turned out to be I think the right formula — one 
that we’ve mused about changing, but I think it’s pretty clear 
that formula is here to stay. And so it should be, if I may quote, 
Mr. Speaker, it should always be known as the Hutchinson 
formula and it should stay as part of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, what was common to all of the 
speeches, the member for Lakeview and all of the members on 
this side of this House, is there was just a great deal of humility 
in all of the speeches and I guess . . . I hope that we will find 
that humility each and every day for those of us that are staying, 
that sense of humility each and every day . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Cypress Hills. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Oh, that’s right. Thank you. I thank the 
Deputy Premier because I forgot to mention one of my very 
first friends in politics, the member for Cypress Hills. He and I 
first met actually and had a little chance to talk at an election 
preparedness session at the Travelodge on Albert Street in 
Regina, and there was an immediate connection there. And I 
have learned much from the member for Cypress Hills, 
including many more additions to my vocabulary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. In his speech he said today that he 
would likely lack profundity, that he probably wouldn’t have 
anything to say that was profound, and then he went on to say 
that the reason for that is that he had come to appreciate the fact 
that people wanted to have plain speaking and honesty in their 
representative. I don’t know what’s more profound than that in 
terms of the speeches today. 
 
So I thank him for his friendship and his service in the cabinet 
and in the caucus, and for our time together as officemates 
when we solved many, many problems in opposition. If only 
somebody had written things down . . . [inaudible] . . . So I 
thank the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you’ll probably be able to resolve this because 
you know these questions. But I always wondered, when we’re 
done the session and when we’ve waited to leave till the mace 
is gone and you’re no longer in the Chair and we’re about to 
leave, do we continue with the tradition — which I quite like — 
that we would bow to the Chair? And I notice some members 
do and some don’t. I don’t know what the answer to that 
question is, whether we should or we shouldn’t, but I think 
today each of us should, whether we’re staying or whether 
we’re retiring. We should take the chance to bow to the Chair 
because it will kind of reinforce the theme today about humility 

and the fact that we have much to be humbled by the chance to 
serve in this place and to represent the people that sent us. Mr. 
Speaker, it is true that humble we come into this House and we 
found out today that humble we shall all leave one day. And so 
I would encourage us all to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do have to seek leave of the House if I can, 
procedurally. I want to ask for leave of the House to waive 
provisions of rule 51(p) that a brief presentation might be made. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave to do a 
presentation and waive the provisions of rule 51(p). Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — So the provision, for those who might be 
watching, governs the prohibition in this House of using props. 
And I have one today, Mr. Speaker, because on behalf of the 
province we’d like to present to each of the members who are 
retiring, this. The members opposite can see that, or members 
behind can see that, members opposite. And we’ll have all of 
them perhaps for the table for when the session and the 
proceedings are truly done. And we can — I think there’s 
Sharpies here — and perhaps each would like to sign this as a 
gift to the outgoing members. 
 
And so we present these with great gratitude to all of these 
MLAs with love, frankly, for their own love for the 
constituencies represented and the province that they’ve served. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I hope everyone takes the chance to sign 
these before these members leave today. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to all 
members for I think what has been a memorable few hours here 
as we’ve listened to the reflections from members who have 
chosen to retire, Mr. Speaker. And a lot of words of thanks have 
been said by all members, and it’s a reminder to all of us of the 
gratitude that we owe to so many and for the honour and the 
privilege to serve in this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier provided a good overview of the 
contributions that the retiring members have made and I thank 
him for that. To the government members who are outgoing, 
thank you for your service. Some of you have served in 
opposition and government, some of you just in government. As 
we would recognize, there is a lot of different views held by 
both sides, Mr. Speaker, but the notion of service, the notion of 
being responsible and responsive to one’s constituents is 
something that is shared in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. So I 
thank outgoing government members. 
 
And I thank the member from Lakeview on our side for his 
service as well, Mr. Speaker, someone that I’ve personally 
appreciated a great amount of discussions with and the wisdom 
and the advice that he shares. I thank him for his advice on how 
to be a parent and a legislator and for the member’s service as 
an MLA, as a minister, and as interim leader of our party, Mr. 
Speaker. On behalf of New Democrats, I want to say thank you 



November 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7889 

very much to the member for all of his service and we’ll miss 
him greatly, Mr. Speaker. I should say tusen takk, which is a 
thousand thanks in Norwegian. The members may not know 
that. 
 
You know, the Premier spoke about bowing as we go in and out 
of the Assembly, and that’s something that I do because of what 
it symbolizes. And yes, it is deference to the Chair of course, 
but I think about it also as appreciation and respect for the 
honour and privilege of serving in a parliamentary democracy, 
in a democracy where we are held to account, where there is 
rule of law, and where we can go about our work peacefully, 
Mr. Speaker. And today as we thanked members for the 
remarks that they made and as we stood and applauded, Mr. 
Speaker, I won’t say I stood because I agreed with every single 
point that was perhaps made by members through the speeches, 
but I stand and applaud everyone’s commitment to service and 
their commitment to the democratic process that we have here 
in the province. And sadly it’s not common enough in this 
world where we can have members of a legislature retire and 
other people peacefully be elected to assume seats. And it is an 
honour and a privilege that we should never lose sight of, 
especially in the times that we live, Mr. Speaker. 
 
At the beginning of every day of the proceedings, a prayer is 
said, Mr. Speaker, as you would know very well and as former 
Speakers would know as well. And probably that prayer means 
different things to different people. You know, in our seats we 
have some diversity here. You know, there may be people of 
different faith traditions, individuals who are atheist or agnostic, 
and whether it’s a time of reflection or whether it’s a time of 
prayer to a creator, it’s an important time. 
 
And in my tradition when there is a moment of someone 
departing and someone leaving, it’s not uncommon to have a 
type of benediction or a type of prayer wishing them well, Mr. 
Speaker. So what I would like to conclude with is a passage but 
also a prayer used as a benediction which will be familiar to 
many members here in the Assembly. It’s from Numbers: 
 

May the Lord bless you and keep you. May the Lord make 
his face shine on you and be gracious to you. May the 
Lord turn his face toward you and give you peace. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that is my wish for all members departing from 
the Assembly here, and may we all look to their example and do 
a better job as elected representatives ourselves. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I ask for leave of the Assembly to make a few farewell 
comments. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to make a few departing comments. I’m assuming that 
will include the Opposition House Leader. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker, and certainly thank you for the opportunity, and we’ll 
afford the same opportunity to the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Just a few thank yous to members of the Assembly and those 
associated with running the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan. To you, Mr. Speaker, thank you very much for 
your guidance and your wisdom, your fairness, although I know 
there may be a want to name a member or something like that. 
And from the House Leader’s perspective, you make sure that 
that doesn’t happen, and I’m glad to say that that hasn’t 
happened yet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the fourth legislative session of the 
twenty-seventh legislature and, in all likelihood, our last day of 
the legislature. I say in all likelihood because I know that in this 
business things could change. You never know what the next 
day brings. But certainly thank you, Mr. Speaker, to you, to 
your office staff who are always very welcoming, whether it’s 
myself and the Deputy House Leader or the Deputy Premier or 
others who came looking for you. Certainly you do have an 
open door, and we appreciate that from you and your staff. 
 
Certainly when we talk about wisdom and professionalism and 
guidance, we have to thank the Clerks at the Table. Thank you 
very much from myself as House Leader and from each and 
every member. We do not hesitate to ask you for that guidance, 
and you certainly provide it. And we very, very much 
appreciate that. 
 
What a special day, colleagues. I’m going to keep this quite 
short, but I just want to say thank you to especially those 
retiring members who give us guidance but serve as mentors. 
And that’s the way certainly that I feel: that we have something 
to aspire to when we look at the careers of those members who 
have come before us, those that we have had the pleasure of 
sitting with and the privilege of sitting with. You’ve given a 
good portion of your life to this Assembly and to your province. 
The Premier always says, leave things better than you found 
them, and I know each and every one of you on both sides of 
the House have certainly done that. So thank you very much. 
 
[14:15] 
 
I have one caution. I know that the stories about you — that’s 
been my experience here — the tales will always get a little 
taller after you leave. And it’ll be up to the rest of us to make 
sure that that indeed does happen. But the folklore is one of the 
things that makes this place the wonderful place that it is. 
 
To the Premier, to my Premier: thank you for this opportunity 
to be House Leader. It is indeed a special type of position. It’s 
one where you have to realize you’re a representative of your 
caucus, but you realize too that there’s much negotiation that 
has to take place. So thank you for that opportunity, that special 
opportunity. 
 
Thank you to those that helped me in this position: Jarret Coels, 
who’s very new to the House leadership position on the 
government side. Graham Stewart who was there before him 
just did a tremendous, tremendous job. I have to thank my 
Deputy House Leader, the Minister of Immigration, the member 
from Meadow Lake who has a unique understanding of this 



7890 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2015 

place, who has spent time in the House of Commons and brings 
that knowledge, and certainly helped me do my job. 
 
To people in the Executive Council and others who help us in 
our everyday operations, thank you for your guidance and your 
help to ensure that we run this place in a very, very professional 
manner. Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the Opposition House 
Leader, the member from Regina Elphinstone. You find that in 
this job you have to have professionalism; you have to have 
courtesy. You have the odd surprise that happens, but that’s all 
part of the job. But at the end of the day what you realize is a 
friendship that existed before has been cemented and developed 
and flourished, and I’m happy to say that that has happened in 
this case. 
 
Mr. Speaker as we’re here, and as members have alluded to, we 
kind of forget sometimes about the work that’s been done in our 
constituencies when we’re here. We want to thank our 
constituency assistants, each and every one. Retiring members 
had a chance to highlight theirs; I’ve had an opportunity to have 
some great ones as well. I want to thank Jacquie Klebeck, who 
is my current constituency assistant. And I know members 
would like to do that and thank all of their current constituency 
assistants as well. 
 
I want to thank those who are responsible for the daily 
operation of this wonderful Legislative Assembly: Hansard, 
broadcast services, library services; financial services; the 
Sergeant-at-Arms, who we have certainly honoured for his 
participation here as he retires, the Commissionaires and the 
security people that work under him; the Pages; the interns; the 
building staff; the cafeteria staff; tour guides; custodial staff. 
Mr. Speaker, I certainly hope I haven’t missed anybody with 
that list, but they are, each and every one of you, very, very 
important. To each of you, you truly help make each and every 
day that we serve in this legislature a pleasure. Your positive 
attitudes and certainly your friendly hi, hello, good morning, 
good evening that we see in the hallways mean a lot to each and 
every member. 
 
To the media — so important to us in doing our jobs, and them 
doing their jobs, and the changes that have taken place — 
certainly it’s interesting to have question period taking place 
and tweets being issued live and then following those at the 
same time. It’s just a new dynamic. But we thank you for their 
attitude, and certainly what they do to help us get our message 
out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our families, each one of us, I think, is thinking 
about later today as we’ll go back and spend time with our 
families — and we’ll have time throughout the next number of 
months — our spouses, our children, our parents, 
grandchildren, and others. We look forward to spending that 
time. 
 
As 10 members move on, I know there’s 48 others members 
that are hoping to have a seat in this Chamber going forward, 
and others who will work very hard to try to earn a seat here. So 
with that, again, Mr. Speaker, to all members of the Assembly, I 
wish you well. May you have a safe and happy Christmas 
season as we look forward to that, and a Happy New Year. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like 
to seek leave under rule 61 to move a motion of urgent . . . No, 
I’m just kidding, Mr. Speaker. It’s good to take my place and 
join the debate . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. Surprises. 
All those kind words and how do I repay them, Mr. Speaker? 
Anyway, it’s good to join the debate. 
 
I just want to say off the top, there’s a one-time member of this 
Assembly, a fellow by the name of Ed Whelan, who once told 
me as a young long-haired, know-nothing, wannabe politician, I 
guess, Mr. Speaker, that in political life and public life two of 
the most important words — the most important two words in 
political life — they’re thank you. 
 
And again I just want to take this time to join what have been 
an amazing set of speeches and to say thank you to the many 
people that I have so much gratitude, for the help and the 
assistance and support. 
 
So at risk of repeating some of what my colleague across the 
way has said, you know, please forgive any redundancy that 
might arise. But I just want to say thank you to you, Mr. 
Speaker, off the top. Not to involve you in debate and also not 
to tempt you to, you know, realize your wish to throw 
somebody out of this Assembly, but certainly thank you to you, 
Mr. Speaker, and your able work that Connie and Sheila and the 
folks do in your office. Is he about to throw me out? Is that 
what’s going on here? Very good. All right. Oh, there we go. 
 
I want to say as well to the Clerk and all the folks at the Table, I 
generally try to get down there to ask forgiveness and seek 
instruction on a daily basis. I miss that when the House is not 
on, Mr. Speaker. But anyway I just want to say thank you so 
much for the work that you do to help us serve the people. To 
member services; to Hansard; to Journals; to the folks in AV 
[audiovisual]; to the security and commissionaires; to the folks 
in the Library, my books will be back, honestly; the folks in the 
cafeteria; all the staff of the Legislative Assembly; the press 
gallery; the caucus members on both sides of this House — 
again, Mr. Speaker, it’s good to pause at this moment to just say 
again, the kind of respect that we have for the service and, in 
some cases, decades of service for working for the people of 
Saskatchewan. So it’s again quite humbling to join the debate at 
this particular junction. 
 
To the caucus staff, to the folks on both sides of the aisle, 
certainly again thanks to Jarret and the folks in the opposition 
House business. But, Mr. Speaker, we had our staff here earlier. 
You know, sometimes when we have the big debates in this 
House, you see all the different government staff come 
marching in and fill the galleries. Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got 
a pretty lean operation over on our side of the aisle. But of 
course, you know, nine staffers to nine MLAs, it’s a pretty good 
staff-to-MLA ratio. But they were here and, you know, for the 
half a row that they filled up, they do so much work on our 
behalf and on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, and we are 
very grateful for it. 
 
And then in particular, as regards House business, I want to 
thank Linsay Martens and Katherine Norton and Mitch 
Bonokoski, the folks that sort of pitch in and out of the House 



November 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7891 

business bailiwick. The folks outside of the building that, you 
know, keep the home fires burning, the constituency offices, 
again we couldn’t do this work without them. 
 
To our constituents: thank you to them, and I’ll come back to 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But as well to family and friends, and as came up in different 
ways throughout the speeches here that we’ve had the privilege 
to bear witness to, Mr. Speaker, you know there have been 
births, there have been deaths, there have been some 
relationships fall apart, some relationships come together. 
There’s been a tremendous amount of life going on as we’ve 
been part of this particular legislature. And I know that in my 
particular case, Mr. Speaker, the family that I have, I couldn’t 
do this without them. And they give me so much and I am so 
very grateful for it. And in that I’m not alone certainly, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I want to end off just a couple, three things, again to reciprocate 
to my colleague across the way. Thanks again for denying leave 
for a unanimous motion. You know, I don’t know what I’d do if 
I caught the car, but we’d give it a whirl. We’d give it a whirl, 
Mr. Speaker. But certainly, to my hon. colleague, the 
counterpart, the Government House Leader, the Deputy House 
Leader, it’s good working with them. It’s straightforward. 
Again it’s not without its surprises or its ups and downs or 
curveballs and all that, Mr. Speaker, but certainly it’s a critical 
relationship in the proper functioning of this House so that we 
might serve the people of Saskatchewan. So I thank my 
colleagues for the good work and the good relationship. 
 
The last thing I’d say is this, Mr. Speaker. As has been noted 
often, and it should be, we are here to serve the people of 
Saskatchewan. We’re here to serve the people of our individual 
constituencies. And, Mr. Speaker, in that work we need to have 
that attitude of gratitude, but I’m also reminded of a couple of 
things around the why we do that work and the how we do that 
work. And when it comes to why we do that work, Mr. Speaker, 
I think of a Cree, a nêhiýaw, teaching, around pimâtisiwin, the 
good life, and what should we be doing as people to live that 
good life and to add to that good life and the connection that 
exists between all things. So what are we doing to add, to bring 
pimâtisiwin, Mr. Speaker, I think is something that we all seek 
out in different ways. But we do well to keep that in mind. 
 
And then the second thing I think of, Mr. Speaker, in regards to 
how we do the work, it comes from scripture, and it comes from 
Micah 6:8. And it is of course where the prophet writes, “And 
what does the Lord require of thee or man or woman, but to do 
justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God?” And 
if we can remember those things, Mr. Speaker, as to why we do 
this work and to how we should be doing that work, I think we 
do that service to the people of Saskatchewan very well. Thank 
you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Well I will take the opportunity as well to say 
a few words since, as Speaker, I get to do lot of “order” but not 
a lot of speaking. 
 
I would like to take this opportunity to thank everyone for their 
hard work this session. Thank you to the members for their long 
hours of service to Saskatchewan and for the long hours and 

days away from their family. Thank you for your co-operation, 
willing or unwilling. 
 
I would especially like to express my appreciation to those 10 
members who have made the decision to retire from their 
position as members of the Saskatchewan legislature. Those 
members represent the following constituencies: 
Melville-Saltcoats, Estevan, Cypress Hills, Regina South, 
Wood River, Canora-Pelly, Regina Lakeview, Saskatoon 
Greystone, Kelvington-Wadena, and Moosomin. Moosomin 
will be — what? — almost 31 years by the . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . 30 by the time the election rolls around. So I 
congratulate you on your 180 years of combined service to 
Saskatchewan, and I would like to wish you nothing but the 
best of luck in your future endeavours. 
 
[14:30] 
 
It is time to return to your homes and spend quality time with 
your family. Thank you to the families at home for their 
continued support. 
 
While it is unknown as to when the Assembly will sit next, I 
know the work does not end and committees will continue 
through the recess period. Ministers will continue their duties 
and meetings in Regina and Saskatoon or across the province. 
Private members will work on their constituency issues and in 
their roles as committee members, legislative secretaries, or 
critics. Those that are running again will have additional duties 
to gain the honour and approval of their constituents to return. 
 
I would like to thank the LAS [Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan] staff, the Clerks and officers, the Pages, 
Hansard, Sergeant-at-Arms — and congratulate him on his 
retirement — and his staff; the interns, caucus staff, cafeteria 
staff, Central Services, building staff. You know, we should 
almost have this to a tune or something. Their hours are often 
long or, in the case of Hansard, longer than those of the 
members. Thank you to our constituency staff for their 
diligence and hard work, especially while the members are in 
the Assembly. 
 
Thank you to my staff, Sheila and Connie, for their support, 
especially in dealing with the programs and initiatives such as 
the SSTI [Saskatchewan Social Sciences Teachers’ Institute on 
Parliamentary Democracy] and the educational outreach 
program which are run out of the Speaker’s offices. These 
programs take a lot of extra time but are well worth the effort. 
 
I would like to thank you for the opportunity and privilege to be 
selected and serve as your Speaker. I would also like to remind 
members that there is still time. You may . . . This is your last 
chance to be ejected. Anyone wish to speak up? 
 
I’d also like to remind you that you can join the CPA 
[Commonwealth Parliamentary Association] as an associate 
member, and I would encourage you to do so, so this would not 
be a goodbye but a see you later. Everyone have a joyous and 
happy Christmas, a Happy New Year, and a wonderful winter, 
and drive safe. Thank you. 
 
I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 



7892 Saskatchewan Hansard November 26, 2015 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 
that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that this House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — This House now stands adjourned to the call 
of the Chair. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:34.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7855 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7855 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7855 
  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7855 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7855 
  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7856 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7856 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7856 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7856 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7856 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7857 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7857 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Recognizing the Denesuline Nation 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7857 
 Completion of Renovation of Saskatoon Schools 
  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7857 
 Climate Change March 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7858 
 New Computerized Tomography Scanner in Estevan 
  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7858 
 Saskatoon Police Constable Wins Award 
  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7858 
 Government Investment in Northern Saskatchewan 
  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7859 
 Record of Government and Opposition 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7859 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Health Care Expenditures 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7859 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7859 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7860 
 Quality of Care in Long-Term Care Facilities  
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7861 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7861 
 Government’s Fiscal Management 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7861 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7862 
 Carbon Capture and Storage Project 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7862 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7862 
 Government’s Fiscal Management and Provision of Medical Treatments 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7863 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7863 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7864 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7864 
PERSONAL STATEMENTS 
 Farewells 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7864 
  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7866 
  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7868 
  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 7871 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7872 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7875 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7878 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7882 
  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7884 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7886 



 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7888 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7889 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7890 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7891 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


