




















































Hansard: March 12, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 33A  THURSDAY, MARCH 12, 2015, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6539 

 March 12, 2015 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a brief shout-out 

and welcome to fellow southerner, Mr. Dale Burnay all the way 

from Assiniboia. He’s an avid politico and a Twitterer and 

keenly follows Saskatchewan politics. So from having been a 

neighbour of him in the town of Lafleche, I just want to say 

welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in calling for greater support for 

education. And we know that education is one of the most vital 

services the government provides to its citizens and that this 

government has failed to deliver a long-term plan and vision 

and the necessary resources to prioritize the delivery of 

educational excellence, and we know we must build the best 

education system for today and for Saskatchewan’s future. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 

to immediately prioritize education by laying out a 

long-term vision and plan with the necessary resources to 

provide the best quality education for Saskatchewan that 

reflects Saskatchewan’s demographic and population 

changes, that is based on proven educational best 

practices, that is developed through consultation with the 

education sector, and that builds strong educational 

infrastructure to serve students and communities long into 

the future. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from Moose 

Jaw. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 

again to present petitions as it relates to the unsafe conditions 

that that government has created on Dewdney Avenue and their 

failure to respond and make sure that there is adequate safe flow 

of traffic, Mr. Speaker. I know that members opposite have 

ignored this issue from the get-go. They’ve ignored proposals 

that have been sent them directly from myself and from our city 

councillor, Mr. Speaker, and we need to get those dangerous 

heavy-haul trucks off of Dewdney. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 

government to immediately take action as it relates to the 

unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 

damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on 

Dewdney Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the 

safety and well-being of communities, families, residents, 

and users; and that those actions and plans should include 

rerouting the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial 

funding, and be developed through consultation with the 

city of Regina, communities, and residents. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned residents of Regina as 

well as White City. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition. 

Homelessness is a major problem in La Ronge and in other 

parts of the North and is getting worse. Shelter is a basic need 

for everyone, but under this government, it’s getting harder and 

harder for people to find adequate housing, especially families, 

seniors, women and children who face abusive situations. The 

problem is getting worse because of the rising level of poverty 

and skyrocketed home ownership costs. The prayer reads: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the Saskatchewan 

government to build a homeless shelter in the Lac la 

Ronge area to meet the needs of addressing homelessness 

in the Lac la Ronge area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by many good people of 

northern Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

present a petition in support of better seniors’ care. The 

petitioners point out that many seniors are having to wait in 

hospital beds due to the lack of spaces in care facilities; that we 

and they continue to hear an increasing number of stories about 

the adverse effects of chronic understaffing in seniors’ care 

facilities, including unanswered calls for help, seniors being left 

unattended on toilets for hours on end, and seniors not receiving 

baths for weeks at a time. 

 

They also talk about the provincial government’s response to 

the seniors’ care crisis being inadequate as evidenced by the 

fact that the recent provincial, last year’s provincial budget 

included no new long-term care spaces for seniors, and the 

minister’s only proposed solution to chronic understaffing 

challenges was to ask health region CEOs [chief executive 

officer] to go on a tour of care facilities. So we look forward to 

different, more measures in this budget, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 



6540 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2015 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the provincial 

government to immediately undertake meaningful steps to 

improve the quality of seniors’ care in our province, 

including creating more spaces and more choices for 

seniors; ensuring higher standards of care in public 

facilities, private facilities, and for home care; ensuring 

appropriate staffing levels in seniors’ care facilities; and 

providing more support to help seniors remain 

independent in their own homes for as long as they desire. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by folks in Regina, Central 

Butte, and Saskatoon. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition in support of infrastructure accountability. 

And the petitioners point out that residents and taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan have a right to know how their money is spent. 

They point out that it’s in the best interest of the residents and 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan to receive the best value for their tax 

dollar in government procurement of Crown infrastructure, 

goods or services on their behalf. And they point out that cost 

savings or value for taxpayers’ money has not been realized or 

has been the subject of audit and dispute in other jurisdictions in 

public-private partnership projects. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners 

humbly pray: 

 

That your honourable Legislative Assembly call on this 

government to immediately pass The Public-Private 

Partnership Transparency and Accountability Act. 

 

This particular batch of petitions is signed by citizens from 

Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, Humboldt, Carrot River, Canora, 

Melville, Prince Albert, Air Ronge, and La Ronge. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 

petition for real action on climate change. The petitioners want 

to bring to the attention of the Legislative Assembly a number 

of items, including the fact that Saskatchewan’s emissions 

continue to grow. As of October 2013, it was 74 million. 

There’s no signs of decreasing. Slashing programs such as the 

Go Green Fund and the EnerGuide for Houses — the energy 

efficiency programs — have set this province on a backwards 

course. And since 2009 the Government of Saskatchewan has 

reduced climate change funding by 83 per cent, including a 35 

per cent cut in the ’14-15 budget. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request: 

 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact a 

real plan and allocate appropriate funding in the provincial 

budget to tackle climate change by reducing greenhouse 

gas emissions, helping families transition to 

energy-efficient homes, and encouraging everyone in the 

province to take real action to protect the environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition was signed by individuals from 

Vanscoy, Air Ronge, Saskatoon, and Regina. I so submit. 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

New Software Program Developed for Ebola Research 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the recent Ebola outbreak in West Africa has caught 

the world’s attention, and many countries and international 

organizations are doing what they can to help. There is one 

constituent of Saskatoon Centre who is contributing to the fight: 

Brett Trost. 

 

Brett Trost, a recent Ph.D. [Doctor of Philosophy] graduate of 

the computer science program at the University of 

Saskatchewan, has helped develop a software program now 

used for Ebola research at the US [United States] National 

Institutes of Health. The new system, PIIKA [Platform for 

Intelligent, Integrated Kinome Analysis], that Brett and his 

supervisor, Anthony Kusalik, created studies of how Ebola 

affects cells and what cells do to fight the infection. Trost stated 

in a recent Star Phoenix article, and I quote, “Clearly Ebola is a 

major concern, given the unprecedented outbreak in Africa. 

Better understanding of how Ebola hijacks cell-signalling 

mechanisms will ultimately allow us to develop better 

treatments.” 

 

This work is part of the new field called bioinformatics which 

combines computer science and molecular biology. Trost feels 

that bioinformatics has a great potential to improve human 

health. To quote him again, “The chance that I might one day 

play even a small part in improving treatments for human 

diseases is a huge motivator for me.” Trost was also the U of S 

[University of Saskatchewan] recipient of the prestigious 

Vanier Canada Graduate Scholarship in 2009. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in 

congratulating Brett Trost on this amazing contribution he has 

made in the fight against Ebola. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 

 

Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities 

Convention 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past week has 

been a busy week with the annual SARM [Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities] convention running March 

9th to 12th in Saskatoon. SARM has been a staple in this 

province since 1905, making this convention the 110th annual. 

Mr. Speaker, Acting President Ray Orb ran an informative 

convention, and I’d like to congratulate Ray on his election as 

president just this morning. 

 

One of the things that this government appreciates most is the 

open dialogue with our RMs [rural municipality] to see what is 

working and what is not in rural Saskatchewan. Issues like 

provincial revenue sharing, STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue 

Society], highways, education, property tax, and landfill waste 

management are important. These are conversations that we 

have to have. 

 

In addition to passing resolutions that covered a wide array of 



March 12, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6541 

topics, SARM hosted over 170 exhibitors for the trade show 

and hosted various ministers, the Premier, and John Gormley as 

some of the guest speakers. The bear-pit for cabinet ministers 

was also a success for both sides. With over 2,000 people 

attending this convention annually, our rural voice is strong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like all members to join with me in 

congratulating SARM for yet another successful convention. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

New Music Director Selected for Saskatoon 

Symphony Orchestra 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to 

recognize an exciting turn of events for an important cultural 

institution in our province. Eric Paetkau has been selected as the 

16th music director of the Saskatoon Symphony Orchestra. 

Maestro Paetkau currently calls Toronto home, but he was born 

on the prairies and also attended Rosthern Junior College. 

 

Maestro Paetkau is trained as a violinist and violist and studied 

conducting in the United States, Canada, and the Netherlands. 

He was the founding director of the group of 27 chamber 

orchestra, which recently recorded a Juno-nominated record 

with well-known Saskatoon trumpeter Guy Few. He has also 

played with a number of prestigious ensembles, including the 

Toronto Symphony Orchestra, the Canadian Opera Company, 

the National Ballet of Canada Orchestra, Les Violons du Roy, 

and the Tafelmusik Baroque Orchestra. 

 

After many years of highs and lows, it is so great to see the 

energy and momentum at the SSO [Saskatoon Symphony 

Orchestra]. In addition to the excitement that comes from a new 

musical director, the organization has begun a new fundraising 

program with the aim of raising $200,000 to mark the 85th 

anniversary of the orchestra, and every dollar raised by donors 

will be matched by the Remai Foundation. I’m certain that the 

orchestra will have no problem reaching its goal, given the 

deep-rooted community support for the fifth oldest orchestra in 

Canada. 

 

I ask all members to join me in welcoming Eric Paetkau back to 

Saskatchewan and in wishing him and the SSO all the best as 

they begin to prepare for another 85 seasons of success. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Education. 

 

Graduate Students’ Association Awards 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently I had 

the pleasure of attending the University of Saskatchewan 

Graduate Students’ Association third annual Graduate Awards 

Gala. I was attending there with the member for Saskatoon 

Centre, and I can say we had a pleasant and an enjoyable 

evening. It was an evening of celebration and inspiration 

recognizing the research, hard work, and achievement of the 

graduate students. 

 

Dr. Monique Haakensen, a specialist in passive water treatment, 

constructed wetlands, biogeochemistry, and genetic microbial 

profiling, and a U of S alumni was the keynote speaker. She 

spoke, Mr. Speaker, on change and how change continues to 

evolve, a remarkably timely message for the young people that 

were there. 

 

The most exciting part of the evening was the award 

presentations. The winners included, and you’ll pardon me if I 

mispronounce some of the names: Belinda C. Daniels for 

Excellence in Aboriginal Research; Ahmed Abdel-Salam for 

Research Excellence in the Sciences; Keshini Madara 

Marasinghe for Professional Excellence; Zohreh Izadifar for 

Interdisciplinary Research; Dr. Alexander Moewes for Advising 

Excellence; Annie Battiste for Exceptional Academic 

Counsellor; and Omeasoo Butt for Outstanding Past GSA 

[Graduate Students’ Association] Executive. 

 

The University of Saskatchewan has set a goal of being one of 

the most research-intensive universities in North America. The 

Graduate Awards Gala is an outstanding event that puts the 

spotlight on research and, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate 

all of the winners and congratulate the graduate students for the 

great work that they do in our province. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[10:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Meewasin. 

 

Governor General Awards for Bravery Recipients 

 

Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I am honoured 

to stand in the House to recognize the heroic acts of Tyler 

Campbell and Chris Clark, security officers working in the 

Saskatoon Health Region. On the evening of March 15th, 2013, 

Tyler and Chris rescued a woman from a burning room in the 

Irene and Leslie Dubé Centre for Mental Health. Thick smoke 

made entry into the room difficult, but the security officers 

risked their own lives and made it through. They were able to 

find the patient and bring her to the safety area. Other members 

of the team assisted and safely secured the area around the fire. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this past Friday, Mr. Campbell and Mr. Clark 

received the Governor General’s Medal of Bravery at a 

ceremony in Ottawa. Joining them were two colleagues, Stacy 

Anweiler and Roel Benedicto, and registered nurse Steve 

Atchison who will receive letters of commendation. They were 

also joined in Ottawa with Constable Steven Enns from Estevan 

who my colleague, the MLA [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] from Estevan, spoke about earlier in the week. Mr. 

Speaker, we are extremely proud of the courage and the 

leadership these men showed, risking their lives to save the life 

of another. 

 

I would ask all my colleagues to join me in congratulating Tyler 

Campbell and Chris Clark for their Governor General’s Medal 

of Bravery. We thank them for going above and beyond the call 

of duty when they were needed most. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Kelvington-Wadena. 

 



6542 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2015 

Inspiring Leadership Forum 

 

Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it was a 

great honour I had yesterday to speak at the sixth annual 

University of Regina Inspiring Leadership Forum, with over 

300 guests in attendance. Guest speakers also included Kim 

Campbell, Canada’s first female prime minister; Mary 

Robinson, Ireland’s first female president; and Mary Simon, a 

former Canadian diplomat. I was privileged to be on the 

moderator’s panel with Louise Simard and SUMA 

[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] President 

Debra Button. 

 

Mr. Speaker, ladies from all over Saskatchewan came to hear 

the inspiring words of strong women who have earned their 

way into leadership positions. This was a great opportunity for 

female leaders of the future to gain confidence and to learn 

from each other. The atmosphere at the event was full of 

positivity and passion and ambition. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan and in this building, we are very 

lucky to have women in roles of leadership to be role models 

for our next generation of leaders. As a woman who has 

political experience for a number of years, I was very excited to 

see that many more women are considering the leadership role 

in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 

the University of Regina and President Timmons for putting on 

a fantastic event. And I’d like to thank all the inspirational 

speakers for sharing their stories. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Brother and Sister Team at Canada Winter Games 

 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the Assembly 

today to recognize the accomplishments of two of my 

constituents who participated in the Canada Winter Games in 

Prince George. This brother and sister team from Delmas 

participated in the slalom race, giant slalom, and super-giant 

slalom. 

 

Louis Lacoursier, age 15, placed 23rd in the slalom under 16, 

and Amy Lacoursier, age 14, placed 36th in the slalom under 

16. Amy did very well, considering she is only 14 years old and 

was competing against 15- and 16-year-olds. 

 

Slalom is a competitive, downhill racing, skiing race over a 

winding and zigzagging course that is marked by poles or gates. 

Mr. Speaker, both of these athletes started skiing at the age of 

three at Table Mountain Regional Park, which is not far from 

their home. Mr. Speaker, Louis and Amy were excited to travel 

with Team Saskatchewan to participate in the games and found 

it to be a rewarding experience to both meet and compete 

against other athletes. 

 

As are all of the members here today, I am truly proud of our 

athletes who represented our province in the Canada Winter 

Games. Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in 

congratulating Louis and Amy Lacoursier and all of the other 

athletes who represented our province in Prince George. 

Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Quality of Care in Emergency Rooms and the Lean 

Initiative 

 

Mr. Broten: — On Monday, 88-year-old Sorn Kear was taken 

to the Royal University Hospital by ambulance at 3:30 in the 

morning. He spent eight hours waiting in a curtained-off area 

before he got a CT [computerized tomography] scan. 

 

After his scan, staff tried to move him back to the curtained-off 

area, but it had already been given to another patient in the 

chaos of an overcrowded emergency room, so Mr. Kear was left 

for six hours sitting on a gurney in the hallway right by the 

nurses’ station at the entrance to the emergency room. He was 

feeling horribly nauseous and he was incredibly embarrassed to 

be out in the open at the entrance of the ER [emergency room] 

in a hospital gown, surrounded by a ton of people. Is this the 

quality of emergency room care that the Premier thinks is 

acceptable? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the 

absence of the Premier today, I’ll be taking the questions 

directed at him under Health. 

 

Mr. Speaker, any time you hear of a case like this it is 

unacceptable. We believe that not only the general public but 

specifically seniors deserve the best possible care in our health 

facilities, in our long-term care facilities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I am not aware of the details around this situation, this 

circumstance. I’m not sure if my office or the Minister of 

Health’s office has been contacted yet, but I would ask the 

Leader of the Opposition to offer that information over. We can 

contact the family and the individual in question and see if we 

can help out. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it is unacceptable, but under this 

government, it is typical. And that, Mr. Speaker, is an absolute 

shame. 

 

Mr. Kear’s daughter Audrey was shocked by the conditions at 

the emergency room at the Royal University Hospital, Mr. 

Speaker. And the Finance minister is heckling, Mr. Speaker. 

This is the Finance minister, under record revenues, who has 

allowed this situation to be created, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Kear’s daughter thought the extreme overcrowding, the 

hallway medicine, and the utter chaos of the emergency room, 

Mr. Speaker, she thought that that would be something that 

wasn’t normal, but staff in the emergency room told her that 

this was just a typical day. This government has had record 

windfall revenues every single year, but long waits in 

emergency rooms and hallway medicine, Mr. Speaker, is now 



March 12, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6543 

typical. My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier. How can 

he explain that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the 

Premier today, I’ll remind the Leader of the Opposition, he’s 

not in the . . . Mr. Speaker, I’ll be taking questions on his behalf 

under Health and the government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again any time a situation like this arises where 

there’s long waits in the ER, specifically with somebody that’s 

very ill and especially with a senior citizen, we want to be sure 

that we look into the case and find out what has been going on. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I will point out to the members of the House, 

the members opposite, the investment that we have made in 

emergency room wait times, the initiatives around that: whether 

it’s through Home First home care for senior citizens making 

sure that they’re healthy in their homes and getting the service 

they need before they need an emergency room; with 

investments in primary health clinics, more access to patients in 

communities before they would need that service; investments 

in health facilities around the province that our government has 

undertaken over the past seven years where we see new 

facilities being opened and planned under this government. We 

saw 52 closed under the opposition. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Kear’s daughter Audrey 

called the Premier. She called the Health minister because she 

was outraged at the treatment that her dad received, but they 

had no decent answers, Mr. Speaker, to alleviate the concerns of 

Audrey and her father. 

 

An 88-year-old man in extreme pain, feeling nauseous, waits 

eight hours for an emergency CT scan. And that’s bad enough, 

but at least he was in a curtained-off area with a little bit of 

privacy. After his scan he was left right out in the open at the 

nurses’ station in the hallway in a hospital gown for six hours 

on a gurney, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This happened just last Monday, long after the 14-day lean 

exercise in February in which the government cancelled a 

bunch of surgeries and asked John Black for yet more advice, 

Mr. Speaker. Staff told Mr. Kear’s daughter Audrey that it’s 

typical for patients to wait too long in the emergency room and 

to be crammed into hospital hallways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. Does he 

acknowledge that these conditions are now typical and when 

can we expect some meaningful action to start fixing this mess? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, we started acting shortly 

after November 7th of 2007 cleaning up the mess left by the 

members opposite. Again I’ll point out: 52 hospitals; the Plains 

Health Centre which was very accessible to especially rural 

people around the province, Mr. Speaker, able to hit the Ring 

Road and get to the facility very quickly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll point to some other projects specifically 

around Saskatoon Health Region. The new CEO there, the 

former deputy minister that has undertaken a 14-day challenge 

has been empowering front-line staff to tackle persistent 

overcapacity. It has resulted in fewer temporary beds and fewer 

patients waiting for beds, Mr. Speaker.  

 

To clarify a point I made earlier, the Health minister’s office 

has been in contact with the family. The ministry and the region 

are looking into it, and we’ll have maybe something to report in 

the days to come. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s ridiculous. The second Health 

minister here stands up, brags about their record in the face of 

these stories like Mr. Kear’s who sits in the front room of the 

emergency room at the desk, Mr. Speaker, in a gown, for hours, 

waiting for care, crammed into a hallway with other patients. 

And he’s bragging about his record, Mr. Speaker. It makes no 

sense. 

 

And then he proves my point as well. He says, well, we did the 

14-day lean exercise where we cancelled a bunch of surgeries 

and went to John Black for more advice. That was before this, 

Mr. Speaker. This happened just on Monday. 

 

This government’s plan, in its fascination with the John Black 

lean project, clearly is not working. They have had record 

windfall revenues year after year, but this is the reality that 

we’re seeing. No end of money for Japanese sensei, for 

American consultants, and a flavour-of-the-day lean 

methodology, Mr. Speaker, but so little for the things that 

actually matter on the front lines, so little to actually address the 

basics. 

 

And we have the former Health minister who has played a big 

role in getting us into the John Black mess, Mr. Speaker, he’s 

the one bragging right now. It’s unbelievable. Their dismissive 

approach is endemic in that entire government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My question to this Premier: when will the government start 

wasting its time and its money on wasteful pet projects? When 

will it start to fix the things that Saskatchewan families actually 

need when it comes to emergency medicine? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, listening to that member 

stand and speak the way he is, you’d think there was absolutely 

nobody waiting for any service in Saskatchewan when they 

were in government, Mr. Speaker. That’s the farthest thing from 

the truth. 

 

We had multiple people waiting for all types of services, Mr. 

Speaker, because we had doctors leaving the province. We had 

nurses leaving the province. We had health care facilities 

closing. Mr. Speaker, we had the longest waiting lists — again, 

as a member has reminded me — under the NDP [New 

Democratic Party]. Where they had a plan to reduce wait-lists, 



6544 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2015 

to do all these sort of grand things, Mr. Speaker, what did we 

see? A 61 per cent increase in wait-lists in this province, Mr. 

Speaker. We saw a lack of investment in our health care 

facilities. We saw a lack of investment in training spots. We 

saw a lack of investment in residency positions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, just the other day we saw medical students up in 

the gallery, a dozen of them. I would argue, under the members 

opposite we would have saw about half of those, and maybe 

half of those would have stayed in the province. Now we’re 

seeing 12 possible graduates with over 60 per cent of them will 

stay in the province at the very least, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s responses make 

absolutely no sense. He stands. He congratulates himself, as do 

the members there, about the job that they’ve done, but let’s 

look at the results, Mr. Speaker. We have family after family 

coming forward. We have Audrey calling the Premier, calling 

the Health minister, calling the opposition, outraged at the 

treatment that her 88-year-old father received. The 

government’s story does not add up, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Let’s look where they’ve been hemorrhaging money. They’ve 

had no end of money for the John Black lean project. That’s 

where they’ll put their resources. That’s where they’ll put their 

time. They’ve got no end of resources for that, but they won’t 

address the things that matter. 

 

Well here’s an idea how we could improve on emergency waits 

and the prevalence of hallway medicine, Mr. Speaker. And 

they’re mocking here, Mr. Speaker. How about we actually use 

City Hospital in Saskatoon properly? How about we have 

proper acute care in City Hospital? How about not shutting 

down the emergency room of City Hospital at 8:30 every 

evening, Mr. Speaker? 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier. Saskatchewan 

people want City Hospital properly used. Mr. Kear’s daughter 

wants it used. I want it used properly. Why won’t this Premier 

use City Hospital properly? 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, let’s talk about lean. 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen a $40.5 million total investment in 

lean. We’ve seen 125 million of savings to this point, and 

there’s a lot of savings to be tallied up after that initial 

document has been drafted, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Where have we been hemorrhaging money? We’ve been 

hemorrhaging money in debt reduction. We’ve been 

hemorrhaging money in tax reductions for people in this 

province. We’ve been hemorrhaging money in a new process 

for patient treatment and assessment. We’ve been hemorrhaging 

money in police and crisis team work. We’ve been 

hemorrhaging money in Lighthouse paramedic pilot projects, 

senior house calls, hot-spotting projects, again, the Saskatoon 

challenge, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve also been spending on a project that I’d like to bring 

back to light, the Moose Jaw Hospital. The member yesterday 

talked about an 80 per cent reduction in beds. Mr. Speaker, that 

new lean-designed facility in Moose Jaw was 121 beds 

previously at 80 per cent occupancy. That facility now: 115 

beds, flexible beds that experts come to the patients and the 

services come to the patients, not the patients being dragged 

around a facility to find services elsewhere, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Support for Buy Local Day 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, a recent study found that 

optimism among small businesses in our province plunged to a 

six-year low in February. In fact over the last five months, small 

business optimism in Saskatchewan has continually declined. 

 

Today we have a chance to give small businesses in our 

province a boost by supporting a bill put forward by the Leader 

of the Opposition, The Buy Local Day Act. A grassroots group 

of local business owners called Sasklandia supports this bill. 

The Broadway Business Improvement District supports this 

bill, and the Canadian Federation of Independent Business is 

also fully supportive of this bill. Will the Premier support this 

common sense legislation when it comes to a vote later today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

The short answer to whether the government will be supporting 

the bill is yes, despite some obvious drafting issues. I’d actually 

point to clause 3, Mr. Speaker, where the NDP, the Leader of 

the Opposition’s bill, he actually spelled business wrong in the 

bill. It’s a one-page bill, Mr. Speaker, and there’s four clauses, 

and he spelled business wrong. 

 

But we will be supporting the bill. The government has a 

long-standing position that we would like to see every day 

being buy-local day, Mr. Speaker. So we will be supporting that 

bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, this is great news. We welcome 

the government’s support by the Leader of the Opposition. The 

bill is straightforward and it doesn’t require extensive review in 

committee. It simply proclaims the first Saturday of each month 

as Buy Local Day, which is a common sense way to promote 

the incredible value of local businesses, to put Saskatchewan 

first, and to create greater economic diversity and sustainability 

in our province. My question is: will the Premier agree to fast 

track this bill? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

I’ve already indicated that the government will be supporting 

the legislation. We’ll be having a vote on second reading later 

today. The bill will be . . . 

 



March 12, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6545 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. I asked for order, and I would 

appreciate if I could hear the minister’s response. Since both 

sides seem to be in agreement on this, I’m not sure what all the 

hollering is about. I recognize the Minister for Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well as the member opposite should 

know as a former Opposition House Leader, there’s a process. 

There’s a second reading vote. It goes to committee and then is 

reported out to the House. So that process will be followed. As I 

said, the government believes every day should be buy-local 

day, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve taken real steps in this direction as well. We have 

proclamations for Small Business Week, Red Tape Awareness 

Week, Women Entrepreneurs Week, Co-operatives Week, and 

we’ve taken real action, Mr. Speaker. We’ve reduced the small 

business tax rate in 2011 from 4.5 per cent to 2 per cent. And I 

find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that this is the only economic 

policy we’ve seen from the opposition. This government has 

fostered the environment for small businesses to thrive in this 

province and lead our province forward. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, as the former Government House 

Leader knows, there is a way to fast track bills, and that’s to go 

quickly through committee and get it back in the House for 

third reading. 

 

Now it’s always a good thing when there is an outbreak of 

common sense in this place so, while we have a bit of that 

happening, I’m wondering: will the Premier also agree to pass 

the bill put forward by the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, the 

bill that would fix this government’s horribly flawed 

procurement policy? That would be another very positive step 

this Assembly could take today to boost Saskatchewan 

businesses. Will the Premier agree to that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve 

already pointed out the process, which the former Opposition 

House Leader should know, if they wish to bring their next bill 

forward, they can. 

 

I guess what I would ask actually of the official opposition is if 

they would agree to an amendment to fix the spelling of the 

word business in their bill, Mr. Speaker. It’s a one-page bill. So 

I guess, Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask for the unanimous consent of the 

House right now to amend their bill such that business would be 

spelled right rather than wrong. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Contract With Housing Developer 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. There 

are a lot of angry and frustrated people in Prince Albert about 

Deveraux Developments being handed a contract for a health 

region housing project. It appears that this contract may have 

been tailor-made for Deveraux. 

 

To the Minister of Sask Housing: did this government influence 

this decision in any way because of its special relationship with 

this developer? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The answer 

is no. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, this is the same developer that 

bungled an affordable housing project here in the city. The 

Social Services minister has said that this government had a 

special relationship with this company, and she said the 

Saskatchewan Party didn’t want to “thump on them.” 

 

She even questioned whether there are desperate homeless 

people in our province. First off, an FYI [for your information] 

for the minister: there are a lot of desperate homeless people in 

our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the same developer that this government 

admits it has a special relationship with. So once again to the 

minister: how can the people of Prince Albert, given their past 

treatment for a number of years under the Saskatchewan 

government, have any confidence that this government didn’t 

interfere with that decision? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — As has happened in the past, we need 

to correct statements that the NDP say in this House. And I 

have never said that this government has a relationship with 

the . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Special relationship. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Or a special relationship. He just 

corrected it. It’s words that have never been spoken by this 

minister. 

 

And his statement, when I said that there were no desperate 

homeless people, I was referring to a specific project and the 

wait-list for a project that we did not go forward with. And the 

wait-list for that project, there was nobody that was homeless 

that was on that list. It was not a broad statement for the whole 

entire province. 

 

Again I will say that there is no interference with the project 

that he is mentioning in P.A. [Prince Albert], and we do have a 

very successful project with Deveraux in Moose Jaw. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

State of Provincial Educational Facilities 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Last week we heard about schools that 

literally have their roofs propped up with temporary posts 

because they’re structurally not sound, propped up with 

two-by-fours and two-by-sixes. On Monday, we had parents 



6546 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2015 

that had to travel all the way from Esterhazy to raise very 

serious concerns relating to the quality of their kids’ elementary 

school and the unsafe air quality. We know of at least $1.5 

billion of school infrastructure needs, but this government is 

keeping the details secret. 

 

You know, it’s bad enough that we had to fight this government 

to get the release of the VFA report which outlines $2.2 billion 

in health infrastructure needs, so why is the Education minister 

now making us fight to get the truth about the state of our kids’ 

schools? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

we take infrastructure in our schools very seriously. When 

problems are brought up, we want to be able to deal with them 

as well and as quickly as we can. 

 

Mr. Speaker, under the previous administration, there were 176 

schools that were closed in our province, 176 schools that aren’t 

looking for capital, that are not looking for students. They have 

gone away, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the schools that didn’t 

close were neglected by the members opposite. 

 

We’ve invested almost four times what the NDP did into 

schools across the province. We’re going to continue to make a 

significant investment. The members should wait until next 

week and see what the budget looks like. We continue to 

remain committed to the education system in our province. We 

continue to remain committed to the teachers and students in 

our province, unlike the members opposite who scared away 

35,000 students. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty interesting that 

the minister conveniently leaves out the fact that the auditor has 

been critical of this government and its funding for school 

infrastructure as it touts and boosts its supposed record at a time 

when there’s $1.5 billion of infrastructure needs. The auditor 

said, “The current level of funding is not sufficient, contributing 

to an infrastructure deficit.” 

 

What did this government do in response to that 

recommendation last year? Well they cut the funding by $24 

million, Mr. Speaker. Despite raking in record revenues, this 

government hasn’t been able to get the job done when it comes 

to our schools. 

 

To the minister: what’s wrong with shining a light on the true 

state of our kids’ schools? What doesn’t this government want 

parents to know? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, once again we have to 

correct the members opposite. We don’t cut funding on 

education. We haven’t cut funding on education. In fact, 

education funding continues to go up in our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to give the members opposite some 

numbers. Mr. Speaker, in Saskatoon and area, we have injected 

over $155 million in capital: new or like-new schools in 

Willowgrove, Nutana Collegiate, Holy Family, Georges Vanier, 

Holy Cross, St. Matthew, E.D. Feehan, St. Mary, Martensville, 

Warman. Mr. Speaker, we have now six new joint-use schools 

in Evergreen, Rosewood, Stonebridge, Hampton Village, 

Warman, and Martensville. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Regina area, some of the members over there are 

from Regina until they go off to their next careers after the next 

election. We’ve invested over $135 million in this area. New or 

like-new schools: Balcarres, Lumsden Elementary, Emerald 

Ridge, École Monseigneur de Laval, Campbell, Scott 

Collegiate, Arcola, Douglas Park, Seven Stones, Sacred Heart, 

École Connaught; three new joint-use schools in Harbour 

Landing, northwest, and Greens on Gardiner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue doing those kind of things 

because that’s what our province needs. That’s what the citizens 

are expecting, and Mr. Speaker, this is a record that we are . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 

Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we know that minister 

doesn’t listen to the education sector. Now we know as well the 

minister doesn’t even read his own budget documents. It’s clear 

in black print that the budget was cut last year for school 

infrastructure by $24 million. The minister should read that. He 

should know it as well. 

 

The auditor has called for transparency around school 

infrastructure needs, but this government refuses to release 

information it has about the state of our schools. Apparently it’s 

some big cabinet secret. Even school divisions aren’t afforded 

proper transparency. School divisions have been clear about 

their concerns on this front. This was even noted by government 

officials in committee in January. The auditor has called for 

more transparency. School divisions need more transparency, 

and parents deserve more transparency. 

 

To the minister: what will it take for that government to finally 

release the list, all the documentation around the $1.5 billion, of 

the state of our schools, of the educational needs in this 

province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

some of the things that aren’t on any lists anymore are things 

that have been completed. The member for Athabasca should 

consider $4 million that went to a brand new school in Turnor 

Lake. The member for Cumberland should consider a $33 

million renovation at Churchill High School in La Ronge. 

While they can beak off all they want and say it was a long, 

long time ago, Mr. Speaker, it was under this government, not 

under that government did that happen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member for Saskatoon Nutana: $14 million 

renovation to Nutana Collegiate. I was on the Saskatoon Public 

School Board, Mr. Speaker, when that was started, when we 

were lobbying the government then, and it was not until this 

government came in that there was funding made available for 

that. Mr. Speaker, those are the projects that are important in 



March 12, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6547 

this province, and those are the projects that we’re going to 

continue to do. We will take no lessons from that group over 

there. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Provision of Services in Moose Jaw Hospital 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Yesterday the Rural Health minister struggled 

to answer basic questions about the hyperbaric chamber in 

Moose Jaw. He refused to go out into the rotunda to answer 

questions from the media. When the Moose Jaw media tried to 

get answers from the member from Moose Jaw North, he also 

refused to talk. To the minister: what is it about the hyperbaric 

chamber in Moose Jaw that leaves this government so 

speechless? 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, we had a really good 

meeting yesterday with the people that were in the Assembly, to 

hear their concerns, and we had some questions for them as 

well. We’ve agreed to meet again and trade some information, 

Mr. Speaker, around the specialties around the hyperbaric 

chamber and what other options are being used province-wide, 

Canada-wide, worldwide right now in lieu of that. So we’ll be 

getting back together to share that information as well as we’re 

open to entertaining community-based options for that facility. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know, I’m glad the member asked another 

question. I wanted to bring to light again, you know, there’s 

questions about the Moose Jaw facility. And I would point out 

that because the facility, the design of it, we were able to put an 

MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] in there that’s going to 

serve thousands and thousands of patients, not like the 

hyperbaric chamber. It’s less than 20 per year, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, it’s interesting that they had an NDP cabinet 

minister from their area that never got a hospital built, Mr. 

Speaker. We got it built and, Mr. Speaker, we’re very proud of 

that fact, and it’ll be serving the members of Moose Jaw and 

area for many years to come. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Quality of Life in Rural Saskatchewan 

 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very honoured to be part of 

the debate that we’re going to have today on health care and 

education and agriculture and highways in rural Saskatchewan. 

The motion that I will read at the end of the debate says: 

 

That this Assembly supports this government’s action 

towards improving quality of life in rural Saskatchewan 

through investments in health care and education, 

supporting agricultural programs for producers, and record 

investments in highways and infrastructure; furthermore 

 

This Assembly condemns the NDP opposition for its 

demands for increased spending without any recognition 

for the cost of its promises and for the failure to present 

any policy that supports a better quality of life for rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I are going to be delighted to 

be taking part in this speech and talking about the changes that 

have happened in rural Saskatchewan since 2007 but are also 

going to be waiting with bated breath to hear what the members 

opposite say about rural Saskatchewan. I hope there is going to 

be some realism in the speeches that come forward. And to be 

fair, I know that none of them on that side of the house live in 

rural Saskatchewan, so anything they talk about will be a rant 

about rural Saskatchewan or a hearsay. 

 

I know the members opposite don’t have, don’t like to talk 

about the past, but many of my colleagues, including myself, 

are here because of a monumental mistake the NDP made a 

number of years ago. The NDP wrote off rural Saskatchewan. 

Probably it was a political decision, and their decision was that 

they don’t have to worry about people in rural Saskatchewan. 

They didn’t need rural Saskatchewan to form government. 

 

The Kelvington-Wadenas, the Melforts, the Canora-Pellys, the 

Saltcoats, Wood River, even the Humboldt, and Thunder Creek 

— the government at that time decided they didn’t need rural 

Saskatchewan to form government. The NDP continued to 

ignore them, and the NDP believed they could keep their base 

happy. Mr. Speaker, even the member from Athabasca knows 

that the NDP had written off his seat. That’s why of course the 

member was elected as a Liberal. The NDP wrote off the 

member’s riding, and then the member wormed his way back in 

the back door into the NDP, but nothing changed the whole 

time he was in government when they were under the NDP. 

 

The past the Leader of the Opposition won’t talk about is that 

not long ago the NDP members decided that rural 

Saskatchewan wasn’t a part of what they needed to do. But 

people in Saskatchewan, rural Saskatchewan, know what 

happened. They know what the NDP did when they were in 

government. Our constituents remember, even if the members 

opposite don’t remember what happened. 

 

We remember getting on buses and travelling to Regina by the 

busload to talk to the NDP about closing hospitals, closing 52 

hospitals. Not to even mention the Plains hospital, 52 hospitals 

were closed by the members opposite. Rural Saskatchewan, the 

devastation that happened because of that, is something that we 

still live with in rural Saskatchewan, but the NDP didn’t listen 

to the people that came to this legislature in busloads to make 

sure that they knew the impact they had on our province. 

 

We all remember that school after school after school was 

closed by the NDP government when they were in opposition. 

One hundred and seventy-five schools were closed, Mr. 

Speaker, and the people, the families had to leave to survive 

because the NDP did not care about what was happening in 

rural Saskatchewan. 



6548 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2015 

We do remember the education portion of property tax. Sixty 

per cent of the cost of education was borne on the back of 

property owners. The NDP said that they were going to do 

something about it, that they were going to change the status 

quo, Mr. Speaker, but they never did. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we remember the cutbacks to the municipalities. 

We remember the crumbling roads, and we remember the local 

municipalities that came to the legislature, to the NDP 

government, and asked them to do something about rural 

Saskatchewan. And their voice was not heard. 

 

And to add insult to injury, the NDP raised taxes. They raised 

PST [provincial sales tax]. They raised property tax. They 

raised income tax. They had surtaxes. In fact I don’t think there 

was a tax the members opposite didn’t love.  

 

Mr. Speaker, people of rural Saskatchewan, and let me rephrase 

that, all the people of Saskatchewan know what the 

responsibility of government truly is. They know that 

responsibility is health care and highways and schools and a 

safety net for vulnerable people and safeguarding our 

environment. That’s the priorities of the people of the province. 

They ask government to provide services that individuals find 

difficult to get for themselves, and the top of the list is always 

health care, Mr. Speaker. That’s why in our government, Mr. 

Speaker, we have invested over $1 billion in health care in the 

last six years — $1 billion. That’s three times the amount of 

money the NDP spent on capital and health care in the last six 

years of their government, a 3 to 1 ratio. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also as government, we’ve changed the 

cost-sharing formula for capital to 80/20 per cent. Our 

government listened to the concerns of the towns that were 

struggling to raise their share of the money for the 13 long-term 

care facilities, and Kelvington was one of them. We’ve put 

$200 million of provincial commitment into long-term care 

facilities. There was $26 million in the last year’s budget for 

rural long-term facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to take a few minutes to talk to you 

about what happens when a town like Kelvington receives a 

new integrated facility. The initial approval for the community 

of Kelvington was for a long-term care facility to replace the 

one that we have in our town. The community advised that it 

couldn’t afford the original proposed LTC [long-term care] 

program, even with the funding share of 80/20. Using a lean 3P 

[production preparation process] approach, an alternative that 

the NDP really doesn’t like, was used to explore how to reduce 

the budget from the estimated $21.9 million to approximately 

$15 million, provincial share of 12 million and the local share 

of 3 million. Mr. Speaker, in July of 2012 the scope changed for 

the project. The change enabled the Kelvington long-term care 

to provide and renovate the existing long-term care facility to 

include an acute care, primary health care, and emergency 

service. 

 

Mr. Speaker, now going into our town, when you enter from the 

south of the town, you are seeing a new facility being built. The 

town is proud of the fact that we’ve been seeing the building go 

up over winter, the very long, cold winter that we’ve had. We 

will now have seven acute care beds and also including a family 

room that can be developed into an eighth room if the future 

demands it. We have an interdisciplinary primary care clinic 

that includes seven multi-purpose patient rooms and clinic 

rooms. There’s a lab and an X-ray and an ER and a trauma 

room. Renovations to the existing long-term care facility 

includes wheelchair-accessible washrooms. The project would 

not have been possible without the hard work and the 

dedication and the efforts of the Kelvington & District Health 

Care Facility Foundation, the town of Kelvington, and the 

surrounding municipalities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Kelvington Integrated Health Care Facility’s 

3P team received a provincial award of excellence at the Health 

Care Quality Summit in Saskatoon for their work. The health 

care system has four aims: better care, better health, better 

value, and better teams. The team received the Better Value 

Award. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP talk about lean, but the people of 

Kelvington and Wadena know the difference it made in the 

budget for them. They know that when a hospital is gone from 

the community, way too often the community doesn’t survive. 

We know that when those hospitals were closed in the 52 

communities, I’m not sure if there was one new house ever built 

in a community where the hospital was removed. People do not 

feel it’s a home. They don’t see it as the future. People have to 

believe that rural Saskatchewan can be the place where they are 

living. Mr. Speaker, we continue to know that as a government, 

this is a priority for the people that we represent. And the 

members opposite should realize that every rural seat is held by 

the members on this side of the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, other Sask Party initiatives was the 3P 225-bed 

long-term care facility in Swift Current. The approximate cost 

of that was $80 million. Mr. Speaker, we all heard the 

discussion lately on the new Moose Jaw Hospital that was not 

even talked about under the NDP government. The construction 

is under way at that time. Mr. Speaker, we are now going to 

have a new children’s hospital in Saskatoon, $215 million in 

provincial commitment. Construction began in 2014 and the 

completion is 2017. The new Saskatchewan Hospital in North 

Battleford, the projected cost of $110 million is on the books. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today in Saskatchewan we are proud of the fact 

that we have over 40 physicians providing locum coverage. Mr. 

Speaker, these locums are helping to stabilize services in 

communities like Kamsack and Maidstone and La Ronge and 

Watrous and Shaunavon. The 2014-15 budget provides $5.2 

million for the rural locum pool, and I thank the members in 

this government for recognizing the importance of that. Mr. 

Speaker, during the 2011 election, the Premier committed to a 

20-physician rural locum pool, and we’re keeping that promise 

by filling these positions. 

 

Mr. Speaker, supporting expansion of training seats for health 

care professionals by adding new training seats for nurse 

practitioners, we’ve supported new nurses and nurse 

practitioners to practise in underserved rural and remote 

communities by forgiving up to $20,000 in student loans. 

Kelvington and Foam Lake both have nurse practitioners which 

have benefited the health care in these communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have talked about doctors. 

We have 423 more doctors in Saskatchewan now than we did 



March 12, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6549 

under the NDP, a 24.3 per cent increase. And I am very pleased 

to say that Kelvington and Wadena have been the beneficiaries 

of the physician recruitment policy called Saskdocs, a one-stop 

shop for physicians who’d like to practise in Saskatchewan. 

 

We’ve increased the medical training seats at the College of 

Medicine from 60 to 100 each year. We’ve increased the 

post-graduate residency seats at the College of Medicine from 

60 to 120. The $685,000 for the continuation of the rural 

physician incentive, Mr. Speaker, one of the best . . . We have 

one of the best physician compensation rates in all of Canada. 

There’s $3 million for distributive medical education. And 

we’ve expanded the distributive post-secondary education 

program, helping doctors receive practice in smaller 

communities, communities like Prince Albert and Swift Current 

and La Ronge and North Battleford, and Moose Jaw was added 

in 2014. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since 2007 our government has added, and I want 

the members to realize this and to acknowledge it: 423 more 

doctors are practising in Saskatchewan, a 29 per cent increase in 

specialists under the government, a 44 per cent increase in 

pediatricians, a 20 per cent increase in family practitioners. The 

physician turnover has decreased, and the local grad retention 

now is at 75 per cent. That’s up 17 per cent from just two years 

ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know the members opposite job is to oppose. 

Their job is to criticize and oppose, but it’s also to bring up new 

ideas. That’s right. They have a responsibility to the people of 

this province — unless they just want to remain in opposition 

forever, which could happen — to bring up new ideas. What is 

your policy? What is your policy that’s going to help rural 

Saskatchewan? What’s your policy that’s going to help the 

schools and people live in rural Saskatchewan? 

 

[11:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people in my constituency don’t have time for 

slick ads that say nothing. They don’t have time to listen to the 

Leader of the Opposition screaming until he’s red in the face, 

talking about opposing what’s happening but never really 

putting anything down on paper, Mr. Speaker. The members 

opposite could have spent or would have spent $5 billion more 

had they been elected in 2011, and the red would’ve continued. 

And today, two years later, they’re still saying yes to anyone 

who will talk to them, no matter what the cost is involved. You 

come forward, we’ll say yes, and we’re going to say, we’re 

going to do it. There is no conscious . . . or no realization that 

it’s going to cost money. 

 

Rural Saskatchewan, all of Saskatchewan, won’t go down that 

road again. We’re not going to say . . . They don’t believe that 

what government says is what should be happening, Mr. 

Speaker. They know that the money belongs to them; it does 

not belong to government. And they’ll be way better at 

spending their money than the NDP ever was. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, the leader asked about, where has all the 

money gone? We know where the money went, and so do the 

people in Saskatchewan, especially rural Saskatchewan — debt 

reduction, tax reduction, and infrastructure. That’s where the 

money has gone, Mr. Speaker, and I’m very proud of it. 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to conclude my remarks by moving: 

 

That this Assembly supports this government’s actions 

towards improving quality of life in rural Saskatchewan 

through investments in health care and education, 

supporting agricultural programs for producers, record 

investments in Highways and Infrastructure; and further 

 

That this Assembly condemns the NDP opposition for its 

demands for increasing spending without any recognition 

for the cost of its promises and for its failure to present 

any policy that supports a better quality of life for rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 

Kelvington-Wadena: 

 

That this Assembly supports this government’s actions 

towards improving quality of life in rural Saskatchewan 

through investments in health care and education, 

supporting agricultural programs for producers, and record 

investments in Highways and Infrastructure; and further 

 

That this Assembly condemns the NDP opposition for its 

demands for increased spending without any recognition 

for the cost of its promises and for its failures to present 

any policy that supports a better quality of life for rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured to be able to rise in 

the Assembly today to enter into this debate. I find it shocking 

and disappointing at the approach that the previous member 

took in her words today, and really the insulting fashion with 

which she addressed the role that we as the members of the 

opposition are playing here and our experience in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, the thought that there is no connections, I am deeply 

rooted in the rural experience. My rural experience has been, 

well I grew up on the farm. I lived in a small town for many 

years. I have brothers, I have sisters, and my parents live in a 

small town. So that experience is real to me, and it’s shocking 

and disappointing to hear the member accuse us of not having 

those connections. That’s really disappointing, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I am hearing lots from people in the rural areas about how this 

government is letting them down, and there’s any number of 

areas that I could speak at length, but unfortunately I only have 

a few minutes available today. 

 

First of all though, I do want to address the concerns I’m 

hearing from many parts of the province about the issues with 

flooding, Mr. Speaker. We don’t see any vision on the part of 

this government or any leadership in terms of what to do when 

we are hearing stories that we’re in an extreme state of 

hydraulic water levels that are going to be excessive for 20 

years. And what we hear the Minister of the Environment 

saying at SUMA was that he just hopes it doesn’t rain this year. 



6550 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2015 

Mr. Speaker, that’s not a progressive and positive outlook. 

 

And certainly the RM leaders that I’ve been meeting with — 

I’ve met with RM leaders from Humboldt; I’ve met with RM 

leaders in Melfort; I’ve met with RM leaders in Yorkton; I’ve 

met with RM leaders in Saltcoats and Langenburg; I’ve met 

with RM leaders in Eyebrow and in Caron; and certainly with 

leaders down in the southeast corner as well — and what I’m 

hearing from them is there is a lot of fear. There’s a lot of 

concern about their ability to deliver the services they need to 

deliver given the record high water levels. 

 

I’ve seen roads that are destroyed. We know the situation in the 

Quill Lakes where even the highways in Dafoe now have to be 

raised up several feet. These are things that affect farm 

businesses. We have farmers who have to drive, you know, 10, 

15 miles to get to a part of their property which used to have a 

road that was half a mile away, and water levels are so high 

they cannot access their own crops. Their cattle are being 

stranded. And we see from this government, the PDAP 

[provincial disaster assistance program] program is simply not 

sufficient. 

 

I’ve heard from a number of farmers just this winter about the 

damage caused by harvest last year, and I’ve seen tracks of the 

combines. One farmer told me there’s a large farm north of 

Caron where they had to pull out combines 5,000 times. They 

had a large operation and they pulled out 5,000 combines. The 

destruction to the surface, to the topsoil is immense and there’s 

no opportunity, no support whatsoever for this kind of 

destruction of farm land. And that’s just the farmers. 

 

The RMs themselves, I’m talking to leaders who are prepared to 

declare themselves a state of disaster because all of their bridges 

are getting washed out. These are not cheap. And certainly with 

the funding formula that this government’s provided to them, 

there’s enough for basic services, but this government keeps 

adding responsibilities on to these governments in addition to 

the additional support. So there’s really no net benefit for the 

RMs. 

 

We see a government that has increased spending . . . increased 

its revenues certainly by 80 per cent or 70 per cent, depending 

on how you look at it, but they’ve increased spending as well, 

Mr. Speaker. We know the cupboards are bare. 

 

They’ve had record revenues, but with all the misplaced 

priorities that we’ve been hearing about . . . And certainly the 

member from Kelvington should pay attention to this because 

she should be a leader in the backbench in convincing the 

government that they have misplaced spending, that they have 

misplaced priorities, and that rural people are not being well 

served by this government. But instead she goes on to brag and 

brag about things that I think they should take a second look at. 

 

I think one of the examples, the supreme examples we have of 

the arrogance and pride of this particular government is some of 

the heckles that the Minister of the Economy has been throwing 

across the floor in the last couple of days. What he stated is that 

— this is how he looks at rural people — he said, “We could 

raise taxes twice and they would still vote for us.” Well I want 

to put that out there, Mr. Speaker, and I want to see what rural 

people think about that. So we’re going to run that past a few 

folks, and then maybe we’ll see what happens at the polls. I 

challenge him to take that platform to the polls in the next 

election. If he’s that proud and that arrogant about his 

performance, I think there’s a real issue here in this 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to actually quote from the Scriptures. I 

don’t often do this, but in Proverbs, chapter 16, verse 18 — this 

is from the King James 2000 Bible — it says this: “Pride goeth 

before destruction and a haughty spirit before a fall.” And I 

think this is something that this government needs to start 

paying attention to, Mr. Speaker. The arrogance and the hubris 

that we see coming from across the way is something that I 

think the average voter needs to pay attention to. And I’m 

hoping people start thinking about that. 

 

And indeed, just to make sure that the members opposite 

understand what hubris is, I’ve jotted down a definition so they 

know what it means. Hubris means a loss of contact with reality 

and an overestimation of one’s own competence, especially 

when the person exhibiting it is in a position of power. And it’s 

too bad the member from Walsh Acres had to chat through that 

description because that’s a word I think he needs to start 

understanding, is hubris. And the extreme arrogance that comes 

from him, in that backbench position, is something I think . . . 

Well I’m pretty sure we won’t be seeing him in the next round 

when we go forward. We won’t have to listen to that kind of 

nonsense anymore. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out right here some of the things 

that we have been talking about. The member from Kelvington 

obviously isn’t paying attention. On February 10th, on February 

10th our party issued a news release saying, “Broten wants 

government to stop scaling back rural health care.” We have 

rural folks coming on the first day of the sitting, Mr. Speaker, 

saying there’s desperate need for more facilities and a doctor in 

Craik, and this government arrogantly and stubbornly dismissed 

those requests. So that’s just one example, and that was in 

February. Another example, February 5th, just last month: 

“Province raises water prices.” So again we have a government 

that’s charging small towns extra money and they don’t have 

the extra resources to be able to do it. God knows where the 

money has gone, Mr. Speaker, but when they continue to raise 

fees like this for rural people, this hurts. This isn’t a place 

where people are busting with pride at some of the decisions 

this government has made. So the disconnect between what the 

member from Kelvington is saying and the reality that rural 

people are facing is alarming and appalling. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are other things that we’ve talked about. 

February 18th we talked about seniors being sent away from 

home. There’s no room for them, there’s no place for them in 

their own home. We know that seniors in the Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region will now be subject to a 

150-kilometre radius first-bed policy. So this is a health care 

policy that is affecting rural people, and it’s hurting rural 

people, Mr. Speaker. What this means is that anybody waiting 

for . . . A senior in that health region who’s waiting for a space 

in long-term care will wait in the first available bed which 

might be as far away as Cupar, Long Lake valley, or Lestock. 

And depending on where you’re from, it could be doubly far, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 



March 12, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6551 

Our Health critic has said we should be working harder to keep 

seniors close to home, close to their family, close to their family 

doctor. And I think of my own mother, Mr. Speaker, who’s now 

85 years old. She’ll be 86 this year. Her memory is starting to 

fail her and she’s becoming more scared because she knows 

she’s not certain anymore about everything that’s going on. She 

remembers a lot of things, but I can tell that she’s becoming 

very concerned about her future. And my dad too. He’s 88. We 

heard about an 88-year-old gentleman today who spent seven 

hours in hallway medicine. Mr. Speaker, if that happened to my 

dad, look out. I mean this is not acceptable, and we have the 

arrogance of this government telling us that everything’s fine, 

that we’re great. We’ve done everything right and people love 

us. And you know what, Mr. Speaker, again Proverbs has the 

story: pride goeth before the fall. This is just another example 

of it. There’s others we have prepared here. 

 

Again, we’ve been asking about the misplaced priorities of this 

government and we’re calling for progress in what matters to 

people, and that’s what this government doesn’t get. There’s a 

number of things that we’ve seen this government misplace 

priorities and spending on the wrong things. For example, and 

the classic example is the toxic John Black lean project, keeping 

tens of millions of dollars out of front-line care. It’s disgusting. 

We know that there’s a bloated health administration. We know 

that this government’s use of consultants has gone up 228 per 

cent, Mr. Speaker. And that’s something even the auditor is 

calling upon them saying, wait a minute, boys and girls, you 

need to check this out, and maybe check it a little bit. 

 

I know of one consultant who was paid $35 million by this 

government in the last few years. These are projects that could 

be done by a stronger and fortified public service. The smart 

meter fiasco, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that fiasco’s over yet, 

but we know that this government basically was stubbornly 

giving away money to the manufacturers of these meters and in 

giving them a special deal. We know there’s all kinds of 

wasteful, entitlement behaviour. And I think I’ve run out of 

time, but I certainly will not support this motion as written. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 

pleasure to stand up in the Assembly and address the motion set 

before us this morning by my colleague, the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena. Because, Mr. Speaker, I think, as a 

member who represents rural Saskatchewan, this is very close 

and dear to my heart about what happens in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have had the opportunity of serving in this 

Assembly for a number of years, and I’ve seen the devastation 

that has taken place through the years through actions of 

government, namely the NDP government. Mr. Speaker, let me 

speak first of all to the fact that when we talk about a 

government supporting rural Saskatchewan, we don’t talk about 

it just on the basis of the rural community; we talk about it as 

how it impacts all of Saskatchewan people. And this 

government is committed to making a better quality of life for 

the people right across this province. 

 

But let me speak about the times of the NDP for a moment. Let 

me remind people of what happened in rural Saskatchewan 

during the NDP years, the school closures that took place. 

People’s lives, students’ lives were disrupted as the NDP closed 

school after school. And it seemed, Mr. Speaker, that the plan 

the NDP had at the time was to reduce the population of 

students in rural Saskatchewan. Their plan was all based on the 

fact that that population would never grow, that school numbers 

would continue to decrease, and as a result we saw them closing 

school after school. We saw the disruption in families’ lives and 

students’ lives and in parents’ lives. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if you think I’m speaking just of something 

that never really happened, you should have been there. You 

should have been in the meetings that took place across rural 

Saskatchewan as these closures took place. And, Mr. Speaker, 

the unfortunate travesty in all of that is that since 2007, we have 

seen such a growth of student numbers, population numbers 

across this province that this government has been forced to 

deal with the capital infrastructure deficit that has been left in 

this province, including schools. 

 

[11:15] 

 

The NDP opposition this morning was addressing or speaking 

to the issue of capital construction. And I believe my colleague, 

the Minister of Education, pointed out that this government is 

committed to making sure that we have a school environment 

that young people can look forward to going to school and 

working and learning in healthy and top-notch school facilities. 

And when we talk about building schools in the province of 

Saskatchewan, what we’ve been forced to do because of the 

capital deficit is, in many cases, portable schools just to address 

the needs of schools that have found that their enrolments have 

increased dramatically. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this government is committed to building rural 

Saskatchewan, building the quality of life in rural Saskatchewan 

— not only rural Saskatchewan, but all of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as well, let me speak for a moment about health 

care. We’ve heard my colleagues. My colleague from 

Kelvington-Wadena already pointed out some of the challenges 

that we faced as a result of the closure of hospitals across 

Saskatchewan. 

 

The NDP record: 52 hospitals closed. And one that sticks out 

today, even if you spend the time visiting in the hospitals here 

in Regina, in the Pasqua and the General, I have yet not to run 

across someone who will not raise the issue of the closure of the 

Plains health care facility. That comes up time and time again. 

And that facility, Mr. Speaker, was one that rural Saskatchewan 

really looked to because of easy access to the facility. I’ve had 

friends who’ve worked in the emergency measures, running 

ambulances, and they talked about how convenient it was to 

access the Plains health care centre and then the challenges they 

faced as that was closed and they were forced to get either to 

the Pasqua or to the General. 

 

Mr. Speaker, through the NDP years we saw nothing but 

reductions. We saw nothing but closures — closures of heavy 

care beds, a failure to address the needs of long-term care 

facilities that were falling apart. 

 

What has the Saskatchewan Party government done? Since 

2007 we have 13 new long-term care facilities that are under 



6552 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2015 

construction or are completed. And tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, it’s 

going to be my pleasure to join with the ministers of Health and 

Rural Health as we officially open the new integrated health 

care facility in Kipling. Mr. Speaker . . . 

 

[Applause] 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, that’s a facility that I’ve 

been working on for a number of years. 

 

And while the NDP closed facilities, I will acknowledge the 

fact that they at least placed one facility and put one facility in 

place. That was the Moosomin health care facility. I’ll give 

them credit for that, Mr. Speaker. But closing 52 and replacing 

it with one just does not cut the bill, cut the fat, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, not only are we opening the Kipling integrated 

health facility and last week we saw the new facility in Radville 

officially open, we have . . . as my colleagues from Moose Jaw 

are now experiencing. While the NDP had, time and time again, 

they had cabinet ministers from Moose Jaw sitting around the 

cabinet table, what did they do — and even the Premier, I’m 

reminded, even the Premier — what did they do when it came 

to addressing the depleted, the facility in Moose Jaw? 

Absolutely nothing. 

 

But when you drive around the city of Moose Jaw today, what 

do you see going up? And I’m sure the residents of Moose Jaw 

were really pleased to see this and are looking forward to the 

day when that facility will be opened, a brand new facility 

being put in place in the city of Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. We 

also have in this province, Mr. Speaker, commitment to a new 

children’s hospital in Saskatoon and a new hospital in North 

Battleford and a commitment to the Plains surgical outpatient 

centre here in Regina. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the actions of this government speak 

louder than words. Mr. Speaker, there is a commitment on 

behalf of the Saskatchewan Party government to ensure that the 

people of this province, whether they live in the rural or the 

urban centres, have the expectation that they will have access to 

quality health care across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me speak for a moment as well to agriculture. 

What’s the one thing that most people remember most in this 

province when it comes to NDP policy regarding agriculture? 

 

An Hon. Member: — GRIP [gross revenue insurance 

program]. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Exactly. The elimination of the GRIP program in 

1991. The NDP were elected, a GRIP program that was finally 

put in place that gave agriculture producers an opportunity to 

kind of plan their farming operations, and the NDP were elected 

and they immediately tore up that contract. In fact they 

unilaterally changed the contract. They didn’t just bring it 

before the Legislative Assembly, they tore it up. And, Mr. 

Speaker, Mr. Speaker, as a result the poor agriculture producers 

had to rethink how they move forward in regards to the 

agricultural programs. But, Mr. Speaker, we didn’t leave 

agriculture producers sitting there. We addressed some of the 

issues that really were coming forward, and if I have a moment 

I’ll get to that in a moment. 

But one thing I would like to speak to is the fact that one of the 

commitments we made was addressing the issue of property tax 

on education; the first government that actually stood up to the 

plate and addressed the issue. I remember, Mr. Speaker, a 

number of years ago, a former premier of this province 

speaking to SARM — I believe it was when he was speaking to 

SARM — and when asked about property tax, his comment 

was, “The status quo is not on.” Well what did he do? Did we 

see anything from that premier or his government of the day? 

Absolutely nothing. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, following the 2007 election, this government 

made a commitment to address the issue of property tax on 

education. We not only made a commitment; we acted on that 

and we’ve addressed it. And I know the people across all of 

Saskatchewan and rural Saskatchewan were pleased to see that 

here was a government that its actions spoke louder than its 

words. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve also, when it comes to . . . I see my time’s 

running out, but there’s so much more that a person could add. 

But when it comes to highways, look at the commitment that 

this government has made to highway construction in the 

province of Saskatchewan. This government has made a 

commitment to address highways. We not only have twin 

highways, we not only are announcing a new further twinning 

of highways in the province of Saskatchewan, or passing lanes, 

but there is a commitment to, a further commitment to larger 

dollars into the highway budget across this province, more than 

the NDP actually did in 16 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s so much that a person could speak about as 

to what has been done. Unfortunately my time’s run out, but I 

thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the opportunity to enter this debate. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s kind of 

interesting joining the debate today. It seems to have a bit of a 

throwback Thursday flavour to it in terms of the speaking 

lineup from members opposite, in that they’ve put up members 

that have announced that they’re retiring. And I could be 

wrong, but I believe we’ll see the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats hit the floor next. And you know, I certainly 

enjoy the vocal stylings of the member from Melville-Saltcoats, 

so it’s always interesting to see him get on the floor. 

 

In terms of the relation to the content and the veracity of what is 

said, that’s not always there because of course we know that the 

member from Melville-Saltcoats said, you know, in opposition 

you can say just about anything you want, in defence of 

something that happened when he’d wound up in the 

government benches, Mr. Speaker. But again he certainly does 

sling it with a lot of passion, a lot of force. So we’ll look 

forward to that one. 

 

And then of course we have the mover of the motion and the 

individual preceding me just now, the member from Moosomin 

participating in the debate. And again it’s . . . I’m a bit torn here 

because I don’t want to appear disrespectful in terms of the way 

that I respect the service that has been rendered by those 

individuals to the people of this province but, Mr. Speaker, 

given again the content of what’s gone on, there’s some 



March 12, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6553 

response that is demanded. And I guess the first place I’d start, 

Mr. Speaker, is with another, with another proverb. I guess it’s 

like Bible-reading Thursday over here, Mr. Speaker. But in 

terms of there’s a proverb that is quoted on one of the meeting 

room walls in the House of Commons where it’s, “Where there 

is no vision, the people shall perish.” 

 

And it’s interesting that in terms of a motion that comes 

forward from this government where it’s, you know, the 

internal contradictions in one sentence alone, it seems to be a 

rear-view mirror approach to the situation facing the province. 

And I guess it explains a lot, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the way 

that this government has conducted itself over the past couple 

of weeks. 

 

We’ve seen, you know, as late as yesterday . . . And I hear him 

bellowing from his chair right now, Mr. Speaker, the member 

from Kindersley, you know, a big shot in that government, 

former leader of the Progressive Conservative Party, the power 

behind the throne, we’re all led to understand in terms of this 

government. But in terms of what he had to say yesterday when 

they come back from the SARM convention, and again this 

relates to the member from Moosomin talking about education 

property tax, well yesterday they floated the old trial balloon 

about raising property tax. 

 

And the Finance minister said, you know, we need the revenue; 

absolutely we’re going to be looking at raising the property tax. 

And in the back and forth across the floor, the member from 

Kindersley, the Minister of the Economy — and you know, he’s 

a big shot in that government so I imagine he’s speaking the 

truth — in terms of what he had to say in the debate was he 

said, you know, we can raise it two times, Mr. Speaker, and 

they’ll still vote for us. You know, it’s an interesting study in 

how far this government has come. 

 

And one thing, one thing I’ll give them credit for, Mr. Speaker. 

The Premier himself generally does a good job of evincing a 

sense of humility, a sense of you’ve got to work for the trust of 

the people every day. You’ve got to get up and look forward. 

You’ve got to get up and make sure that you’re connected to the 

best interests of the people of Saskatchewan. And I can only, I 

can only surmise that that seems to be slipping from the top 

because the lieutenants over there are certainly taking a lot of 

advantages, taking for granted support that has come their way 

over these many years. 

 

And in terms of the speeches we’ve just heard now, I hope to 

goodness that those members were good enough to give similar 

kind of speeches in caucus. When we had people come here 

from Craik who’ve had this, who’ve had the situation with their 

health care raised with this government before, and what kind 

of response, what kind of welcome did they get from this 

government? Well it certainly wasn’t a warm one, Mr. Speaker. 

And it certainly wasn’t the kind of reaction you’d expect 

between people who’ve had in many cases a years-, a 

decades-long relationship. But instead we saw many of the 

members over there that come from those communities sit on 

their hands and pretend that, you know, everything was 

awesome and, you know, pay attention to their own internal 

monologue. But what the people from those, that community 

from Craik in particular but also from Central Butte and from 

Coronach, what those people were saying needs to be 

listened to. 

 

And if a government is on its toes and if it’s really working for 

the trust, for the people, then you’re going to see that effort 

made, Mr. Speaker. You’ve going to see that willingness to 

work with people. You’re not going to see them saying that, 

well you know, it’s fine that you came here but, you know, you 

got it wrong. The concerns you’re bringing forward are 

somehow ill-founded, or that they’ve not understood the 

situation; people being disrespected in a fundamental way. 

 

And that makes sense, Mr. Speaker, when you hear the words 

from people like the Minister of the Economy, who again is a 

big shot in that cabinet and that government, talking about how 

you could raise education property taxes two times and the 

people in rural Saskatchewan would still vote for them. And I 

think today he added to that, that you know, we own them. And 

that kind of disrespect, Mr. Speaker, it eventually gets paid. 

 

So now I hear the Minister of Finance yelling from his chair 

about the need to work for the people’s respect. And again, Mr. 

Speaker, I hope he’s giving the same kind of speech in caucus 

when he’s talking to his fellow colleagues about, you know, 

maybe our heads are getting too big here. Maybe our heads are 

getting so inflated that we might float away. Maybe we should 

be careful about being so arrogant that we talk about owning 

people in rural Saskatchewan. Maybe we should think about 

that. And maybe we should think about, you know, resolutions 

that in the very same sentence where, you know, having got 

through in the first part congratulating themselves, Mr. Speaker 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And they can try to shout me 

down all they want, but it’s just, it’s part of the deal, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s part of the trend in terms of the way these guys do 

their business. 

 

You know, if you’re Sask Party, it means never having to say 

you’re sorry. If you’re Sask Party, it means you’ve got it right; 

everybody else has got it wrong. So why bother listening to the 

official opposition or people from rural Saskatchewan? Because 

they take you for granted. Because they’re arrogant, Mr. 

Speaker, and in terms of approaching the people of 

Saskatchewan in that spirit, well we’ll see how that works out 

for them. 

 

[11:30] 

 

But in their very own motion, Mr. Speaker, where they get 

through congratulating themselves in the first part, and then in 

the second part stating: 

 

That this Assembly condemns the NDP opposition for its 

demands for increased spending without any recognition 

for the cost of its promises . . . 

 

You know, so on the one hand, it’s a condemnation about, you 

know, the promises and then carrying on: 

 

. . . and for its failure to present any policy that supports a 

better quality of life for rural Saskatchewan. 

 

So again we’ve had a bit of to and fro in this Chamber, Mr. 

Speaker, about the merits of proper spelling and, you know, 

sign me up for that. I’m all in favour of good spelling, Mr. 



6554 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2015 

Speaker. But I’m also in favour of, you know, putting forward 

something that makes sense, that’s not at war against itself, Mr. 

Speaker, in the very same sentence. 

 

And so in terms of, I guess in terms of the critique they like to 

make of the official opposition and the concerns that are 

brought to us by the people of Saskatchewan and in many cases 

rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and the way that they are in 

turn brought forward in this House, I would say, you know, 

maybe listen. Maybe don’t be in such a hurry to condemn. 

Don’t be in such a hurry to climb up self-righteousness 

mountain and say that, you know, we’re the Sask Party. We 

don’t need to apologize. We don’t need to listen to anybody. 

We’ll just do our own thing. 

 

And again in the words of the Minister of the Economy, we 

own them in rural Saskatchewan. We own them in rural 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Can you imagine somebody saying 

that? Well here we are right on the floor of the House today, 

Mr. Speaker, hitting it again today in terms of the arrogance that 

has grown into the root and branch of the Saskatchewan Party 

and the way that they conduct themselves in politics. 

 

This week, Mr. Speaker, we had people coming from the 

Esterhazy school, and in the very same day you had this 

government, you know, climbing all over a positive 

announcement made by a potash corporation in terms of an 

expansion and the $1.7 billion of investment that’s attended. 

But you know, Mr. Speaker, in terms of what is the basic job of 

the government, you know, they can’t connect the fact that in 

this community the elementary school’s in such a poor state of 

repairs that the kids have to wear jackets because they keep the 

windows open because the air quality is so poor. Mr. Speaker, 

maybe they could get a little more consistent. Maybe they could 

think about . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Time has expired. Next presenter. I recognize 

the member for Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I’m pleased to be able to take part in this debate today, 

especially because the debate today and the motion today put 

forward is about rural Saskatchewan, and I take great interest in 

the members opposite talking about rural Saskatchewan with 

their vast experience. 

 

I think it was the member for Saskatoon Nutana said that the 

members opposite actually have experience in rural 

Saskatchewan. I want to tell that member what experience in 

rural Saskatchewan is like after 16 years of NDP government. I 

lived it, Mr. Speaker. Many on this side lived in rural 

Saskatchewan under the NDP. And I might remind that 

member, Mr. Speaker, that — you know what? — that’s why 

every rural riding is represented on this side of the House. And 

unless I’m getting old, Mr. Speaker, I don’t see one rural 

member on the NDP side of the House. That’s what I call 

experience, Mr. Speaker, with rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to . . . I think because lack of policy on the 

members opposite with an election coming — what, about a 

year away — and the members opposite are criticizing well 

pretty well everything, and that’s their job, to be critical in 

opposition. We did it; we did it very well. We got to be here 

and they got to be there. I think the message that we’re looking 

for or the thing we’re trying to pass across to them, if you want 

to be government, you’ve got to tell people what you stand for. 

What do the NDP stand for? And with the absence of that, we 

have nothing to go by. We have to go by their past record, and 

I’d like to go there for a few minutes, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my colleagues, the member from Moosomin and 

the member for Kelvington-Wadena, both touched on health 

care, and that’s an important issue for rural Saskatchewan. And 

you know, it’s being a little repetitive about the 52 hospitals 

closed under the NDP, but they did it. We lived it. We saw our 

hospitals close. Good example was Langenburg hospital. They 

were raising money to build a new facility, raised their money. 

Remember at that time, the community raised 35 per cent, and 

the government of the day, the NDP, would give 65. 

 

Well Langenburg raised their 35, had the money in the bank. 

And the Premier at the time, Mr. Romanow . . . And I think 

Louise Simard was Health minister, was she not? They not only 

didn’t build that hospital, they closed the one they actually had. 

You know what? They didn’t have to come and fix that 

Langenburg hospital with infrastructure dollars. It was gone. 

It’s never been there since. That’s the record of the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if you know what’s in these pages, 

Mr. Speaker. Probably not; you haven’t seen them. But I have 

on these three pages a list of communities across rural 

Saskatchewan, and there’s some from urban Saskatchewan here 

too of the larger centres. But places like Climax, Coronach, Cut 

Knife, Goodsoil. Where’s Goodsoil? Right there. Here we are, 

Meadow Lake area. They know what I’m talking about. 

Invermay, the member from Canora-Pelly knows Invermay 

very well. He lived there. He saw this happen. Theodore, 

member for Kelvington-Wadena’s constituency. Norquay. And 

I talked about Langenburg. I won’t repeat myself. Milden, 

Pangman, Rockglen. I could go on, Mr. Speaker. I have 52 

communities that saw their hospital closed under the NDP. 

 

Now should they get elected after this next election — well I 

doubt it; it’s a stretch but say they should — what are they 

going to do out to us in rural Saskatchewan again? I’m getting 

old. I can’t take much more of this. It’s kind of why I’m 

stepping down ahead of the game. I want to see a Saskatchewan 

Party in power when I’m out there in my retirement age, Mr. 

Speaker, taking advantage of the good times in rural 

Saskatchewan, for that matter, right across this great province 

of Saskatchewan. I’m going to retire here and enjoy every 

minute of it. Might be a little critical of my colleagues from 

time to time, but I’m going to enjoy it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I think what scares me the most is someday, somewhere 

down the line, people of this province may forget. I don’t think 

they will, but they might. Because there’s so many new people 

coming into this province that don’t know what the NDP stand 

for. They don’t know what the CCF [Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation] stood for. I mean they don’t know 

who Allan Blakeney was. They don’t know who Tommy 

Douglas was. So to, you know, kind of spread fearmongering 

and be critical of every issue and saying if it isn’t for the NDP, 

you won’t survive out there, those days are gone. 

 

Because most people in this province like the Premier that we 



March 12, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6555 

have today because he’s optimistic. You know, he’s criticized 

over there and actually I think there was a column or two in the 

media kind of criticizing the Premier because of his optimism. 

My God, what a change. For 100 years or 60 years, whatever it 

was, we sold gloom and doom in this province. We finally get a 

Premier in this province that’s optimistic and is proud of the 

work that the Saskatchewan people do. And, Mr. Speaker, 

there’s still, still got a few people in this province that would 

criticize that. Mr. Speaker, times are changing — not fast 

enough for some of us, but they’re changing. The good times I 

think are here. 

 

I have an apartment in Regina and it’s so nice to see so many 

young, new families living in those apartments, Mr. Speaker. 

You know, at one time our seniors at home had nowhere to go 

but they’d move to the larger centres. In fact they weren’t alone. 

They took their kids and their young grandchildren with them 

because they were going on. They weren’t stopping in Regina 

or Saskatoon. They were going on to Alberta. And we saw that 

trend, that out-migration for many, many years. And you know, 

the members were here the other day, people were here from 

my constituency talking about Esterhazy school and a real 

serious issue. And it’s been dealt with now and that was a good 

issue to bring to the forefront. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the problem is that we have a growing 

population. A great problem to have; they never had that on that 

side of the House. We saw an out-migration of every 

community in this province. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, and I know the member for education, 

the critic for Education over there knows exactly what I’m 

talking about. Two of my kids are teachers. And you know, my 

son, my oldest son was in a small school in Saltcoats at the time 

when he first got out of school or university and got a job. But 

you know what his biggest concern was? They were closing 

schools so fast that he had to try and jump to a larger centre. He 

wasn’t alone. Many of the others had to do that. Because he was 

worried: what they did at that time because of the out-migration 

of young people is that grade 9, 10, 11, and 12 were transferred 

under the NDP to the Yorkton school because Yorkton was 

losing population of students in there. So what was happening is 

we were losing not only our kids; we were losing our teachers. 

And our young people like that had to move to the larger 

centres. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can go on here for a long time, but I think it’s 

time we compared the record of the NDP in health care, Mr. 

Speaker, to some of the things that have been done under the 

Sask Party government. And that’s the comparison in the next 

election I think people will go by in the absence of any policy 

from the members opposite. 

 

But over the last number of years, we’ve invested $1 billion 

into health care capital. Hospitals, Mr. Speaker, Swift Current 

long-term care facility, needed badly; Moose Jaw, new hospital 

coming in Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. I know my colleagues have 

talked about it. The new children’s hospital in Saskatoon, it’s 

on the way; North Battleford, new hospital there; and we’re 

committed to a new Plains surgical outpatient centre in Regina. 

So, Mr. Speaker, I think we’ll let our policy stand for itself. 

 

But you might be surprised, Mr. Speaker, that I would have 

another number of pages in this same speech, and I know I only 

have 10 minutes so I've got to hurry it a little bit. But this time 

I’ve got probably 12, 15 pages with nothing but communities 

across this province where the NDP government, same thing 

again except not hospitals. This time they closed 176 schools 

across the province. So when the members opposite get critical 

that we aren’t fixing schools fast enough across this province, 

they should . . . I’m sure they saw the Minister of Education 

today get hoarse because he was listing off so many new 

schools that the Sask Party government is building across the 

province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go through this list, and we don’t have 

time right now, but there’s probably every constituent or every 

MLA on this side of the House, and there’s a number on that 

side of the House, that had schools closed in their constituency. 

And if they only knew what that does to a community out there 

— it kills that community. Once a school goes, that community 

pretty well dries up. And it’s a good thing to see out there 

because that optimism that the Premier brings to the table and I 

think members on this side try to bring to the table, is those 

small communities. They’re turning around, Mr. Speaker. 

They’re going strong out there. They’re growing. 

 

My small community of Saltcoats right now. You couldn’t give 

a house away 15 years ago. I know. My mom and dad retired 

and then they went to the care home for health reasons later on. 

But they had a house. You couldn’t sell that house, and it was 

about 10 or 12 years old. Mr. Speaker, hindsight’s 20/20. If 

we’d have kept that house, we’d have made about four times as 

much because right now I think the town of Saltcoats has 14 or 

15 brand new homes just built. Houses are actually selling that 

couldn’t move before or being remodelled, and it’s a great thing 

to see in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that, you know, I had more to say and 

I’m sure when the budget comes in we’ll have a lot more to say 

and a lot more optimism, Mr. Speaker, to say, but I would . . . 

You know, I think on this side of the House it would be so 

much easier to listen to the criticisms of the member opposite if, 

when they get up and ask questions, if they would add to that, 

their prelim to that, is: this is what we would do if we ever got 

to be government. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, in my last few seconds, the Leader of 

the Opposition gets up — and I know he takes all the gravy 

train over there and probably some members over there don’t 

get to ask too many questions — and he, you know, gets 

himself, his face on the camera and that, but he doesn’t tell us 

what he sees. We saw what he did last election for Mr. 

Lingenfelter. His promise was to spend 5 billion more than 

actually was affordable. And that was under Mr. Lingenfelter, 

but the Leader of the Opposition was . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. I recognize the member for 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I’m pleased to join in the debate today, and I want to 

point out that I find it surprisingly strange that the motion that’s 

being discussed today and the presentation being made on 

behalf of the Sask Party government are being made by 

members who cannot wait to get out of Dodge soon enough, 



6556 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2015 

Mr. Speaker. These are members that have quit the 

Saskatchewan Party government. They have retired from 

politics, Mr. Speaker, and yet in their parting wave, in their 

parting shot, Mr. Speaker, they try and rewrite the history of 

Saskatchewan. All those members would know, Mr. Speaker, 

that when the NDP took over government in 1991, we were 

facing bankruptcy. We had $15.5 billion in debt that the 

Conservative government left the province of Saskatchewan in. 

We were facing bankruptcy as a province. 

 

Why don’t they talk about that, Mr. Speaker? Because it’s a 

shameful record. They don’t want to bring that up, Mr. Speaker. 

They don’t want to bring that up, Mr. Speaker, because they 

know that almost . . . I think it was the second-highest payment 

every year, the second-highest payment every year that the 

Saskatchewan government had to pay in the 1990s was the 

interest on the debt alone, Mr. Speaker, $15.5 billion, Mr. 

Speaker. And this is what I find passing strange is that you sit 

here and you start talking about trying to rewrite history. People 

in Saskatchewan will not be fooled by how they try and rewrite 

the history of Saskatchewan. They know the incredible debt that 

we had to go through in the 1990s. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, what we want to point out is that instead of 

back-patting themselves which we see often from this particular 

government, we should take the effort, as the members of the 

Assembly here, to make sure that we recognize the true builders 

of the Saskatchewan that we’re very proud of, Mr. Speaker. 

And by some of the true builders in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, I am talking about the producers in many of our 

communities, Mr. Speaker. I’m talking about the small 

businesses that dot the landscape of Saskatchewan, rural 

Saskatchewan. I’m talking about the community-minded people 

who volunteer countless hours, Mr. Speaker, in making their 

community stronger. I’m talking about the organizations and 

the groups out there that just relentlessly work to build their 

community and make it stronger and prouder, Mr. Speaker. It 

has nothing to do with the Saskatchewan Party back-patting 

themselves on a regular basis here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:45] 

 

So from our effort, from our point of view, Mr. Speaker, in the 

history of Saskatchewan, they should recognize those people 

instead of giving themselves a pat on the back every five 

seconds here. And instead of trying to rewrite the history, they 

should recognize what builds rural Saskatchewan, and that is 

strong-minded people, good business people and certainly, Mr. 

Speaker, the many producers throughout the province. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, from my perspective here I see this motion 

as simple theatrics on behalf of the members that are leaving 

this Assembly. These are theatrics in their effort in trying to 

rewrite history. And from my perspective of standing here 

today — I often make the statement to many of my constituents 

and I think this every single day — so much money was 

available to the Sask Party government. It received so little 

progress. Record revenues, record revenues, and the Sask Party 

can’t even get it right. They cannot get it right, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And if you look at some of the examples that I would use, some 

of the examples I would use, Mr. Speaker, they have lost so 

much revenues and opportunity in particular with the 

transportation crisis facing the ag producers of our province, 

Mr. Speaker. How many billions of dollars did we lose as a 

result of the transportation crisis in rural Saskatchewan? And 

yet not a peep from the Saskatchewan Party government or any 

of their rural members. They sat on their hands and they sat on 

their cash, Mr. Speaker, when our farmers had a difficult time 

of trying to get their product to market because they had this 

transportation issue that they had to deal with. We’ve heard it, 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard it from many, many sectors. And yet 

today again the government’s sitting there, arrogantly patting 

themselves on the back when they know that the grain 

transportation crisis still affects the Saskatchewan producers 

today and thus affects rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And this is a government, again, that sat on their hands and sat 

on their cash when rural Saskatchewan needed them the most. 

They refused to stand up to Ottawa. They refused to look at any 

long-term strategy to be able to use the revenues we have today 

to build a stronger tomorrow for all of Saskatchewan, and that 

includes rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. There is absolutely 

nothing in the kitty for future generations, or to build, Mr. 

Speaker. And we in the NDP often speak about the future and 

the challenges, what may lay ahead for many of our families 

and our friends and our communities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The agricultural critic and I had the opportunity to view some of 

the areas and to visit some of the areas that are deeply affected 

by the flooding that happened last year, Mr. Speaker. We saw 

farm fields, driveways, houses, all being flooded. We saw, Mr. 

Speaker, how many of the families were really struggling with 

trying to retain and keep their homes in some of the 

constituencies that they brag about today, Mr. Speaker, that 

they personally brag about. We saw the incredible trauma that 

some of the families was going . . . And we also looked at how 

PDAP was not responding adequately to making sure that they 

mitigate the problem of flooding in some of these farm families 

and these farm locations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We look at the challenges of the future, Mr. Speaker, with the 

lower oil prices. We look at the argument around surface rights. 

No leadership from this government. We looked at the 

revenue-sharing discussion today at SARM. Again, there’s no 

leadership from this government at all. We looked at the 

affordability for families: whether it is your power bill or 

telephone bill or taxes, these are all going up through the roof, 

Mr. Speaker. And yet you also look at the health care 

challenges. So you look at the agricultural crisis, the flooding 

crisis, the lower oil prices, the surface rights that they refuse to 

have, Mr. Speaker. Why aren’t they releasing the report for the 

state of our schools? All this, Mr. Speaker, all of this is in a 

time of prosperity and opportunity. 

 

And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, we on the NDP tell the people of 

rural Saskatchewan that the Saskatchewan Party is taking you 

for granted, and they have not delivered despite having record 

revenues, Mr. Speaker, record revenues. And this is the most 

important thing that we tell people throughout our travels is that 

they have simply failed to meet the test, failed the test of 

leadership, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And now we’re in the situation where lower oil prices having us 

re-look at the budget and trying to figure out exactly what to do 

now because we’re in this situation now where we don’t have as 



March 12, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6557 

much revenues coming in. Why didn’t they put together a 

visionary plan, a visionary plan that protected the agricultural 

sector, Mr. Speaker? Why didn’t they look at a plan that spoke 

about engaging the Aboriginal community to the extent that 

they should be engaged — $90 billion, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And now, Mr. Speaker, the member from Moose Jaw North is 

chirping from his chair. And that’s the only time you hear the 

member from Moose Jaw North chirping from his chair is when 

he’s heckling in this Assembly. But when the time comes for 

him to speak on behalf of Moose Jaw, all you hear from him is 

silence, Mr. Speaker — silence, silence, silence. 

 

And once again they’re sitting on their hands, Mr. Speaker, and 

they’re sitting on their cash now as we see the debate here today 

from the MLAs that are leaving. My advice to them is, too little, 

too late. You had the opportunity. The bus has left the station, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that the people that should be 

recognized are people like Mosaic. They’re the ones putting the 

money into potash, not the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I also want to take special aim at Prince Albert. Again you 

see the headline from the Daily Herald: “Laundry workers 

relieved to find closure.” They’re trying to find ways they can 

keep their laundry services going. These are the examples of 

how they have decimated opportunities for future generations, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And that’s why on this side of the House, we say shame on the 

Saskatchewan Party. You were left with so much — billions in 

the bank, a growing population, a booming economy — and 

you couldn’t figure it out. Mr. Speaker, that’s why we don’t 

support their motion, and that’s why we say shame on them for 

taking rural Saskatchewan for granted and for not doing the 

right thing for them for lasting opportunity for years and years 

to come. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. Questions. I recognize the 

Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

certainly ironic to see the Premier taking credit for a big, shiny 

potash project in Esterhazy while he fails to do his actual job, 

ensuring safe learning spaces for the kids in Esterhazy. To the 

member from Melville-Saltcoats: does he agree with that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’m glad the 

member opposite brought the question up about Mosaic, 

because for my constituency that is tremendous news right now. 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think the Premier was saying 

that was our doing; it was Mosaic’s. But you know what? When 

you get out of the road of business and let them do their 

business, it’s amazing how they can expand in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In this legislature, 

ambulance services have been at the forefront of the discussion. 

This week the members of the opposition have proposed 

changes to ambulance fees. To the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana: are you in favour of eliminating the per kilometre 

change, and if so, how will this policy cost the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I think what’s at issue here is the 

absolute failure of this government to deliver for rural residents, 

and part of that is the exorbitant interest fees that this 

government has nailed on people who can’t even afford to pay 

for the ambulance bill itself. I think it’s really shameful that he 

brings the question up when he should be looking at his own 

cabinet. And I hope the member is speaking up through his, on 

behalf of his citizens so that the cabinet will make the right 

decision. 

 

So I think it was clear on Monday, when the individuals had to 

come in and raise this issue, that this is a government that 

doesn’t listen, that it’s taking its rural residents for granted, and 

that it’s time for those backbenchers to start laying it on the line 

for the cabinet so that people know what’s really going on out 

there. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wanted 

to ask the member from Moosomin, when the government was 

defeated in 1991 by the NDP, the former Conservative 

government, what was the second-highest payment that we had 

as a budget? And can he confirm the amount of dollars that was 

owing by the people of Saskatchewan under the Devine 

government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to just respond to the question by saying that over the years 

and the work of this government, this government has made a 

real effort to address many of the needs left . . . Where people 

of Saskatchewan had at one time looked to the NDP, but finally 

quit looking to the NDP because every time they looked to the 

NDP they found that we were falling further and further behind.  

 

We found that we were behind in heavy-care construction in the 

province of Saskatchewan. We found that we were losing 

heavy-care beds and that people had no access to heavy-care 

beds. We found that young people across this province were 

leaving the province. But not only that, even students going to 

school were finding out that they were having to travel further 

because of the neglect that the NDP were leaving this province 

in. And the NDP would like to say that was because of what 

they inherited. I would have to say to you . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Sutherland. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, we all know that the NDP 

refused to release any type of policy and have denied the very 



6558 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2015 

document that their leader cut his teeth on. Yet as much as they 

want to deny their past promises to the people of Saskatchewan, 

it’s hard to deny the citizens that they ignored the most — rural 

Saskatchewan.  

 

There may be one member opposite who has an inkling of 

policy. The member from Nutana last year paid $500 for a 

document labelled, Initial Report: Climate Change/Energy 

Policy. To the member from Nutana: since the taxpayers of 

Saskatchewan have already paid for this report, will you table it 

in the House today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I find it 

interesting when we have a debate about rural people and 

what’s happening in rural areas and we’re hearing from a 

government that is taking them for granted, that we have these 

kinds of strange questions coming from the backbenchers.  

 

What we’re talking about today and the topic that we’re talking 

about, may I remind the backbenchers we’re talking about this 

government’s treatment of rural people. And I think we’ve 

amply pointed out some of the issues that rural people are going 

to start raising and they have started raising, and that when we 

hear the Minister of the Economy saying, well you know, we 

could double taxes and people would still vote for us, we’re 

going to see what happens in the next election, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To the 

member from Moosomin, and I understand that he’s resigning 

and I know his answers will be straightforward and frank . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Moving on, moving on. My mistake, 

Mr. Speaker. But he wants to talk about spending. He wants to 

talk about spending. I would like to know, and I will ask the 

member from Moosomin who is finishing up in the next while 

— he can be frank and straightforward — what he sees the 

benefits of rural Saskatchewan, in fact anybody in 

Saskatchewan, from the Premier’s pet project like the Premier’s 

library here in Regina. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

didn’t quite catch all the question, but I’d like to point out that, 

given the record of this government and given where we’ve 

gone, what has happened since 2007? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Record population. 

 

Mr. Toth: — Exactly, record population in the province of 

Saskatchewan. More people working today than we’ve ever 

seen in the province of Saskatchewan. More money put into 

agriculture to support the agricultural community of the 

province of Saskatchewan. More money put into addressing the 

needs of doctors and nurses. Where the NDP saw doctors and 

nurses leaving the province, we have more doctors and nurses 

practising in the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I find this 

whole conversation quite interesting, as there are two members 

that stand up and give a speech on rural Saskatchewan for the 

opposition, and no one really once mentioned any policy that 

they’d have for rural Saskatchewan, how they’d make things 

better. The only thing they have is to talk about heckles from 

across the floor because they really don’t have any inkling of 

what’s going on in rural Saskatchewan. 

 

And I find the unbelievable arrogance coming from the member 

from Nutana and the member from Elphinstone thinking that 

they speak on behalf of rural Saskatchewan. Not one bit of 

contrition, not one time to say, you know what? We maybe got 

it wrong; that’s why we don’t have any members from rural 

Saskatchewan. Meanwhile when they should have a policy in 

place, like when you’re looking at the leader’s opposition tree 

book, there’s not one mention of rural Saskatchewan in their 

whole policy book, not one mention. 

 

So to the member opposite, to the member from Nutana, you 

don’t mention your policy on rural Saskatchewan once in your 

tree book. And you’re the Ag critic and haven’t asked one 

question on ag this session. How do you think people of rural 

Saskatchewan feel you should treat them? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — I need to correct the member from Walsh 

Acres on two points here. I did ask a question of the Agriculture 

minister yesterday which he refused to answer. And secondly, 

two of our members represent half of the geographical area of 

this province. If you think that the members from the North 

don’t represent rural Saskatchewan, you haven’t looked at the 

map lately. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we do have a caucus that listens to rural 

people. We have a caucus that’s active in rural areas. And this is 

a government that is so caught up in its own pet projects and 

misplaced priorities that they don’t have a clue what’s actually 

going on in rural Saskatchewan. And I think that’s good. We’re 

going to see the results of that in the next election. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I guess 

we heard yesterday from the Minister of the Economy, the 

member from Kindersley, that they’re going to raise property 

tax, they could raise property tax two times and everyone in 

rural Saskatchewan would still vote for them. Further on that 

score today, Mr. Speaker, we hear him say that they own rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I guess my question to the member from Melville-Saltcoats: 

does he agree with the Minister of the Economy on those 

outrageous statements? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 



March 12, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6559 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to the 

member opposite, I believe that everybody across rural 

Saskatchewan that I’ve talked to in my time in here will never 

in a million years vote for another NDP MLA as long as they 

live. So, Mr. Speaker, I think if the member opposite talked 

about raising taxes double what they are now, it would still end 

up being about a third what they were in 2007 when we came to 

power. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. When the 

members opposite were in government, it was tough times for 

the people of rural Saskatchewan. They closed 52 hospitals, 19 

long-term care facilities, 176 schools, 31 rural agriculture 

offices, and they tore up contracts for the GRIP [gross revenue 

insurance program] program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on about the ways that they 

ignored rural residents. The NDP didn’t care about rural 

Saskatchewan when they were in government, and they 

certainly don’t care about rural Saskatchewan now. 

 

The Speaker: — Seventy-five minute debate has elapsed. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 607 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Mr. Broten that Bill No. 607 — The Buy Local Day 

Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to 

speak to The Buy Local Day Act. We know that this is the time 

today for it to be voted on. We know that this is a simple, 

straightforward bill. We had the former government House 

leader speak to it today in question period, so we’re looking 

forward to this vote. It’s a simple, straightforward bill. It 

shouldn’t be controversial, and we know that it will be 

embraced by every single member of this House. So what we’re 

going to . . . All it simply does is proclaim the first Saturday of 

every month as Buy Local Day. It’s common sense, a simple 

way to promote the value of local businesses to our province’s 

economy and to our communities. 

 

I think, you know, rather than spending a lot of time in 

providing an extensive commentary on this again, I just want to 

share with the Assembly a letter that I believe was provided to 

all members today. This is from the Broadway Business 

Improvement District, and this has been a very vibrant business 

improvement district in my riding for many, many years. I 

remember the former, I think, the original director was Heather 

Larson, and she was a huge contributor to the vibrancy and the 

excitement that we see on Broadway Avenue and certainly a 

revitalization from the ’70s when things weren’t quite so 

positive on Broadway Avenue. And a lot of members who lived 

in Saskatoon will remember Broadway in those years. 

 

But since then, through the efforts of the local business 

improvement district and the local businesses, there’s a lot of 

community pride in that area. Indeed you know, one of the 

iconic buildings on the street is in the news these days as we 

know that the Farnam Block, which has been an apartment 

building, a restaurant, bookstore, and more recently a very 

popular pub in the Broadway area, is now being slated for 

demolition, and just the community spirit that’s coming out and 

activism that you see coming. Peter Garden’s bookstore, 

Turning the Tide, a very popular local bookstore right on 

Broadway Avenue, you know, the building is now slated for 

demolition. But I’m happy to say that Peter’s going to relocate 

just two doors down from me, which makes it a lot easier for 

me to get there to do my book shopping, by the way. 

 

But there’s a lot of really strong, vibrant businesses in the 

Broadway area, and I’m sure many of the members from 

Saskatoon frequent it often. And I’m hoping that on the first 

Saturday of every month, we’ll now see each other wandering 

down the street on Broadway Avenue or other parts of 

Saskatoon. Certainly there’s a farmers’ market and a lot of 

businesses on 33rd Street downtown. 

 

So this is a positive bill, and I am just going to share with you a 

letter that was written to the Legislative Assembly and to all the 

members from Sarah Marchildon who is the executive director 

of the Broadway Business Improvement District. And what she 

says is this: 

 

To all members of the Saskatchewan Legislative 

Assembly: 

 

As one of the province’s original commercial main streets, 

today’s Broadway Business Improvement District — 

Broadway BID — continues to be a successful example of 

a community built on local business. 

 

On behalf of our approximately 150 merchants, the 

Broadway BID board of directors wholly endorses the 

implementation of the proposed buy local day Act. During 

our 29 years as a business improvement district, we have 

proudly fostered an environment in which small local 

businesses have thrived. As a commercial district nestled 

in the heart of an established residential area amidst three 

schools, we have seen first-hand how local businesses can 

serve the whole community. Locally invested dollars 

support the district’s employment and development. Local 

property ownership adds a level of community 

engagement and accountability. Local business people 

build invaluable relationships with the community through 

their investment and sponsorship of neighbourhood events, 

school groups, and organizations. 

 

By proclaiming a provincially recognized Buy Local Day, 

the Act aligns resoundingly with our BID’s values to 

celebrate and support local business as a means towards 

economic sustainability and prosperity. We are pleased to 

offer the buy local Act our full and enthusiastic support. 

 



6560 Saskatchewan Hansard March 12, 2015 

Sincerely, 

Sarah Marchildon 

Executive Director 

 

And with that, Mr. Speaker, I have really nothing more to say. I 

just look forward to the vote. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Leader of the Opposition that Bill No. 607, The Buy 

Local Day Act be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — Call in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 12:06 until 12:09.] 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 42] 

 

Morgan Stewart Wyant 

Krawetz Boyd McMorris 

Harpauer Toth Huyghebaert 

Doherty Docherty Harrison 

Tell Ottenbreit Norris 

Hart Bjornerud Brkich 

Makowsky Draude Wilson 

Marchuk Ross Michelson 

Hutchinson Young Steinley 

Merriman Lawrence Elhard 

Parent Phillips Doke 

Broten Forbes Wotherspoon 

Vermette Belanger Chartier 

McCall Nilson Sproule 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed please rise. 

 

[Nays — nil] 

 

Senior Committee Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, 42 in favour; 

opposed, nil. 

 

The Speaker: — The ayes, 42; nays, 0. Carried. To which 

committee shall this Bill be committed? I recognize the Leader 

of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — I designate that Bill No. 607, The Buy Local 

Day Act be committed to the Standing Committee on the 

Economy. 

 

The Speaker: — This bill stands designated to the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. I recognize the Minister for 

Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved that the House do 

now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. Monday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:12.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6539 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6539 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6539 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6539 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6539 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6540 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6540 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 New Software Program Developed for Ebola Research 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6540 

 Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities Convention 

  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6540 

 New Music Director Selected for Saskatoon Symphony Orchestra  

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6541 

 Graduate Students’ Association Awards 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6541 

 Governor General Awards for Bravery Recipients 

  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6541 

 Inspiring Leadership Forum 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6542 

 Brother and Sister Team at Canada Winter Games 

  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6542 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Quality of Care in Emergency Rooms and the Lean Initiative 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6542 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6542 

 Support for Buy Local Day 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6544 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6544 

 Contract With Housing Developer 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6545 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6545 

 State of Provincial Educational Facilities 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6545 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6546 

 Provision of Services in Moose Jaw Hospital 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6547 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6547 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Quality of Life in Rural Saskatchewan 

  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6547 

  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6549, 6557 

  Toth ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6551, 6557 

  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6552, 6557 

  Bjornerud ...................................................................................................................................................................... 6554, 6557 

  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 6555, 6557 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6557 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6557 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6558 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6558 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6559 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 607 — The Buy Local Day Act 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6559 

 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 6560 

  Broten (referral to committee) ............................................................................................................................................... 6560 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


