
























































Hansard: May 04, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 58A  MONDAY, MAY 4, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7079 
 May 4, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
Clerk: — Members, Mr. Speaker is not present to open today’s 
sitting. 
 
[Prayers] 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — On Thursday, April the 30th, 2015, a 
point of order was raised by the Opposition House Leader. The 
Opposition House Leader indicated that the member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford used language during members’ statements 
which repeatedly has been found to be unparliamentary. He 
cited three occasions when ministers have apologized for using 
similar language. 
 
I have reviewed the record, and at page 7059 of Hansard the 
member from Cut Knife-Turtleford stated the following, which 
I quote, “. . . the NDP is just making stuff up . . .” I have 
reviewed the past instances of this type of language and find 
that on March 23rd, 2015, March 19th, 2015, and March 25th, 
2013, members have withdrawn and apologized for similar 
comments. Therefore I find the point of order well taken. 
 
Before calling on the member to withdraw his remarks, I want 
to comment about how some points of order have been raised 
recently. It would be helpful to the Chair if the alleged breach 
of order is clearly articulated. I would ask members to be much 
more specific when they raise and respond to points of orders. 
 
I now call on the member from Cut Knife-Turtleford to 
withdraw and apologize for the cited unparliamentary remark. I 
recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Doke: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, comments I made in my 
member’s statement last Thursday, I wish to withdraw and 
apologize. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has withdrawn his 
remarks, and that closes the issue. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I’m going to be asking if I . . . right now I will ask for a leave 
for an extended introduction today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Premier has asked leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

thanks to members for the leave. It is a great honour for us to 
welcome a very special guest seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, today. It’s my pleasure to introduce to you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, His Excellency 
Nicolas Chapuis, the ambassador of France to Canada. With the 
ambassador today is Monsieur Jean-Cristophe Fleury, the 
consul general of France in Vancouver. They’re accompanied 
by officials from Intergovernmental Affairs, Melinda Carter and 
Laurie Hutton. 
 
Monsieur le Président, en français, j’ai le plaisir de vous 
introduire son excellence Nicolas Chapuis, Ambassadeur de 
France. Ce sera sa première visite en Saskatchewan, et nous 
sommes très contents de lui souhaiter la bienvenue à 
l’Assemblée législative ici à Regina.  
 
La France et la Saskatchewan font preuve un amitié spécial, que 
l’on parle de culture et histoire partagé, et en matière de 
commerce, surtout l’export d’uranium — comment est-qu’on 
dit lentils? — lentils aussi et moutarde qui provient du 
Saskatchewan. 
 
[Translation: Mr. Speaker, in French, I have the pleasure to 
introduce to you His Excellency Nicolas Chapuis, ambassador 
of France. This will be his first visit in Saskatchewan, and we 
are very happy to welcome him to the Legislative Assembly 
here in Regina. 
 
France and Saskatchewan have a special friendship that speaks 
to a shared culture and history and, in matters of commerce, 
especially the export of uranium — how do you say lentils? — 
also lentils and mustard coming from Saskatchewan.] 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the ambassador has a very special, very 
busy schedule here during his time, his first visit to 
Saskatchewan. Yesterday he met with members of our 
province’s vibrant French community. We thank him for doing 
that. His Excellency will also meet with the Lieutenant 
Governor, a number of government representatives, and 
officials from the University of Regina. I’m going to have a 
chance to meet with the ambassador in just a little while from 
now after question period. 
 
But perhaps the most important event, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
marking the ambassador’s first visit will come later today when 
His Excellency very graciously and generously honours some 
Saskatchewan heroes, four veterans who helped liberate France 
nearly 71 years ago: James Bennett of Regina, formerly of 
Yorkton; Howard Leyton-Brown of Regina; John Milani of 
Regina; and Arthur Ramshaw of Nokomis. Mr. Deputy Speaker 
and members, His Excellency will present these courageous 
gentlemen with the Legion of Honour, the National Order of 
France. This is the highest commendation, similar to the Order 
of Canada, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it recognizes the heroism 
of Canadians, including these four Saskatchewan gentlemen. 
And we want to thank the ambassador and, through him, the 
people of France for the honour that they would bestow. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, President Hollande, the French president, 
President Hollande said France and Canada are “united by the 
blood that was spilled and the alliance that was forged during 
the two successive world wars in the 20th century,” and that the 



7080 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2015 

ambassador would mark that alliance and that bond that we 
have during his visit is very special to these four and to all of us 
in Saskatchewan. We’re very, very grateful for that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the commercial relationship between 
France and Saskatchewan is well known, driven principally by 
uranium but not exclusive to uranium. As I mentioned, perhaps 
poorly, in French, there’s a great agricultural trade between 
Saskatchewan and France. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we hope 
to see that relationship become even more robust with the 
advent of CETA [Canada-European Union Comprehensive 
Economic and Trade Agreement], with the opportunities that 
will exist for Areva in-province, but also for the expansion, to 
the mutual benefit of the people of France and the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan, owing to CETA. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would just ask all members to join with 
me in welcoming this very special guest to the Legislative 
Assembly today. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, I would like to join with the Premier in 
welcoming His Excellency and the consul general here to the 
legislature today. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the ties and the bonds between our country 
and our province and the nation of France are indeed strong and 
historical. We think of the many settlers who came to the 
province and Canada from France. We think of the ongoing 
relationship through trade and social ties. And as the Premier 
points out, we also think of the strong partnership as an ally that 
Canada has had with France over many years and tragically, 
Mr. Speaker, over many battles and through many wars as well. 
 
And I would like to extend a particular thank you and word of 
appreciation to His Excellency for coming to Saskatchewan and 
recognizing veterans from our province in the way that he is 
doing. That’s very important and meaningful to their families 
and meaningful to the entire province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I wish His Excellency all the best as he spends 
his duration of time here in the province, and a safe return to 
Ottawa, and all the best with his career beyond that, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you, I would like to take this opportunity to 
introduce to the legislature a friend, a constituent, friend, and 
neighbour, Ms. Bonnie Gleim who is seated in your gallery. 
Bonnie operates an SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance] 
insurance agency right next to my constituency office. So 
claims aside, we’ve gotten to know each other fairly well and 
we’re on good speaking terms in spite of my mishaps along the 
way. But Bonnie Gleim was diagnosed with MS [multiple 
sclerosis] some 20 years ago, and in the interim she has become 
a very strong advocate and a leading voice, particularly in her 
fundraising efforts to help overcome this crippling disease. 

Bonnie has contributed countless hours to volunteering and 
organizing the annual MS Walk in the community of Eastend. 
In the 16 previous years, southwest Saskatchewan has raised an 
astounding $350,000 in support of MS research. And just 
yesterday was the 17th annual walk, and they raised another 
$31,000 as a result of that event. The efforts and the goodwill in 
the community on behalf of MS are really quite outstanding. 
 
This year Bonnie was named the incoming Chair for the MS 
Society of Canada, the Saskatchewan division board. Bonnie is 
most deserving of this recognition. Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour 
to have Bonnie join us this afternoon in her Legislative 
Assembly, and I would ask all of my colleagues to make her 
and her colleagues welcome in their legislature. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social 
Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through to all 
members of the Assembly, I have the honour of introducing two 
very important guests who have joined us in the legislature 
today. Child Find Saskatchewan, which was first established in 
1984, works across our province to educate and advocate for the 
protection and the rights of children and youth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am honoured to introduce the president of Child 
Find Saskatchewan, Phyllis Hallatt who has travelled from 
Saskatoon to be here with us today. And Ms. Hallatt has also 
brought with her the Child Find Saskatchewan provincial 
coordinator, Conrad Mitzel. So, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members 
to join me in welcoming Ms. Hallatt and Mr. Mitzel to the 
Assembly today. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
On behalf of the loyal opposition and with the Minister of 
Social Services, I too would like to join in welcoming the 
guests to their legislature. And I know they’ve been working 
hard at Child Find Saskatchewan for many years and have done 
some incredible work. We really appreciate the work that they 
continue to do. And this is not a happy situation when we find 
when children do go missing, but they’re there and they provide 
resources to make sure we can do all we can to get kids back 
home. So I would like to welcome them to their legislature. 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 
from Cypress Hills introduced Ms. Gleim in the gallery, and she 
is joined with Eugene Paquin from my constituency who also 
serves on the provincial executive of the MS Society. He has 
been a tireless advocate and has met with MLAs [Member of 
the Legislative Assembly] across the province with regard to 
multiple sclerosis issues and has been a strong advocate for 
families and people that suffer from the disease. I want to 
welcome him to the legislature and also want to commend him, 
not just for his work there but for persons with disabilities, 
because he deals with hard of hearing issues as well as other 
things. So I want to welcome him to his legislature. 



May 4, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7081 

And while I’m on my feet as well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
join with the Minister of Social Services welcoming the people 
here from Child Find. They were here recently. These are 
people that are in the same office building as my constituency 
office and people that I see often regularly, and certainly concur 
as to their hard work and commitment and want to welcome 
them to the legislature as well today. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to join some of the members in the government in 
welcoming folks from the MS Society of Saskatchewan here 
today: Eugene Paquin from Saskatoon, Bonnie Gleim, Brian 
Duck. We have an opportunity later this afternoon to meet with 
the MS Society and to hear a little bit more about ongoing work 
that they do, and we’re looking forward to that at 5 o’clock. But 
I just want to say thank you to these folks and all those who are 
involved with MS research, support, and service and providing 
information to those who perhaps are newly diagnosed or on 
that journey. 
 
So thank you for all the work that you do in supporting citizens 
of Saskatchewan in their journey with MS. So thank you. I’d 
ask all members to welcome them as well. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 
Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in the west gallery, there are 20 students from 
A.E. Peacock Collegiate in Moose Jaw that I’d like to welcome 
here, along with their teacher. Ms. Carrie Kiefer. Ms. Kiefer has 
brought us students here every year, so it’s kind of an honour to 
have them again repeat here. And A.E. Peacock is no stranger to 
the records of this legislature because they are very noted for all 
their extracurricular activities, always in football and volleyball. 
And this is the social studies 30 class, so I ask all members to 
welcome A.E. Peacock Collegiate to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, 
Culture and Sport. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To 
you and through you, it’s my absolute pleasure to introduce, 
sitting in the west gallery, a group of 21 grade 7 and 8 students 
from Coronation Park Community School. Mr. Speaker, with 
them today is their teacher, Ms. Nicole Blondeau. 
 
And I let them know earlier — I had a chance to have a little 
discussion with them — I went to Coronation Park Community 
School, and there might be one trophy left in that . . . If you 
could dust off the cobwebs and everything off the one trophy 
that’s still there . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . It’s archived, 
yes. It’s probably archived. But I look forward to meeting a 
little later here with this group, and I’d like all members to join 
with me in welcoming this group of awesome students to their 
legislature. 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to just 
briefly mention my constituent with the MS Society. Mr. Brian 
Duck is in your gallery. He certainly gives back to his 
community as much as he can. He’s been with the MS Society 
for 25 years or so, only to be overmatched . . . or his 45 years 
with the Regina High Noon Optimist Club. So he’s definitely 
given back to his community. I’d like all members to welcome 
him, as they already have, one more time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and 
Remote Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To 
join with members on both sides of the House, they did miss 
one member up there from the MS Society, so I’ll do a 
reintroduction to four individuals in the Speaker’s gallery. 
Bonnie Grove we also met with this morning. She isn’t in 
attendance right now. 
 
But I also want to mention a great meeting that we did have this 
morning, myself and the Minister of Health, with Eugene 
Paquin, Bonnie Gleim, Brian Duck has been mentioned, but 
also Erin Kuan has been left out up there. So we’re . . . really 
great meeting with Erin as well. I ask all members to welcome 
them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
rise today to present a petition that calls for support for better 
schools here in Saskatchewan. And we know that far too many 
of our classrooms are overcrowded and under-resourced and 
that the Sask Party government has eliminated hundreds of 
educational assistant positions and students often do not get the 
one-on-one attention they need. And none of this is acceptable, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, given the record revenues this government 
has had over the last eight years. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like 
to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on this 
government to immediately stop ignoring schools and start 
prioritizing students by capping classroom sizes, increasing 
support for students, and developing a transparent plan to 
build and repair our schools. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to stand today to present a petition on P3 
[public-private partnership] accountability. And the prayer 
reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Your petitioners humbly pray that your honourable 



7082 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2015 

Legislative Assembly call on this government to 
immediately pass The Public-Private Partnership 
Transparency and Accountability Act. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are 
from Kamsack, Sturgis, and all throughout Saskatchewan. And 
I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 
pleased to rise again today to present a petition in support of 
maintaining hyperbaric services at the Moose Jaw Hospital. The 
petitioners point out whereas the people of Moose Jaw have 
worked hard for many years through fundraising and 
community activism in order to procure a hyperbaric chamber 
for the Moose Jaw Hospital. They point out that hyperbaric 
treatments are essential for the proper treatment for many 
people living with diabetes, cancer, and other conditions. They 
point out that the existing hyperbaric chamber is the only unit of 
its kind currently in operation between Edmonton and Toronto, 
and they also point out that hyperbaric services will no longer 
be offered in the new design for the Moose Jaw Hospital 
because of the changes to the hospital’s design initiated through 
the John Black version of lean. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Legislative Assembly require the Sask Party 
government to reverse its decision to scrap the hyperbaric 
chamber and to instead ensure that this service continues to 
be provided in the new Moose Jaw Hospital. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from 
Saskatoon and Moose Jaw. I so submit. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition in support of retaining Yarrow Youth Farm. 
 
The government is planning to close Yarrow Youth Farm and 
create an open-custody wing in Kilburn Hall to accommodate 
Yarrow’s residents. The provincial Advocate for Children and 
Youth has declared it can’t endorse such a rationalization as 
low-risk teens could be influenced and pressured by close 
proximity to high-risk youth who may be involved in serious 
crimes or gangs. And Kilburn Hall has a more institutional 
environment that could intimidate and alienate teens that have 
committed minor offences. And so I would like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the government to keep Yarrow 
Youth Farm open, to ensure a caring home environment for 
youth who have committed minor offences, and provide 
support to help these young people redirect their lives by 
setting more positive goals. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the individuals that signed this 
petition come from Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress 
Hills. 
 

MS Awareness Month 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As you’re no 
doubt aware, May is MS Awareness Month in Canada. Across 
the country, the MS Society will work to inform the public 
about their services and mission, and to engage their supporters 
in the fight to end MS. 
 
MS is an inflammatory disease that affects the ability of nerve 
cells in the brain and the spinal cord to communicate properly 
with each other. There’s no known cure for MS. And while it is 
most often diagnosed in young adults aged 15 to 40, we know 
that it can affect younger children and older adults as well. 
 
MS is unpredictable and can affect vision, hearing, memory, 
balance, and mobility. Its effects can be physical, emotional, 
and clearly financial. Currently there is no cure but each day 
researchers are learning more about what causes MS and are 
zeroing in on ways to prevent it. Saskatchewan has the highest 
per capita rate of multiple sclerosis in the nation. Our 
government is committed to helping find viable treatment 
options for our MS patients. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 
bringing awareness to MS Month. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I too rise 
today in recognition of Multiple Sclerosis Awareness Month. 
Organized each year by the Multiple Sclerosis Society of 
Canada, MS Awareness Month is a time for us to raise 
awareness of this disease that affects so many families in our 
province. With chapters all over the country, the MS Society 
runs many events each year, including today’s red carnation 
day, to raise the profile of the disease. 
 
The MS Society also does a great deal of work in funding 
research for a cure. Their efforts have sponsored more than 
$140 million in research since 1948. Although the root cause of 
MS remains unknown, each year of research brings us one step 
closer to a cure. New and better treatments are being discovered 
all the time. 
 
I ask all members to join me in thanking those delegates who 
are here in the gallery today for their years of hard work raising 
awareness and funding research and also in committing to 
making sure that everyone living with MS in our province has 
the support and treatment that they need. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 



May 4, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7083 

Awareness and Prevention Regarding Missing Persons 
 
Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in 
this House to inform all members that May 2015 has been 
officially proclaimed the Missing Children’s Month. Missing 
Children’s Month is an important opportunity to raise 
awareness in Saskatchewan and across Canada on behalf of 
missing children, youth, and their families. 
 
This year marks Child Find Saskatchewan’s 24th annual Green 
Ribbon of Hope campaign which runs through the month of 
May. Green ribbons may be obtained at TD Canada Trust and 
RBC [Royal Bank of Canada] Royal Bank branches or by 
calling Child Find Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m proud to note that our government is providing $50,000 in 
funding to Child Find Saskatchewan in support of their Alert 
Youth program and expand on their All About Me ID clinics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this week has also been declared Missing Persons 
Week. There are currently more than 120 people missing in the 
province. They are cherished family members and friends. We 
are thankful for the work being done here in Saskatchewan by 
the provincial partnership committee on missing persons, a truly 
Saskatchewan approach to looking at this difficult issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize Missing Persons Week 
and Missing Children’s Month and thank those who are 
working to bring awareness and preventing future missing 
persons and children. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 

Historic Military Milestones 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
week we will remember the 70th anniversary of a number of 
milestones in our country’s military history. Tomorrow marks 
70 years since our country’s fighting men and women defeated 
the German forces in the Netherlands. More than 7,600 
Canadians died fighting to liberate the Dutch from Hitler’s 
forces with many Saskatchewan fighters among the dead. The 
Dutch people have never forgotten the sacrifice made by 
Canadians for their freedom, and anyone who has been to the 
Netherlands can attest to their gratitude. 
 
Friday is VE [Victory in Europe] Day, which marks the end of 
the war in Europe and the final surrender of the Nazi regime. 
My father fought in the Second World War and was proud to 
serve his country and fight against oppression and hate. Like 
many other Saskatchewan people, he stepped up to promote the 
values of fairness and democracy and stand against Hitler’s 
tyranny. Saskatchewan sailors, soldiers, and airmen and women 
served with bravery and courage and their sacrifice should 
never be forgotten. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing the 
70th anniversary of the end of the Second World War this week 
and in thanking all the men and women who fought and 
continue to fight for our rights and freedoms. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Family to Reunite in Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I’m very pleased to rise in the House today to talk about a case 
of a little boy that crossed my desk as a minister, and that this 
government has worked on tirelessly for a number of years. It 
has held interest in the hearts of many Saskatchewan people. 
 
Last Friday we learned that four-year-old Ajjab Afridi will be 
coming to live in Canada with his adoptive family. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the Canadian embassy in Islamabad, Pakistan has 
approved a visa for Ajjab to travel with his adoptive mother to 
his new family’s home in Saskatoon. Ajjab was born in 
September 2010 to his mother, who was in failing health and 
living in severe poverty in Pakistan. She thought it was best that 
her son be adopted by her sister Waheeda and her 
brother-in-law Ashfaq so that he would have a better life in 
Canada. Since Ajjab’s birth, Waheeda has been living in 
Peshawar, Pakistan and raising Ajjab as her own. 
 
Our government has advocated for the Afridi family case, 
writing to the federal government numerous times and issuing a 
letter of no objection for Ajjab to come to Canada. This has not 
been an easy time for the Afridi family but they hope their 
family can finally be reunited by mid-May on Canadian soil. 
 
I’d like to thank everyone who has worked diligently on this 
case lobbying for the reunification of the Afridi family. Mr. 
Speaker, this is such good news; a family is together at last. 
Ajjab Afridi will soon call Saskatchewan home, and home is 
where he belongs. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 

Support for Camp fYrefly 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, this past weekend I had the pleasure of 
attending a fundraising event for Camp fYrefly summer camp 
which was held at the home of co-founders, Tony Bidulka and 
Herb McFaull, both recognized as Saskatoon’s 2014 Citizens of 
the Year specifically for their support of this camp. 
 
Camp fYrefly Saskatchewan is an educational, social, and 
personal learning retreat for sexual minority and gender-variant 
youth. It focuses on building and nurturing their leadership 
potential and personal resiliency in an effort to help them learn 
how to make significant contributions to their own lives and to 
their schools, homes, and group home environments and 
communities. 
 
Camp fYrefly was founded in 2004 as a university community 
education project from educators at the University of Alberta. 
In 2008, in partnership with the Faculty of Education at the 
University of Regina and the College of Education at the 
University of Saskatchewan, committees of dedicated 
volunteers were formed by Tony Bidulka and Herb McFaull 
with the now realized goal of bringing Camp fYrefly to 
Saskatchewan. 
 



7084 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2015 

Mr. Speaker, our government supports gender- and 
sexually-diverse youth throughout the province, which is why 
we’re providing $25,000 to Camp fYrefly Saskatchewan. We 
want to ensure that all our youth feel safe and supported at 
schools and in their communities. I ask all members to join me 
in congratulating the co-founders, Tony Bidulka and Herb 
McFaull, for putting on a wonderful event, and I would like to 
thank the Camp fYrefly team and volunteers who put on this 
supportive retreat. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 

Health Foundation’s Health Care Celebration 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I was 
honoured to attend the recently held Moose Jaw Health 
Foundation 10th annual Health Care Celebration. The Chair of 
the capital campaign, Dave Reidy, announced that more than $5 
million has been raised to date for the Health Foundation’s $8 
million capital campaign. This is an outstanding achievement 
that shows the exceptional generosity of Moose Jaw’s people 
and the business community. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Health Foundation’s capital campaign has a 
motto of Equipping the Hospital of Tomorrow . . . Today. The 
Health Foundation is one step closer to being able to purchase 
new life-saving medical equipment for the new Moose Jaw 
regional hospital which is set to open later this year. Some of 
the equipment that will be included is a CT [computerized 
tomography] scanner and Saskatchewan’s first MRI [magnetic 
resonance imaging] to be located outside of Regina or 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, two major donations were also announced at the 
health care celebration. The Moose Jaw Kinsmen Club 
presented the Health Foundation with a cheque for $100,000, 
and the Mosaic Company will again match donations up to 
$150,000 to this week’s 800 CHAB Family First Radiothon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
Moose Jaw Health Foundation for raising $5 million so far and 
wishing them all the best in reaching their $8 million goal. 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Expenditures Prior to and During Government 
Trade Missions 

 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Alison Redford got in a fair bit of 
trouble for having one taxpayer-funded travel scout. Why does 
this Premier have two? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, within the Department 
of Intergovernmental Affairs, there are officers who are tasked 

to make sure that trade missions are managed in a logistically 
efficient way. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s true that our 
government has engaged in more trade missions. Ministers are 
involved. I’m involved. And so it’s certainly true that officials 
have been sent ahead of time in markets. They’ve done so, I 
think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in a way to manage costs as 
efficiently as possible, I believe, including ensuring that they 
are flying even overseas in economy, even though by policy of 
the government, they could fly in business class. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have been able to manage the overall 
travel of government, including what happens in the ministries 
and what happens in the front benches by ministers, so that it is 
significantly lower than what happened under members 
opposite when they were in office. And all the while, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we’ve been able, I think, to see some good 
results that come from those trade missions. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re going to continue the practice. 
We’ll be careful with the funds that are expended, as we always 
have been, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but we’re going to continue 
with trade missions and continue with doing what has been 
successful, I think, for the economy and the people of the 
province. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, that was a very similar answer to 
what Premier Redford gave when she was confronted with this, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government has been anything but careful when it comes 
to taxpayers’ dollars on these advance trips. The Premier’s two 
travel scouts spent $23,493.76 for a 16-day advance visit to 
Singapore, Japan, and the Philippines. The Premier’s two travel 
scouts left nearly two months early before his trip. My question 
to the Premier: how on earth can he possibly justify this? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well first of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
know that the member opposite is prone to hyperbole. Let me 
just be pretty clear. The folks that have been going on these 
trips, on the missions ahead of time, are within the ministry. 
There’s a clear role for them to be doing so, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. When we’re in market, we like to get as much into the 
agenda, as much into the program as possible. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we want to make sure that we are using taxpayers’ 
dollars efficiently, both in terms of what happens in advance 
and also what happens in terms of when I arrive and when the 
delegation arrives. Sometimes it’s ministers and sometimes it’s 
me. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the practice of travel for government is 
important for us, but it’s important that we do so in a way that’s 
economical. And it’s important that we learn the lessons from 
members opposite. When they were in office, they had the 
chance to actually demonstrate some leadership, and we saw 
huge travel bills rung up, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ve got lots of 
information to share with members opposite about how travel 
costs are actually down. 
 



May 4, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7085 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all the while our government can, I 
think, point to results for Saskatchewan people. I think if you 
talk to the CEO [chief executive officer] of Cameco . . . And by 
the way, when we travel in Asia — and he’s referenced some 
Asian communities, countries — Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we 
travel there, we are advancing the case for Saskatchewan 
fertilizers, for potash, for uranium. 
 
I just recently attended and witnessed the signing of a sale, 7 
million pounds of uranium to India. That’s the first time ever, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. The Cameco folks say they don’t think it 
would happen without the trade missions that we’re doing. 
We’re likely going to continue on a cost-effective basis both the 
advance and the missions, delivering results for Saskatchewan 
people, which is a far cry from what members opposite used to 
do when they were in office. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, you can do trade missions without 
wasting money on travel scouts that this Premier is so fond of 
using. You know, Alison Redford, Mr. Speaker, she had one 
travel scout that did these advance trips. This Premier has two 
that are paid through the ministry. 
 
For their entire first week in Hiroshima, the Premier’s two 
travel scouts had about 7 hours and 45 minutes of work 
meetings on their schedule. On Monday they arrived and settled 
in. On Tuesday they discussed logistics for an MOU 
[memorandum of understanding] signing ceremony. On 
Wednesday they spent an hour and a half touring a hotel. On 
Thursday they transferred to a different hotel. On Friday they 
visited a banquet room, a hotel room, met with hotel staff and 
viewed a reception room. My question to the Premier: does he 
actually think and believe that this is a wise use of taxpayers’ 
money? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, both of the officials in 
question that the member is referring to now are part of the 
public service of the province of Saskatchewan. They are not 
travel scouts for anyone. They have important duties within the 
ministry, Mr. Deputy Speaker. When it is that we have planned 
a trade mission abroad, their role doubles. They also undertake 
these advances. We’ve looked at the costs of the advances. I’ve 
asked specific questions about this to make sure that we’re 
getting value for the taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
As I said, I think in the trip that’s referenced by the hon. 
member and the subsequent trips, though the policy would 
allow them to fly business class, they fly economy as do, as do 
elected members of the government when we’re flying 
domestically, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I would also point this out. Here are the facts in terms of which 
side of the House actually cared enough about the taxpayers’ 
dollars when it came to the issue of travel. The number of 
out-of-province trips in 2014-15, compared to ’06-07 — that 
was the last full year of members opposite — has decreased by 
72 per cent or 94 less trips. One hundred and thirty-one trips by 
the high-flying NDP [New Democratic Party], Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, 37 under the Saskatchewan Party. The only difference 
is for the 37 out-of-province trips on this side of the House, we 
actually delivered for Saskatchewan people. They’ll have to 
account for the 131 trips they took, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because I don’t think they sold any potash, and I know they 
didn’t sell any uranium. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, when you look at the travel 
itineraries of the Premier’s two travel scouts — remember 
Alison Redford only had one travel scout; this Premier thinks 
it’s necessary to have two — you see nothing, Mr. Speaker, in 
these documents that required two travel scouts to travel to 
these countries far in advance. These are basic logistics that 
could and should be sorted out by email, by phone, by Skype, 
and by working with Canadian embassies. 
 
What the internal documents from the Premier’s two travel 
scouts reveal, Mr. Speaker, is this Sask Party government’s 
massive sense of entitlement. In each city, in each city that the 
Premier planned to visit, his two travel scouts spent time 
evaluating at least two ritzy hotels to determine which ritzy 
hotel was nicer. Again you’d think, Mr. Speaker, that online 
reviews could help with that. You’d think working with the 
embassy could help with that, Mr. Speaker, but not this 
Premier. He sends two travel scouts to go in advance to 
compare one luxurious hotel to another. 
 
My question to the Premier: why on earth are Saskatchewan 
taxpayers paying the bill for two travel scouts to go in advance 
and judge one foreign luxury hotel to the other? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — These individuals are professionals within 
Intergovernmental Affairs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, providing 
professional services throughout the year. And also, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, they have also performed these duties with respect to 
scouting out locations. Often it’s to find the most cost-effective 
accommodations. 
 
You see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, unlike members opposite when 
they were in government — and he might want to turn around 
and ask the member for Lakeview about travel policy when 
members were the government not very long ago, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — here are the facts. You should look at the overall 
amounts for travel and the results from travel, I think, in terms 
of comparing parties in this House. The cost of our 
out-of-province travel on this side of the House overall has 
decreased 75 per cent or about 200,000 — under the NDP, 
$263,000; under the Saskatchewan Party, $63,000, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
If you want to talk about entitlement, you want to talk about 
what side of this House today is still entitled, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, you need to look over on your left hand. You need to 
ask the member for Lakeview why, when he was the Health 
minister, were taxpayers paying for him to go to attorneys 
general meetings in places like, I don’t know, all over the 
United States. I don’t know why they would even want him 
there, but he was travelling on the government’s dime, Mr. 



7086 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2015 

Deputy Speaker. We got a long list of practices of members 
opposite, including Maynard Sonntag, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Their overall travel bill was higher with or without scouts. But 
here’s the difference — they delivered nothing for the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Alison Redford’s travel scout had 
a big title and a big salary as well. The difference is this 
Premier has two; Alison Redford only had one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When you look at the advance work being done as detailed in 
the government’s own documents, Mr. Speaker, basic logistics, 
basic logistics, Mr. Speaker, that could be found out through 
email, through Skype, through the embassy. It’s not like the 
Canadian embassy is going to set the Premier up in some dive 
in a slum, Mr. Speaker. They’re going to be in a good hotel. But 
this Premier has to send a travel scout to go in advance and 
judge one great hotel to another, Mr. Speaker. That’s where the 
priorities lie. 
 
At every hotel the travel scouts went to, they asked if the 
Premier and his wife could get complimentary upgrades to even 
fancier rooms. They asked, “Can you assign a hotel staffer 24-7, 
provide us with a cell number in case we need anything for the 
Premier’s entire stay?” Mr. Speaker, it’s baffling to me why the 
Premier and his delegation can’t pick up a phone and call the 
front desk like any other person staying in a hotel would do. 
 
But again, Mr. Speaker, these are basic questions that could and 
should have been sorted out from here by phone, by email, by 
Skype, and working with the embassy. But this Premier sends 
two travel scouts two months in advance to go check out to 
make sure everything is just right for him. My question to the 
Premier: how can he justify this waste of taxpayers’ money? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a very 
interesting line of questions coming from that particular 
member and that side of the House. Here are some basic 
numbers. I think you have to look at total government travel 
and compare the two sides, when they were in power and what 
we’ve done since 2007. Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the last five 
years, I believe it is, for the last seven years, sorry, for the entire 
time of the Saskatchewan Party government in terms of 
out-of-province travel, the total amount that the government has 
spent, $3.9 million. 
 
The total amount for the NDP for the same time period in 
advance of the ’07 election — here’s entitlement, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — $5.45 million, unadjusted for inflation, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. These folks in office were travelling around, the point 
of which I’m not sure because we didn’t see many results. We 
didn’t see them advancing the potash file or the uranium file. 
 
We’re going to make sure the trips are done as efficiently as 
possible, that we’re in market for a short period of time, that 
we’re out of market for a short period of time, and that the 
overall costs are down. And the fact of the matter is, for all of 
his bluster, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the point is this: costs for the 

Saskatchewan Party travel down versus what the NDP used to 
spend, unadjusted for inflation. And the focus is always on 
results. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you don’t have to take our word for 
it. Industry is saying publicly, very publicly recently that results 
are being delivered to Saskatchewan people. We’re selling our 
product. We’re promoting the province, and we’re doing so in a 
way more cost-effective way than members opposite ever did. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, zero answers, zero accountability, 
zero rationale, Mr. Speaker, about why this Premier needs to 
send two — two — well-paid travel scouts in advance just to 
make sure, Mr. Speaker, that he can get upgrades for his rooms. 
 
Here are the other questions that the Premier’s two travel scouts 
asked: “Invitation to VIP reception on opening night. How 
many people? Just one? Does this run concurrent to the cocktail 
reception?” “Premier’s delegation may be quite large. Any 
concerns around this?” “Is there a possibility to secure 
additional banquet tickets for the rest of the Premier’s 
delegation?” “Can the Premier bring his photographer to the 
event?” 
 
Mr. Speaker, all this sounds very self-entitled, which is 
problematic enough, Mr. Speaker. But again why should 
Saskatchewan families, Saskatchewan taxpayers pay to send 
two travel scouts to go and sort out the most basic logistics, 
things that could easily be done from here through phone, 
through email, through Skype, and through working with 
Canadian embassies? Could the Premier please provide an 
answer. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ll compare the 
record on this side of the House in terms of travel and results 
from travel, the overall costs including all that he’s referenced, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ll do that any day of the week. 
 
With respect to some of the achievements in terms of trade 
missions, in terms of November 2014, Canpotex as a part of the 
trade mission signed two sales agreements that will see millions 
of tonnes of Saskatchewan potash shipped to India. Obviously 
the precursor work to the uranium sale that was announced was 
also very much a part of that mission.  
 
Two new labour migration MOUs with the Philippines, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, a unique memorandum from the Philippines 
signed, I think, in large measure because of the trade mission 
that we were there. I think now we have a preferred relationship 
with the Philippines in terms of immigration policy, even 
preferred over Manitoba, in part because of our protection for 
foreign workers, but also part of the reason is because we go to 
trade missions, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  
 
I would just point out to my honourable friend again that the 
overall costs of travel on this side of the House are way lower 



May 4, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7087 

than they were under the NDP, even though the NDP were not 
availing any results for industry here for Saskatchewan people. 
 
We’re going to continue with this. We’re going to continue with 
engagement. We’ll watch our costs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’ll 
ensure that they’re, that people are actually paying less, 
unadjusted for inflation, than they were before and getting 
better results. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, these high-ranking officials, 
they’re not hammering out a deal. What they’re doing is asking 
if the Premier can get an upgrade on his room, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re asking which hotel is nicer and checking out banquet 
rooms and banquet tickets. This is not stuff that you need to 
send two travel scouts in advance across the globe to do. This is 
stuff you can do through email, phone, and Skype, and that 
would be a well . . . use of taxpayers’ dollars, the opposite of 
what we’ve seen from this Premier. 
 
Here’s what else the internal documents show. The Premier’s 
travel scouts attempted to inspect the vehicles that would be 
used to transport his delegation. Even when, even when the 
Canadian embassy could provide a 21-passenger bus for the 
delegation, the Premier’s scouts requested a separate car to 
transport the Premier and one or two members of the 
delegation. In the Philippines, Mr. Speaker, the two travel 
scouts arranged a three-vehicle motor, a motorcade for the 
Premier, Mr. Speaker, and for his delegation. 
 
And the travel scouts, Mr. Speaker, they note — now this is 
very important, this is really important to send high-ranking 
individuals for — they note that there is no VIP [very important 
person] terminal in the airport, so the Premier will have to use 
“the facilities that regular passengers use,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
These are the types of questions that these travel scouts are 
doing. Talk about entitlement and talk about a complete 
abandonment of good Saskatchewan common sense. My 
question to the Premier: how on earth can he justify this 
spending? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — How can we justify the spending? The 
spending is a million and a half less under our government than 
it was for the last seven years of the NDP. It was less. How can 
we justify the spending? Why doesn’t he turn around and ask 
the member for Lakeview, while he was the Health minister . . . 
And by the way, remember last session and all the requests for 
money to be paid back? Has he asked the member for Lakeview 
to pay back? While he was the Health minister, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, he went to attorneys generals meeting in Juneau, 
Alaska; Sun Valley, Idaho; Monterey, California; Sylvan Lake 
Resort. I think it was a family holiday. I think these were family 
holidays. Twelve thousand dollars spent on the taxpayers’ dime 
to go to these attorneys general meeting when he was a Health 
minister. That’s just part of the narrative. 
 
The rest of the narrative is waste by members’ opposite. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, $5.5 million spent in their last seven years 

compared to 3.9 million spent . . . This is the total number. 
These are the total numbers in our first seven years, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. That’s a savings to taxpayers of $1.5 million. 
 
What you don’t get though from this side of the House, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that you did get from that side of the House is 
folks coming back from the mission saying there were no 
MOUs signed. There were no sales made of any particular 
resource that the people of the province have. We sort of blew 
your money without much to show for it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Things are different today. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the explanation from the Premier 
about why he needs two travel scouts to go months in advance 
. . . Premier Redford, Mr. Speaker, only had one. Those were 
inappropriate, but at least she only had one, Mr. Speaker. The 
types of questions being asked were, will the Premier have to 
go through regular security? Can he get a nice upgrade to the 
fancy hotel? Mr. Speaker, it’s ridiculous that he would stand 
and try to justify these questions and this type of unnecessary 
travel. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, that taxpayers paid about $23,500 for 
the 16-day advance visit to Singapore, Japan, the Philippines. 
And we know that taxpayers paid nearly $14,000 for a 
one-week advance trip to India last September which was well 
after, well after Alison Redford got in hot water for her use of 
one, one travel scout. That’s about $37,500 for only two of 
these advance trips just for the Premier’s travel scouts to sort 
out basic logistics, to evaluate ritzy hotels one to the other, to 
sort out room upgrades for the Premier, inquire about menus, 
inquire about wardrobe. 
 
My question to the Premier: how many other trips have these 
two travel scouts gone on, and what has been the total cost to 
Saskatchewan taxpayers? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad that the Leader of the 
Opposition is now actually interested in the total costs because 
we’ll get into that today. And we’ll get into it in estimates later 
this week, and we’ll find out that the NDP blew money on 
travel at a far greater rate than any government could conceive 
of blowing, especially when they weren’t delivering results for 
people, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I want to point out to the member opposite that it’s not just 
Saskatchewan that has this practice of sending public servants 
on advance missions . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . What’s 
that? The member for Saskatoon says, is Alberta one? Yes, 
Alberta’s one. Yes. But so is British Columbia, so is Ontario, 
and so is NDP Manitoba, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So it’s not quite 
so shocking after all. 
 
This member is so desperate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he’s looking 
at a government that’s now well into its second year, second 
term. He must have thought, well we’ll just change leaders. We 
don’t have to tell them anything about policy, but we’ll change 
the leaders. I’m different than Lingenfelter. It will all turn 



7088 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2015 

around. We’re a year away from an election, and he’s 30 points 
behind, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So we see more and more 
desperation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP province of Manitoba undertakes 
the same practice. I’m not sure if they’re watching the dollars; 
I’m sure they are in terms of overall expenditure. Let me assure 
the hon. member that we are. That’s why travel is down $1.5 
million from when the NDP were in office. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, such incredible arrogance and 
entitlement we’re hearing from the Premier, Mr. Speaker. I 
don’t know how he can think he can justify to Saskatchewan 
people that work hard and pay their taxes, Mr. Speaker, that it is 
appropriate to have high-ranking officials, two of them, Mr. 
Speaker, go across the globe to ask questions about whether or 
not he can get a complimentary upgrade on his hotel room, 
whether or not he’ll have to use regular security, and whether or 
not, Mr. Speaker, he can have a motorcade to go through the 
city, Mr. Speaker. But these are the types of dollars being spent 
by this Premier who, from that answer, is not showing any sort 
of remorse or recognition that it’s inappropriate; in fact digging 
in his heels, saying this is a good use of money. 
 
Remember, Mr. Speaker, this is the Premier. This is the 
government that said they had no money. They couldn’t send 
one official, not one government official to northern 
Saskatchewan for an important meeting on health care and on 
the economy. Couldn’t find one, but he’s got money for two 
travel scouts, Mr. Speaker, to head to the North. 
 
At every ritzy hotel they went to evaluate for the Premier, the 
travel scouts asked two questions about the Premier’s hotel 
rooms which have been redacted. The reason for the redaction 
is section 29(1) of the Act which has to do with personal 
information. Mr. Speaker, these scouts have spent a lot of 
money, paid for by the Saskatchewan taxpayers. They deserve 
to know, the public deserves to know what these travel scouts 
are actually asking and doing. So to the Premier: what are his 
travel scouts asking about hotel rooms that needs to be blacked 
out? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the hon. member is trying to 
characterize this debate in certain ways. I’m just here trying to 
defend NDP Premier Greg Selinger from this attack because he 
undertakes the same practice. I don’t know to what extent, but 
he undertakes the same practice. 
 
In fact, provinces that have in-market representation . . . 
Remember, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we do not have any offices 
around the world. Most, a lot of provinces have offices in 
different markets around the world: British Columbia in Asia, 
and Alberta in Asia. Alberta’s got an office in Washington and 
through many locations in Europe.  
 
So even some provinces with offices in market still will send 
advance, Mr. Deputy Speaker. One of them is NDP Manitoba. 
The reason that you do this is to make sure the trip’s as 

coordinated as possible, that it can be short in duration, that the 
program is useful. There’s been many occasions, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, where a mission was cancelled on my part. I just said I 
didn’t think there was value there for taxpayers. 
 
These are the kinds of questions we get. We ask questions 
around when are we flying economy, how are we going to 
maximize value. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the difference is 
these questions were never asked by members opposite when 
they had the chance, when they were in government for 16 long, 
dark years, the last seven of which they spent $5.9 million 
travelling all over the place. Compare that to what we’ve spent, 
same time period. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s $1.5 million less, 
and industry is saying the results are far better. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 

Release of Information Concerning Worker 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier admits that he 
personally directed a leak of confidential employment 
information about a private citizen. That leak is now being 
investigated, Mr. Speaker, and the Premier’s office is being 
investigated, the Ministry of Health as well. But over and over 
again, that Premier has said the information leaked to reporters 
was general. But now we know for a fact those claims were not 
accurate. Why did the Premier say that it was general 
information when that clearly was not the case, and will he 
finally admit that what he did was wrong? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve already indicated 
both in the House and outside the House to the media that I had 
asked for general information to be provided for the reasons 
that I have given, which is that we simply wanted health care 
workers to know that what Mr. Bowden was facing in the 
workplace had nothing to do with him coming forward but 
rather had to do with complaints from colleagues. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I indicated that the information was 
general in nature. That was certainly the case with the first 
email. I can confirm for the House this, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
that last Thursday I learned of a second email that was sent to 
one reporter, Mr. Murray Mandryk of the Leader-Post, and it 
had specific information in it. It was provided on background. 
Certainly that’s the assurance from the senior staff person, and I 
take that person at her word, that it was provided on 
background, again for the same reasons, but specific 
information which is not what was asked for by myself. And so 
we’ve had a meeting, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’ve had a direct 
conversation. This is not going to happen again, and she is no 
longer going to be working on this file. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 613 — The Green Energy, Green Jobs and 
Diversified, Sustainable Economy Act 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 



May 4, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7089 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 613, The 
Green Energy, Green Jobs and Diversified, Sustainable 
Economy Act be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member 
from Saskatoon Nutana that Bill No. 613, The Green Energy, 
Green Jobs and Diversified, Sustainable Economy Act be now 
introduced and read for a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second 
time? I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Human Services to report that it has 
considered certain estimates and to present its seventh report. I 
move: 
 

That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on 
Human Services be now concurred in. 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 
Standing Committee on Human Services: 
 

That the seventh report of the Standing Committee on 
Human Services be now concurred in. 
 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 178 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 178 — The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2015 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And it’s my honour to be able to rise today and make some 
comments on Bill No. 178 that was introduced recently. This is 
the one budget bill that we’ve seen this year, and it deals with 
some changes that are required to The Income Tax Act, 2000 to 
bring a number of things in line with the Canadian federal 
Income Tax Act, and then some significant policy changes that 
this government is introducing with respect to programs that 
Saskatchewan people have come to rely on and, I think, a 
number of changes that are benefiting some major corporations 
here in the province, Mr. Speaker. So I’ll want to address a few 
of those in the bill today and maybe ask a few questions about 
why the government is taking this approach. 
 
[14:30] 
 
So if we look at the actual bill itself, the first change that we see 
is a definition change in clause 2(bb). And what they’re doing 
here is they’re changing the definition of taxation year, because 
apparently in the past there was special rules for taxation years 
of testamentary trusts, and so now they’re removing that and 
they’re just bringing it in line with section 249 of the federal 
Income Tax Act where the general definition of taxation year 
resides. So it just really referred to section 249 now of the 
federal Act. 
 
It’s kind of interesting when you see these retroactive changes 
that go back 13 years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I would be 
curious to know why these things take as long as they do. But 
then I started looking at some of the clauses in the Income Tax 
Act and, boy, they’re pretty dense and a complicated section. So 
I think you really need a lot of expertise to be able to analyze 
these well and properly, and so maybe that’s why it took 13 
years to make this kind of change. 
 
The second change that we’re dealing with in the bill is an 
amendment to section 35(8), and what’s explained there is that, 
again the Canada Revenue Agency has asked that there be 
changes made to the provincial Act to conform to the federal 
Act. And as you know, our income tax regimes are very closely 
parallel in Saskatchewan and federally. And I think every 
province makes efforts to tie them in as closely as they can so 
that, you know, filing income tax isn’t as complicated, or more 
complicated than it already is. 
 
Anyways this change here is going back to January 1st, 2012, 
so it’s going back three years and it’s changing the definition 
just to simplify what total charitable gifts are. And I just find 
that it’s interesting that it’s being simplified, because the 
language itself in this subsection is incredibly, incredibly dense, 
and I’m not sure how you could really even begin to understand 



7090 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2015 

its meaning. But it looks like section 118.1(1) of the federal Act 
has a definition of total charitable gifts and this is just really 
bringing in the changes that the federal Act has. 
 
I’m tempted to read out that subsection just so you could see, 
Mr. Speaker, how incredibly dense the language is and . . . Yes, 
well perhaps I will just so you can see this is a very complicated 
issue that I’m not sure any ordinary layperson would even get 
meaning out of it. And I’m not sure I understand it, but it says 
the following:  
 

“In applying the definition of ‘total charitable gifts’ in 
subsection 118.1(1) of the federal Act for the purposes of 
subsection (1)”, the words ‘to the extent that the amount 
was not included in determining an amount that was 
deducted under this section in computing any individual’s 
tax payable under this Part for a preceding taxation year’ 
in that definition are to be read as ‘to the extent that the 
amount was not included in determining an amount that 
was deduced for preceding taxation year pursuant to this 
section in computing the individual’s tax payable pursuant 
to this Act or pursuant to section 118.1 of the federal Act 
in computing the individual’s tax pursuant to Part 1 of the 
federal Act’”. 

 
So it’s as clear as mud to me. But I think at this point we have 
to assume that the officials are clear on what is exactly required 
under the federal Act. And we need to sort of determine 
whether these are appropriate changes, and we’ll certainly have 
more questions in committee when we have an opportunity, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, these are 
complicated questions, and I think we would have to rely on the 
officials to talk about some of the meanings that we find in that 
particular subclause. 
 
The next change that we see . . . And again, happy to be 
involved in adjourned debates, especially when the Finance 
minister pipes up. And he’s always easy to hear, so we look 
forward to his comments as this debate unrolls as well, although 
he did have his opportunity when he gave his second reading 
speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And maybe he forgot . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, it was a really good speech. I’ll 
give him that. But maybe he forgot that it’s our turn now to 
have some comments on this. At any rate . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker, I’ll keep trying here, despite I 
hear the dulcet tones of our Finance minister across the way. 
 
Section 35(8) is being repealed, and we’re substituting . . . 
Actually the only change there is they’re adding subsection (d) 
which is a new change to the federal Act, that this province has 
been asked by the CRA [Canada Revenue Agency] to make the 
changes, I guess, not retroactive but comparable so that this 
section now is in line again with the federal Act. 
 
Now this, interestingly enough, goes back to February of 2004. 
So again these are fairly lengthy retroactive clauses. We’re 
looking at 11 years in this case, and this is just for an 
amendment that was made to clarify the treatment of foreign 
interest income for the purposes of computing the foreign tax 
credit. So there’s a new subclause in the federal Act, and it now 
applies to the purposes of this section in the Saskatchewan 
income tax Act, 2000. 
 

We get into some of the policy changes now when we look at 
changes to section 37 of the existing income tax Act, and that 
deals with graduate tuition tax credit. And we know there was 
much made of this in the budget, and certainly a lot of people in 
Saskatchewan are expressing concern about the way the 
government is changing this tax credit. It’s been very well 
received by students here in Saskatchewan, and I think in many 
ways has been relied on by students here in Saskatchewan. 
 
But what we see now is they’re making a change so that the 
non-refundable portion of it is now effective immediately . . . 
where it was a refundable income tax credit, used in very 
important ways by individuals who were struggling making 
ends meet, single moms, people with large student loans 
depending on the studies that they undertook, and people that 
are struggling to make ends meet with income that isn’t quite 
enough to pay all the bills, Mr. Speaker. So this was an 
important benefit that many, many, many students in 
Saskatchewan have relied on for the last few years. 
 
Converting it to a non-refundable income tax credit is actually 
ruling out the people that probably need it the most, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and it seems a bit mean spirited in a sense that this 
government is choosing to create this version of this graduate 
retention program, sadly, and I think to the detriment of a 
number of individuals who would be able to benefit from this if 
it remained in its current form. 
 
So I think we’re still receiving comments from people who are 
realizing the impact it’s going to have on them and their ability 
to meet their debt obligations and their student loans and to 
continue to develop their careers in their chosen paths, you 
know, with struggles with the cost of living and in particular the 
cost of housing in a lot of urban centres in Saskatchewan where 
we know people are really struggling. 
 
So converting this to an entirely non-refundable income tax 
credit is something that will have a significant impact on those 
that need the help the most, and certainly I think we will 
continue to question why this government has gone this route. 
 
Section 39, changes there as well, and in this particular case this 
is the low-income tax credit. And what has happened here is 
that the CRA is asking for this government to conform to an 
amendment made to the federal Act from 2014 year and 
forward — this is interesting — to remove the requirement for a 
specific application for the federal goods and services tax credit. 
 
And I remember when I finished university and had small 
children, this was a tax credit that really meant a lot. It was a 
small amount often but it meant a lot for us as a family, but we 
had to apply for it. And I’m not sure how many people were 
fully informed that that was the process that was necessary. And 
I think this is a good move, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where we’re 
removing the requirement for individuals to apply. As long as 
they file their income tax, it’s known automatically whether or 
not they’re eligible for this credit. So why would you make 
them apply when you already have that information through 
their tax return? So this is a change I think that makes a lot of 
sense and I think it will certainly help individuals who aren’t 
familiar with the intricacies of filling out a tax form. It’s a 
complicated process, and if people are able to access a tax credit 
that they’re eligible for without having to go through the 



May 4, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7091 

process of applying, I think that makes sense and it’s already 
information that the government has. So I think it’s fine. 
 
Going on, section 39 has a number of other changes in terms of 
the tax credit. But the graduate retention tax credit, I think a lot 
of those changes are just ones that have to reflect the 
government policy changes that were introduced in the previous 
clause that I spoke to. And so those are just — what would you 
call it? — technical or bureaucratic changes that are required. 
For example, in section 39.1 it sets out the tuition rebate 
instalment amounts, and it’s just being clarified now to show 
that this is a lifetime maximum benefit and that it’s only for the 
years 2012 to 2014 that they can claim in respect to the 
program. So those are just minor changes that are being 
introduced in section 39. 
 
Moving on, another important policy change this government 
introduced in this budget, you know, section 39.2. And again, 
this is a budget where we’re still seeing record revenues 
flowing into the government’s coffers through the good 
fortunes of our natural resource sector and our farming sector, 
and all the hard-working sectors that are out there. We still see 
cuts to benefits to families that were really appreciated and 
certainly encouraged families to be more active, for children to 
be able to have access to certain programs. 
 
And I think of, for example, when my two sons were playing 
soccer, Mr. Speaker, and I know soccer is like one-third the 
expense of what sports like hockey or swimming or different 
other sports involved, but soccer fees were a lot of money. And 
again, when you’re looking at paying down student loans, 
you’re looking at trying to buy a house and secure a mortgage 
and put some money away for that, when you’re looking at 
rising costs of living, these types of benefits are ones that make 
sports or music lessons or all those types of activities that are 
over and above what we can get through our school system . . . 
But they’re important, because they get families out moving. 
We get them being exposed to different kinds of cultural 
activities. These are ones that are really, really cherished and 
important. 
 
And again, what we see in this government is a bit of a 
mean-spirited approach where all of a sudden there’s an income 
test. Out of the blue, we see an income test. We see that 
$60,000 is now decided to be the amount where if you make a 
penny over $60,000 regardless of what . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . We see someone over there is talking about 
free money. This government, if that’s the truth, then they 
would be cutting out this benefit altogether. But all of a sudden 
the backbenchers come alive when they think they have 
something to add to the debate. And certainly, you know, we’ll 
look forward to their comments in committee as well. If they 
think that there should be no what they call free money, I think 
they should be careful about what they’re calling for, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What we see is a mean-spirited approach by this government to 
draw a line in the sand and say, $60,000. A penny more, you’re 
out. You’re not eligible. Your family has to make it on your 
own. And again, why in this case an income test and not in 
others? It’s not clear. And certainly we know . . . I think what is 
clear is that they’re looking to save money, because they’ve 
been spending so much money that now all of a sudden, when 

we see some revenues dropping in the oil and gas sector, 
they’re desperate to find ways to cut. And what do they do? 
They pick on families. 
 
So it’s really unfortunate we see a government with this kind of 
mean-spirited and small-minded approach. It’s unfortunate and 
it’s affecting families and it’s stopping kids from having access 
to programs that they currently have access to. And that’s not 
the way to go, Mr. Speaker. That’s not the way we think 
Saskatchewan should be moving forward. It’s moving 
backwards. It’s not moving forward at all. 
 
The other thing we see though, who’s going to get the benefit of 
these changes in The Income Tax Act? It’s not active families. 
It’s not graduates. It’s actually a large corporation who is now 
going to benefit from changes to the manufacturing — I have to 
find the right name — manufacturing and processing exporter 
tax. This is where the benefits are flowing. The benefits are now 
flowing to large corporations who are going to save millions of 
dollars in taxes by the benefit of this new, changes to . . . Well 
it’s the creation of a new tax incentive. 
 
And it’s not a tax incentive for a family that’s trying to pay their 
bills. It’s not a tax incentive for a family who needs a program 
like Radius offers to youth in the summertime, families that 
need help and support. It’s not an incentive for graduates, Mr. 
Speaker. It is an incentive for manufacturers and processors. 
And the change is now found under section 64.3(1). This is the 
new change to The Income Tax Act, and the benefit and the 
incentive that’s being created here is for two components: a 
general hiring tax credit and a head office tax credit. So what 
happens if this large corporation is able to create a head office 
here in Saskatchewan? They get $10,000 each year in tax 
credits for each incremental full-time head employee hired by 
an eligible business. So let’s say, Mr. Speaker, they have seven 
employees. That’s $70,000 in tax credits that this corporation 
gets. That’s equal to the amount that this government has cut 
when they cut the program for the youth companionship 
program through Radius in Saskatoon. 
 
[14:45] 
 
So seven employees and a head office, a tax credit of $70,000, 
and yet this government cannot find ways to support families 
who rely on the youth companionship program. I think the 
contrast is stark. I think it is shameful and I think it really 
indicates where this government is pointed, and it’s certainly 
not for the families of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So that’s an interesting tax incentive. Again, you know, we see 
that tax incentives for industries in Saskatchewan in the cultural 
spheres, such as the film employment tax credit, was seen as 
something that’s shameful, but now we have a tax incentive 
here for manufacturing and processing and this is the best thing 
since sliced bread, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So you’ve really got to 
wonder what kind of thinking goes into these changes, and what 
sort of maybe representations were made by advocates of this 
tax incentive. 
 
Who lobbied the government in order to get this tax incentive? 
Whose idea was it to provide this type of tax incentive to large 
manufacturers and creative industries? Now it says creative 
industries, but the irony of that, Mr. Speaker, is that there is no 



7092 Saskatchewan Hansard May 4, 2015 

more large-scale film industry in Saskatchewan. We’re down to 
about 140 people that, in the province, scattered across the 
province, that would consider themselves to be . . . that would 
be their career or the industry that they work in. And so it’s 
hardly imaginable how this tax incentive will apply. We’re 
looking forward to see if it does, and certainly we’ll keep an eye 
on that. 
 
But I think the notion that it’s for creative industries, I don’t 
think that was the intent of this. And I certainly don’t think that 
the lobbyists who approached the government to get this tax 
incentive were lobbying on behalf of film companies, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but of course we’ll never know because we 
don’t have our lobbyist registry yet. But it will come, and we 
will continue to keep an eye on that once that registry is finally 
set up. And you know, I guess, were there people from the 
graduate studies programs that were lobbying the government 
for changes to the graduate retention program? I don’t think so, 
Mr. Speaker, but I think the people that were lobbying this 
government were very, were very careful about making 
applications for things that are in their interests. 
 
You know, and interestingly enough, we saw in this budget a 
change in the way royalties are calculated for potash, and I 
don’t profess to understand all the details, but what I did hear 
from potash officials last week at their reception was that it was 
out of the blue. It was a complete surprise, and it was not well 
received by the potash industry. So you’ve got to wonder again, 
who’s lobbying these guys and who’s making these kinds of 
representations? 
 
There’s a few sections as well, other sections that are being 
changed. Sections 68 and 95 are also being amended. Again, 
this is at the request of the Canada Revenue Agency and this is 
to conform to another amendment to the federal Act. And this is 
just adding provisions to allow a refund of excess instalment 
amounts paid on account of a taxpayers’ tax liability for a year. 
And I believe that currently those are just being held for the 
next tax year; I’m not entirely sure. But this seems to make it 
clear that these excess instalment amounts are now refundable 
to the taxpayer which is, I think, a welcome change. 
 
There’s some changes to section 124 of the Act. I’m just going 
to go to that section, Mr. Speaker. It’s near the end of the bill 
here. And that’s section 17 of this Act — that’s Bill 128 — and 
this is just to add some regulation authorities, so new powers 
are being added to allow for regulations for the manufacturing 
and processing exporter tax incentive and the corporate income 
tax, tax rebate for capital investment and primary steel 
production. 
 
Again we see the singling out of one particular industry and 
that’s primary steel production. We don’t know what sort of 
lobby effort was made on the part of the steel production 
industry here in Saskatchewan. Interesting that that’s where the 
tax incentives are flowing out of this budget, and certainly we 
know it’s not going to active families. It’s not going to 
graduates from this province. And certainly it seems like these 
changes are benefiting the few and not the many that need the 
help here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Like I said, with the cost of living the way it is, housing, 
particularly housing . . . That’s the one thing I hear over and 

over and over in my conversations in Saskatoon, is the impact 
of high housing rates and difficulty finding suitable and 
adequate housing that’s at a reasonable price. And I think the 
things like this where you see a cut to the active families benefit 
and the graduate retention program are really hitting those 
people that are struggling just to make ends meet. Their utility 
bills have gone up and the cost of living has been skyrocketing. 
And I think you talk to anybody and look at their grocery bill 
over the last few years; we can all feel the impacts of these 
climbing prices. 
 
So again, not sure who’s advocating for graduates and we’re not 
sure who’s advocating for active families. I think if people 
knew ahead of time and were consulted they would have made 
a case to this government. But I think it’s only steel producers 
and others that are making representations that they should have 
benefits under tax incentives, that other sectors of the 
community and groups and families and communities are not 
making those representations. I can’t figure it out otherwise, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So at this point, I think we want to continue this discussion and 
others of my colleagues are going to want to be able to speak to 
this, so I would like to move that we adjourn the debate on Bill 
No. 178, An Act to amend The Income Tax Act, 2000. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 178, The Income Tax 
Amendment Act, 2015. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. To accommodate the work of committees later this 
day, I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until 
tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:52.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Ruling on a Point of Order 
  The Deputy Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................... 7079 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7079 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7079 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7080 
  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7080 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7080 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7080 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7080 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7081 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7081 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7081 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 7081 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7081 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7081 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7081 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7082 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7082 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 MS Awareness Month 
  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7082 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7082 
 Awareness and Prevention Regarding Missing Persons 
  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7083 
 Historic Military Milestones 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7083 
 Family to Reunite in Saskatchewan 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7083 
 Support for Camp fYrefly 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7083 
 Health Foundation’s Health Care Celebration 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7084 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Expenditures Prior to and During Government Trade Missions 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7084 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7084 
 Release of Information Concerning Worker 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7088 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7088 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 613 — The Green Energy, Green Jobs and Diversified, Sustainable Economy Act 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7089 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7089 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 178 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2015 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7089 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


