




















































Hansard: March 26, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 41A  THURSDAY, MARCH 26, 2015, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6785 

 March 26, 2015 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we have a very, very special 

guest, and actually special guests, in your gallery today that it is 

my great pleasure to introduce to you and then through you to 

all members of the Assembly. They are Gabriel Reaume. We’ll 

ask Gabriel to give us a little wave. There he is. His brother 

Adrian has joined us as well as his mom, Allana is here. 

 

When Gabriel was diagnosed with mesothelioma in May of 

2012, Mr. Speaker, he was 8. He was given a 5 per cent chance 

of living more than two years. After undergoing chemotherapy 

and losing his right lung and five ribs, Gabriel is cancer free. 

Throughout his treatment Gabriel remained very, very 

optimistic, and his is an inspiring story for every single member 

of this legislature and everybody in the province of 

Saskatchewan. He remains very much full of courage with 

respect to what he has went through, and he continues to 

believe that “cancer isn’t all that bad.” 

 

Today Gabriel is serving as the ambassador for this year’s 

Relay for Life in Regina and is here helping to sell daffodils in 

the annual spring campaign. And I think the Leader of the 

Opposition had a chance to say hello and purchase some, and 

many members have. And we want to welcome Gabriel and his 

brother Adrian and his mom here today. 

 

He’s gathered his family and entered a team, the G Squad, in 

the Regina Relay for Life. And here’s another quote from 

Gabriel. He said, “I can’t wait to meet more survivors and to 

join in the relay with my family and friends. Keep calm and 

fight on.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we just want to say to Gabriel how very proud we 

are of him and all those that he represents who battle this 

terrible disease. We’re grateful for the Cancer Society for all the 

research that’s happening, for the medical care professionals 

who are there for Gabriel and all too many that, like him, face 

this terrible, terrible challenge of cancer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members of this Legislative Assembly 

to welcome our honoured guest here today and thank him for 

his inspiration and his example. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the Premier in welcoming this remarkable family to the 

legislature and thank them for their service and what they’re 

doing for the larger fight and a larger cause. And that’s the 

remarkable thing about so many people in this province: it’s not 

just about their own family, but it’s about so many other 

families. 

 

When I asked Gabriel about his brother, why his brother was 

along, he said, well Adrian’s my bodyguard today. But, Mr. 

Speaker, when you’re a fighter like Gabriel, I don’t think you 

need a bodyguard. He’s clearly proven that. And they said 

there’s an older sister, but she didn’t want to miss school today, 

so she’s not along. So, Mr. Speaker, I extend my warm 

welcome to this family here today, thank them for their work, 

and encourage all members to go down, make a donation, and 

get some daffodils. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

to you and through you to all of my colleagues in the 

Legislative Assembly, I’m delighted to welcome some very 

special guests in the post-secondary educational sector to their 

Assembly here today, Mr. Speaker. Seated in your gallery are 

the various board Chairs of our regional colleges, along with 

their respective CEOs [chief executive officer] of the seven 

regional colleges. Unfortunately two of the board Chairs 

couldn’t join us there today, Mr. Speaker, but these ladies and 

gentlemen are meeting, they meet usually two or three times a 

year as a group. And I have the opportunity to meet with them 

as well after question period here today, Mr. Speaker, and 

discuss some issues common across the post-secondary 

educational sector. 

 

And so to you, Mr. Speaker, and to colleagues, if they could 

just give a wave as I introduce them: we have Mr. Glenn Hepp, 

the chairperson from Carlton Trail Regional College; Dr. Ivan 

Yackel, the CEO of Carlton Trail; Mr. Jim Thiessen, 

chairperson, Cumberland; Dr. Tom Weegar, CEO of 

Cumberland; George Janzen, chairperson of Great Plains 

regional college and Dr. David Keast, the CEO of Great Plains; 

Mr. Glenn Lafleur from Northlands regional college, along with 

Toby Greschner, the CEO of Northlands; Ms. Lydia Cyr, 

chairperson, Parkland Regional College, along with Dr. Fay 

Myers, the CEO of Parkland. And I might just add, Mr. 

Speaker, that Dr. Myers is retiring in June after 25 years of 

service at that particular college, and we wish her all the best in 

her retirement. Mr. Dion McGrath, CEO of Southeast; is Dion 

with us? Oh he’s down there, okay. I couldn’t see him, sorry. 

And Tavia Laliberte — I always get that wrong, Tavia; I’m 

sorry — CEO of North West; and Marlene Beaudry, the 

executive secretary for both Northwest and the Association of 

Saskatchewan Regional Colleges. Welcome to your Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in welcoming these 

accomplished educators to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 

like to join with the minister opposite in welcoming these 

leaders in the post-secondary education sector to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

Certainly one of the things we’ve been blessed with in 

Saskatchewan is geography, no shortage of it. And certainly the 

regional college system is that great edge in terms of getting the 



6786 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2015 

learning opportunities to learners from every corner, to every 

corner of this province. So it’s really good to see these CEOs 

and Chairs from the various regional colleges here today. 

 

And I’d also like to join with the minister in congratulating Fay 

on many years of great service to the sector and to so many 

students. You will be missed, but thank you very much for the 

service that you have provided this province these 25 years on. 

And enjoy a well-deserved retirement, but I’m sure you’ll be on 

to greater things there as well. But again I’d just like to join 

with the minister in welcoming these leaders to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 

 

Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 

welcome to you a fine young fellow that grew up in the 

constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook just north of the 

community of Hafford. Mr. Cole Janostin is here to visit the 

Assembly today. Upon graduating from the Hafford Central 

School, Mr. Speaker, Cole attended the Okanagan College, 

where he completed his commercial pilot training licence, Mr. 

Speaker. He’s on his way now to Fredericton, New Brunswick 

to work as a pilot with Leading Edge, Mr. Speaker, and we wish 

him all the best in the start of his career. We know he’ll 

represent Saskatchewan and the constituency of 

Rosthern-Shellbrook and the community of Hafford very well 

in everything he does. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 

you and through you to all members of this Assembly, I’d like 

to introduce Dr. Neil Alexander in your gallery. Dr. Alexander 

has been the executive director of the Sylvia Fedoruk Centre for 

Nuclear Innovation since July 2014, a centre that’s doing great 

work on cancer research, amongst many other endeavours. 

 

Prior to that, Dr. Alexander served in a number of senior 

executive roles in the Canadian nuclear industry, including 

president and general manager of Rolls-Royce Civil Nuclear 

Canada, president of the Organization of CANDU Industries, 

and as vice-president of business development with 

SNC-Lavalin Nuclear. I very much look forward to our 

discussion today, and I would ask that all members join me in 

welcoming Dr. Alexander to his Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I too on behalf 

of the official opposition would like to welcome Dr. Alexander 

to the Legislative Assembly. I and my colleague from 

Saskatoon Centre had an opportunity to get a very good tour of 

all the amazing work that’s happening there and really excited 

about seeing the results for Saskatchewan residents. So again, 

on behalf of the official opposition, thank you for all you do and 

all the good work, and welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition calling for greater support for 

education here in Saskatchewan. And we know that education is 

one of the most vital services that government provides to its 

citizens, but yet this government has failed to deliver a 

long-term plan and vision and the necessary resources to 

prioritize the delivery of educational excellence; that this 

government has also failed to develop a plan, a real plan to 

close the Aboriginal education gap, to support English as an 

additional language students, and to support community schools 

and their communities and students. And I’d like to read the 

prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 

to immediately prioritize education by laying out a 

long-term vision and plan with the necessary resources 

that provides the best quality education for Saskatchewan 

that reflects Saskatchewan’s demographic and population 

changes, that is based on proven educational best 

practices, that is developed through consultation with the 

education sector, and that builds strong educational 

infrastructure to serve students and communities long into 

the future. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 

the good city of Moose Jaw. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 

again to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it 

relates to the unsafe conditions created on Dewdney Avenue by 

that government and their failure to plan a safe route of traffic 

for dangerous heavy-haul truck traffic. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 

government to immediately take action as it relates to the 

unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 

damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on 

Dewdney Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the 

safety and well-being of communities, families, residents, 

and users; and that those actions and plans should include 

rerouting the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial 

funding, and be developed through consultation with the 

city of Regina, communities, and residents. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Regina once again. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 

petition. Homelessness is a major problem in La Ronge and 

other parts of the North. It is getting harder and harder for 

families, seniors, women, and children to find shelter. Poverty 

is a problem. We know that for a fact. Skyrocketing home 



March 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6787 

ownership costs are huge. And I want to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the Sask Party 

government, the Saskatchewan government to build a 

homeless shelter in the Lac la Ronge area to meet the 

needs of addressing homelessness in the Lac la Ronge 

area. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by many good people of 

northern Saskatchewan. I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased again 

to present a petition in support of safe staffing levels in 

long-term care. The petitioners point out, Mr. Speaker, that 

many aspects of long-term care are deteriorating under this 

government; that this government has removed the regulations 

requiring a minimum standard of care for seniors, resulting in 

neglect; and that chronic understaffing, they point out, in 

long-term care facilities results in unacceptable conditions, 

including unanswered calls for help, things like infrequent 

bathing, and a rise in physical violence amongst residents. I’d 

like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the government to 

commit to the creation of safe staffing levels for all valued 

members of the health care team and to reintroduce actual 

numbers of staff to match the level of care needs and the 

number of residents under their care in long-term care 

facilities. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, once again this petition is signed by folks from 

many communities in Saskatchewan. Today it’s signed by folks 

from Melfort, Beatty, Naicam, Star City, Regina, Saskatoon, 

and Moose Jaw. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 

from citizens of Saskatchewan for real action on climate 

change. And the people who have signed the petition want to 

bring to the attention of the Assembly the following: 

Saskatchewan’s emissions have continued to grow to 74 million 

megatonnes as of October 2013 and show no signs of 

decreasing; slashing programs such as the Go Green Fund and 

the EnerGuide for Houses energy-efficiency program set this 

province on a backwards course; and that since 2009, the 

Government of Saskatchewan has reduced climate change 

funding by 83 per cent. 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

enact a real plan and allocate appropriate funding in the 

provincial budget to tackle climate change by reducing 

greenhouse gas emissions, helping families transition to 

energy-efficient homes, and encouraging everyone in the 

province to take real action to protect the environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by individuals from 

Prince Albert, Regina, Moose Jaw, Lloydminster, Nipawin, 

Regina Beach, Estevan, and Redvers. And I so present. 

 

[10:15] 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Purple Day 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 

Assembly in recognition of Purple Day, the international day of 

awareness for epilepsy. Epilepsy puts a lot of stress on families 

all across our province and brings significant challenges for 

those living with it. 

 

My nephew Nolan has epilepsy, and I’ve seen first-hand how 

difficult this can be for families and people touched by this 

condition. Having better access to needed supports, therapies, 

and health professionals is critical in Saskatchewan. This needs 

to be a focus of government. 

 

I’d like to thank Cineplex in Saskatoon for arranging a special 

movie screening for the families of children living with 

epilepsy, earlier this year. Regular theatre conditions can 

aggravate the symptoms of people living with epilepsy, and so 

the Cineplex staff adapted the environment through sound, 

light, and breaks to accommodate those with this condition. For 

many families this was the first chance they have ever had to 

take a trip to the movies, something that so many of us take for 

granted. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we need more of these accommodations and 

adaptations in our public spaces and schools, so that everyone 

can feel welcome and thrive. And we need government to do 

better when it comes to ensuring access to supports, therapies, 

and health professionals. And so I ask members to join with me 

in recognizing Purple Day and in committing to make our 

province the best place in Canada for people and families living 

with epilepsy. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Lloydminster. 

 

Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 

recognize the International Day for Epilepsy, or Purple Day. 

Epilepsy is a condition of the brain characterized by recurrent 

seizures and can affect anyone at any age. There is currently no 

cure for epilepsy. However through surgery, medication, and 

lifestyle changes many people are able to control their seizures. 

 

There are approximately 50 million people living with epilepsy. 

That is an estimated 1 in every 100 people. Here in Canada 

more than 300,000 citizens are living with this condition. 

Epilepsy affects each person differently, including what could 

trigger their seizures. Purple Day is about bringing awareness of 

epilepsy in an effort to dispel harmful myths and to let those 

who live with epilepsy know that they are not alone. 



6788 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2015 

Mr. Speaker, Purple Day was created by Cassidy Megan, a 

young girl from Nova Scotia who lives with epilepsy. Cassidy 

wanted to bring awareness about epilepsy in an effort to fight 

the stigma of this condition. In 2009 with the help of the 

Epilepsy Association of Nova Scotia and the Anita Kaufmann 

Foundation, Purple Day was launched internationally. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in recognizing 

March 26 as Purple Day and thank Cassidy Megan for all her 

work to make this day possible. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Saskatchewan’s Living Fiddling Heritage 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to report to 

this Assembly that yesterday the House of Commons passed 

third reading of Bill S-218, An Act respecting National Fiddling 

Day. This bill proclaims the third Saturday of May each and 

every year as National Fiddling Day. This brings Canada in line 

with World Fiddle Day. 

 

In the debate yesterday, many members of the House of 

Commons rose to speak about their regions’ rich fiddling 

history. Unfortunately none of Saskatchewan’s MPs [Member 

of Parliament] spoke about our living fiddle heritage here in 

Saskatchewan. So I’d like to take a few minutes today to boast 

about the exciting and diverse fiddle community that we have 

here. 

 

Of course, no story about Saskatchewan fiddling would be 

complete without mention of John Arcand, the master of the 

Métis fiddle. John is originally from Big River, now in 

Saskatoon. He’s been an inspiration to so many here in 

Saskatchewan and has put the Métis fiddle style on the map, so 

to speak, Mr. Speaker. He is likely one of the most decorated 

fiddle players in Canada, and I’m proud to call him my friend. 

 

I would also like to mention Michele Amy from Forget, in your 

area, Mr. Speaker. She has single-handedly raised the profile of 

fiddling in southeastern Saskatchewan, hosting an exciting 

fiddle camp each summer at Kenosee Lake, and this year 

presenting an exciting musical theatre show called a Fiddle 

History of Canada at the community theatre in Carlyle. 

 

I was able to see the world premiere of this show in Smithers, 

BC [British Columbia] in 2012. It made me so proud to be a 

Canadian, and I hope that members from that area will be able 

to take in the show on the May 2nd weekend. Mr. Speaker, 

fiddling is alive and well in Saskatchewan, and we’ll be 

celebrating that fact on the third weekend in May. To all 

members, take in a fiddle event near you. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 

Wakamow. 

 

Habitat for Humanity Build in Moose Jaw 

 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Habitat for Humanity has become a staple in this province and a 

huge contributor to breaking the cycle of poverty, one family at 

a time. This past Friday I had the opportunity to volunteer at the 

Home Street build in Moose Jaw. As the fifth Habitat build in 

Moose Jaw, this project got under way just a few months ago. 

Yet the Korbo family, Krista and her two-year-old daughter 

Sawyer, are closer than ever to owning their own home. 

 

Habitat for Humanity is an amazing organization, and this 

government has supported Habitat’s efforts to lift families up 

and change their lives through home ownership. With $65,000 

committed to each build, our commitment to Habitat for 

Humanity is stronger than ever. Mr. Speaker, this is my fourth 

time volunteering at a Habitat for Humanity project, and every 

time I am truly amazed at the talent and generosity of all the 

volunteers. The house is coming along well, and last weekend I 

actually had the opportunity to install door frames and some 

casing last week. I just want to throw a shout-out to Fern 

Paulhus, the coordinator. He’s a great teacher, especially when 

he can teach me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the benefits of home ownership go far beyond the 

cycle of poverty. This family, just like all others that Habitat 

works with, will put in the hours necessary to call . . . to build 

this home their own. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join with me in 

congratulating Habitat for Humanity on another successful 

build. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Volunteers Make a Difference to People 

Living With Diabetes 

 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Thursday I had the 

honour to attend the National Volunteer Awards Luncheon 

hosted by the Canadian Diabetes Association of Saskatchewan 

at Government House. The volunteers recognized the 

outstanding contributions of volunteers, donors, corporations, 

and individuals whose actions have helped others to prevent and 

manage diabetes. I’m pleased to note that out of 11 national 

awards, three were from Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that diabetes is a serious disease 

affecting a growing number of residents in our province. 

Together these volunteers provide a strong team devoted to 

helping people living with diabetes to live healthy lives while 

working towards a cure. By participating in community 

outreach programs, by sharing their stories, and donating 

towards diabetic projects and research, these volunteers have 

made a difference. Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that Statistics 

Canada recently reported that our province has the highest 

volunteer rate in all of Canada. 

 

Our local volunteers were honoured for their efforts, time, and 

commitment to the Canadian Diabetes Association last 

Thursday: Betty Sigfusson of Pilot Butte, Sarah Struthers of 

Saskatoon, and Georgia Joorisity of Regina. Mr. Speaker, I ask 

that all members join me in recognizing Betty, Sarah, and 

Georgia along with all the other volunteers who are dedicated to 

improving the lives of people living with diabetes. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 



March 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6789 

Peacock Senior Girls Win Regional Basketball Finals 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past weekend 

was an exciting weekend for the Peacock Toilers basketball 

team. The Peacock senior girls hosted the 4A southern regional 

tournament in Moose Jaw over the weekend. The Toilers are the 

defending 4A senior girls’ provincial champions and have 

worked hard this season to defend their title. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, on Saturday the girls completed that task, 

defeating the Central Cyclones by a score of 78 to 39 in the 

regional finals, earning the number one position into next 

week’s provincial championship tour. 

 

Caitlyn Kitts led the Toilers, scoring 9 of the team’s first 11 

points and finished with a total of 23 points that night. The 

Toilers were certainly happy with the results, but they were far 

from satisfied as the team now focuses quickly, turning to 

prepare for their third straight trip to Hoopla and their 

defending provincial title from last year. 

 

The senior girls won’t be the only team from Peacock making 

the trip to Saskatoon this weekend, Mr. Speaker. The Peacock 

senior boys will join the girls, after winning the 4A title last 

year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me, congratulating the 

Peacock senior girls’ basketball team on winning the southern 

regionals and wishing both the girls’ and the boys’ teams the 

best of luck in the provincial tournaments this weekend. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Carrot River Midget Loggers Take 

Northern Championship 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

Carrot River Midget Loggers provincial hockey team consisted 

of 16 Carrot River players and five players from Hudson Bay, 

and they began their provincial series games in mid-February. 

This series is the total points of a two-game showdown. 

 

Carrot River squared off against Kelvington in the first round, 

winning by one point. The second saw a battle between our 

team and Cudworth, again in a knuckle-biter series that saw 

Carrot River move on by a one-point lead. 

 

On Sunday, March the 8th, the Loggers were host to Hillmond 

for the first game in the northern championship. Carrot River 

walked away with a five-goal lead. The following Sunday, 

Carrot River travelled to Hillmond with a game that saw the 

scoreboard bounce back and forth between the teams, yet Carrot 

River won and came up victorious again with a total of a 

six-point victory for the final score. 

 

Leading the team were coaches Chris Bergen and Calvin Kunz, 

assistant coach Greg Nicklen, trainer Al McCrea, and manager 

Alois Bronner. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members join me in 

congratulating the Carrot River Loggers in bringing home the 

2015 Midget C northern championship banner. We wish them 

all the best as they move into the provincial gold final game 

against Carnduff. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Hyperbaric Therapy and Moose Jaw Hospital 

 

Mr. Broten: — Donna Hodel was diagnosed with breast cancer 

and squamous cell carcinoma in her neck 12 years ago. She 

received 33 radiation treatments. These treatments, they 

destroyed her saliva glands which can compromise the health of 

teeth. The treatments also reduced blood flow to her jaw. She 

has this to say: 

 

Because of the decreased blood flow, they don’t want to 

ever pull one of my teeth because the trauma to the bone 

would make it difficult to heal, resulting in osteonecrosis, 

bone death. Then they would need to remove my jaw 

completely. The only option I have, if I need an extraction, 

is the hyperbaric chamber. My dentist said not to worry. 

There’s one in Moose Jaw, very convenient. 

 

Why won’t the Premier reverse this government’s decision and 

keep this vital public service here in our province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thanks very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I thank the member for raising this question and the 

specific case. With respect to the hyperbaric chamber in Moose 

Jaw, I think the Minister of Health has stated and the Minister 

of Remote Health has also stated that it is the preference of the 

government to find a solution whereby the chamber could 

continue to operate in the province. Its presence in the new 

Moose Jaw Hospital is potentially an option, but there may be 

others. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we know that treatment that the hyperbaric 

chamber provides is available, for certain cases is available in 

other ways, perhaps not for this particular case. And, Mr. 

Speaker, we do want to be able to provide as many services as 

close to home as possible, and I think that’s why the Minister of 

Health has asked the health regions to explore potential 

solutions in this regard. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Health has said it 

is not an option to have it in the Moose Jaw Hospital because 

they shrunk the size of the hospital. The government is clearly 

on the record — very different story here. 

 

The Moose Jaw Hospital has the only, the only hyperbaric 

chamber between Toronto and Edmonton, but this government 

let the $40 million American lean consultant shrink the size of 

the hospital, Mr. Speaker, and the hyperbaric chamber was left 

out of the design. This government, they have also said on the 

record, Mr. Speaker, that the hyperbaric chamber is not a high 

priority for them. 

 



6790 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2015 

Well for people like Donna, it sure is a high priority, Mr. 

Speaker, and the prospect of losing this important health care 

service is very troubling, very concerning. She says this: 

 

This is a real possibility for me and I’m sure at least 

hundreds of others in our province alone. It’s not a hugely 

expensive piece of machinery. Saskatchewan is booming, 

they tell us, but I’ve yet to see any benefit of it, and now 

my little lifeline in a serious time of need will be gone too. 

 

Well the Premier said it’s a preference, Mr. Speaker. That is not 

a plan. That is no guarantee to people like Donna. How can the 

Premier justify losing this important medical service here in 

Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thanks very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Again I thank the member for the question. In any 

number of cases, with respect to treatments in the province of 

Saskatchewan, the preference of the government is to provide 

services as close to home as possible. 

 

[10:30] 

 

We know that of course sometimes the preference isn’t met 

because we have had for some years in this province an 

out-of-province approval process. We would rather that not be 

an option with respect to the hyperbaric chamber. That’s why 

the minister has indicated he has asked the regions involved, not 

just the region involving the Moose Jaw Hospital but others 

around the province to find a solution so that we can see the 

continued operation of the chamber, which is currently 

obviously still offered now in the province at its current 

location. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we’re not talking about space 

here where a whole wing of a hospital is needed, and it’s 

absolutely mind boggling that this government would go ahead 

with a plan and leave out something so important as the 

hyperbaric chamber. 

 

You know, because of her medical condition, Donna would 

require roughly 20 treatments in a hyperbaric chamber if they 

needed to pull just one of her teeth. That’s what she would have 

to do in order to avoid a jaw amputation. If we lose the 

hyperbaric chamber in our province, Donna would have to go to 

Edmonton for about those 20 treatments. My question to the 

Premier: would the province cover the costs of those trips? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly we 

do have interprovincial agreements when it comes to sharing of 

services, Mr. Speaker. With respect to the hyperbaric chamber, 

I can repeat: what the Premier has indicated is that the Ministry 

of Health is working with not just Five Hills Health Region but 

other health regions to determine the best way that we can 

continue to provide hyperbaric services to citizens of this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are looking at those options. We know that the vast 

majority, as in this case, is an outpatient type of treatment, Mr. 

Speaker. We are looking at options to continue to provide it as 

outpatient, but we are also exploring whether or not that it could 

be provided in an in-patient site, Mr. Speaker. So no decisions 

have been made at this time, but our intention is to find a 

solution to being able to provide hyperbaric services to the 

people of this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this government is clearly on 

record saying that they’re only open to options — no guarantee, 

no plan whatsoever. In fact the CEO of the Saskatoon Health 

Region said that he hasn’t been told that this is a high priority 

for the government at all. It makes no sense, and many people 

in the medical community feel the same way. 

 

Dr. David Amies, who has spent many years providing 

hyperbaric treatment in the Moose Jaw Union Hospital, says 

this: 

 

It’s disappointing that we can take a sophisticated 

instrument like this out of our community, which was 

raised through the efforts of the community, and it’ll be 

junked. 

 

Dr. Amies points out that the hyperbaric chamber saves this 

government a lot of money — all those trips out of province, 

Mr. Speaker — not only because we’re not sending patients out 

of the province, but the hyperbaric chamber reduces the need 

for amputations, and it helps people. It helps cancer victims, 

Mr. Speaker, heal more quickly. It makes sense. It is the right 

thing to do. 

 

This government doesn’t have a plan, and it is absolutely mind 

boggling why they do not. What will it take for this Premier to 

realize that it is a mistake to throw this all in limbo and to get 

rid of the hyperbaric chamber in this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I think the Leader of the 

Opposition will know and certainly the former Health minister 

on the other side will know that the hyperbaric chamber has 

never been a provincial resource. It’s been an asset of the Five 

Hills Health Region that was donated, Mr. Speaker. We have 

taken the additional step though to look to see how we can 

continue to provide, in a provincial context, hyperbaric services 

in the province of Saskatchewan, whether that be on an 

outpatient basis or on an in-patient basis. 

 

We’re also, as a part of that analysis, looking at what the costs 

would be to provide hyperbaric services outside of the province 

for people that we would have to provide that service to, Mr. 

Speaker. That is all a part of the analysis, and we haven’t made 

a decision yet. But we are actively working on ensuring that we 

can continue to provide hyperbaric services to the people of this 

province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think the Moose Jaw Hospital — I will put it on 

the record — I think it will serve the people of this province 

very well into the future, Mr. Speaker. It will have an additional 



March 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6791 

MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] for this province, Mr. 

Speaker, for the people of southern Saskatchewan, and it will be 

a great asset to not just the people of Moose Jaw but the people 

of Five Hills Health Region and beyond. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this is such short-sighted and little 

and narrow thinking that we’re hearing from this government 

today. A valuable piece of medical equipment, raised up from 

the community for the support for it, Mr. Speaker, provided for 

many years, and at times of record prosperity for many years, 

this government is pulling it away. We’re not even talking 

about tens of millions of dollars here, and even if it was about 

dollars, Mr. Speaker, we know it actually saves money in the 

long run because you’re keeping people closer to home for 

treatment and you’re helping them heal faster. Why they’re 

digging their heels on this with no plan is absolutely bizarre. 

 

You know, the Health minister recently received a letter — 185 

of them actually — signed by concerned individuals. They were 

forwarded by Yvonne Sawatzky, and she’s a registered 

psychiatric nurse from Cut Knife. Here’s what her letter says, 

“Surely the new facility in Moose Jaw could not have been so 

poorly planned. Surely if the planning was indeed so poor, 

space could be allocated in another facility.” But she 

emphasized, and this ties into something that the minister said, 

“A private clinic is not the appropriate alternative for this 

chamber because those needing this treatment often have very 

serious medical conditions that require concurrent hospital 

care.” There was a reason why it was in the hospital, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

What does the Premier have to say to this registered psychiatric 

nurse and the 185 people who have written to this government 

saying, give your heads a shake; this makes no sense? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll take a moment to 

correct the Leader of the Opposition. Over the last 15, 16 years 

since the hyperbaric chamber has been in use in the city of 

Moose Jaw, the vast majority of cases have been on an 

outpatient basis that have had no other in-patient care that was 

provided, Mr. Speaker. It wasn’t due to hospitalization, Mr. 

Speaker. The vast majority was outpatient treatment, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s why there is a case to be made for it to be 

provided on a continuing basis on an outpatient basis, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But we are looking at that option in terms of whether or not 

there’s the opportunity for a clinic to provide this in Moose Jaw 

or in another location, whether or not there’s an opportunity to 

provide it in an in-patient site, Mr. Speaker, as well as doing the 

analysis based on what it will cost the province to provide the 

service on an ongoing basis to the people of this province 

outside of the province. That is a part of the analysis, and we 

will be making a decision on that, on how we are going to 

provide hyperbaric services on an ongoing basis. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, in the first response that the 

Premier provided, he said that it was still an option for the 

hyperbaric chamber to be in the Moose Jaw Hospital. That’s 

contrary to everything the government has said. It’s contrary to 

what the minister has said, senior health officials, CEOs of 

health regions, Mr. Speaker. So somebody doesn’t know what 

they’re talking about. My question to the Premier: what is the 

actual story here? Is it still an option for the hyperbaric chamber 

to be in the Moose Jaw Hospital, yes or no? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, we are looking at a number 

of different options, both on an outpatient basis as well as on an 

in-patient basis, whether that be in Moose Jaw or whether that 

be in another location. So certainly that is a part of the 

deliberations that we are making, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I do want to say that we are very pleased with how the progress 

has gone on the Moose Jaw Hospital, Mr. Speaker, the fact that 

this is the government, on this side of the House, that has made 

the commitment not just to planning for a Moose Jaw hospital 

but obviously on a completed hospital that will be open for 

patients, to serve patients later this year, that will have the 

newest, most state-of-the-art MRI machine for this province and 

will be able to provide services for many years to come in an 

efficient and an effective manner. Mr. Speaker, we’re very 

pleased about that, and I think the people of Moose Jaw are as 

well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Quality of Care and Patient Safety 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Just 1 in 10 nurses in our province say that 

quality of patient care has gotten better over the last year. The 

majority of nurses say there’s been no improvement 

whatsoever, and a third of nurses say that the quality of patient 

care in our province has declined over the last year. What does 

the Health minister have to say about this? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well certainly 

we are committed on this side of the House to ensuring that we 

have continuous quality improvement in the health care system 

in this province, Mr. Speaker. I think first and foremost that 

starts by ensuring that you have the proper number of health 

care professionals serving the patients of this province, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We’ve seen a dramatic turnaround when it comes to the 

front-line staff in this province at a time where . . . Over the 

same time period under the NDP [New Democratic Party], 

nearly 200 physicians were lost. Under this government, 423 

additional physicians are practising in this province, Mr. 

Speaker, as well ensuring that we have front-line staff when it 

comes to our nursing complement. 

 

I know our professional bodies that do the licensing have 

reported to us that never before in the history of this province 

have we had more licensed professionals on the nursing front 

working in this province, Mr. Speaker. Twenty-six hundred 



6792 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2015 

nurses of all designations, additional nurses of all designations 

are licensed, Mr. Speaker, to the point where the SRNA 

[Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association] put out a news 

release not that many months ago saying that never before in 

the history of this province have we seen more nurses working, 

licensed in this province. You can see that is evident by the 

budgets that we have brought down, not only this year but in 

previous years. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Those nurses are saying there are big 

problems, Mr. Speaker. Nurses are not just concerned about the 

quality of patient care, they’re also concerned about patient 

safety. Just 1 in 10 nurses say patient safety has improved over 

the last year. A bit more than half of nurses say there’s been no 

change to patient safety over this same time frame, but a third 

of nurses say that patient safety has gotten worse over this last 

year. What does the Health minister have to say about that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, well what I would say to that is that ensuring that you 

have the proper complement of health professionals in this 

province is one thing, Mr. Speaker, but you also have to look at 

the processes that you have in place to ensure that you’re 

actually delivering a safe and quality service, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we have, as I’ve mentioned before, we have worked hard to 

address the front-line staffing issues that were left behind by the 

NDP government at a time where they were cutting nursing 

positions. They were cutting beds. They were cutting physician 

positions. They were cutting pharmacists, Mr. Speaker, a 

decrease in the number of pharmacists under the NDP. We’re 

seeing a dramatic increase in those types of positions all across 

this province, Mr. Speaker, and we’re actually ensuring that we 

have additional beds open. 

 

I want to correct what was said a couple of days ago by the 

Leader of the Opposition when he said that a resident, a patient 

was being housed, Mr. Speaker, in a closet, in a transitional unit 

that was a closet. Well, Mr. Speaker, it was being used for 

supplies in the past because it was actually a hospital room that 

was converted under the NDP into a storage room. That has 

now been changed back to a hospital room under this 

government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — After years of the lean experiment in our 

hospitals and care facilities, the majority of nurses say there has 

been absolutely no improvement to quality of care or patient 

safety. A third of nurses say quality of care and patient safety 

have actually gotten worse. That is an incredibly damning 

indictment of the Sask Party government’s approach to our 

health care system. Is the Health minister ready to admit that 

the John Black lean has failed where it matters most, in quality 

of care and patient safety? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would note that SUN [Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] 

membership that was surveyed, a strong majority, nearly 72 per 

cent that were surveyed rated the quality of patient care 

delivered positively in their workplace, Mr. Speaker. I can point 

to a number of examples of where care has improved, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

At Five Hills Health Region, the time from when a mental 

health appointment was made to the time the clients received 

the service has been reduced by more than 90 per cent. 

Individual appointments for adults saw a 99 per cent reduction 

in the wait times. Group services for adults saw a 94 per cent 

reduction. And individual appointments for children and youth, 

from the time that an appointment was made to when the 

service was received, a 95 per cent reduction, Mr. Speaker — 

one health region. Mr. Speaker, these are just some of the 

examples that we’ve seen improvements in the services that 

we’re providing in a quality service that we’re providing. 

 

We know that there is more work to be done, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re not satisfied with the status quo, as the members opposite 

were when they were in the government, Mr. Speaker. That’s 

why we’re working on making important changes to our health 

care system. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — I guess when you’ve been duped by a snake 

oil salesman and you’ve handed over more than $40 million, 

it’s pretty difficult to admit a mistake was made. But while John 

Black attends appreciation tea parties and laughs his way to the 

bank and while this government keeps pretending this was a 

wise investment, health care professionals are left frustrated and 

concerned and patients are left with a quality of care and level 

of patient safety that is worse. 

 

To the minister: what will it take for this government to admit 

that John Black lean has been disastrous where it matters most, 

in quality of care and patient safety? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well again, Mr. Speaker, I’ll just give an 

example of where lean has been used to make improvements in 

the health care system. In the Sunrise Health Region, outpatient 

mental health patients were placed, prior to lean, Mr. Speaker, 

they were placed on a wait-list for treatment for up to a week 

without a known appointment date, Mr. Speaker. These are 

people that are seeking mental health support in the most 

critical time of their life, Mr. Speaker, in some of the most 

critical periods of a crisis in their life. Mr. Speaker, before lean, 

wait times were up to a week without a known appointment. 

Now for people with very severe mental health challenges, Mr. 

Speaker, 100 per cent of the time in Sunrise Health Region an 

appointment is received within 24 hours of seeking assistance. 

 

This is the work that we need to be doing in our health care 

system, Mr. Speaker. It is one thing to be able to criticize that 

work, and I appreciate that. That’s the position of the members 

opposite. But this is why we are doing this work: to ensure that 

we reduce our wait times; that we provide a quality service, Mr. 



March 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6793 

Speaker; and that we provide a service that people desperately 

need, when they need it, at the appropriate place with the 

appropriate providers. 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Government Procurement Policy 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — There was a lot of concerning news 

about significant job losses in our province yesterday, and it 

was another reminder about how important it is for this 

government to finally fix its flawed procurement policy and 

strengthen our economy. It wouldn’t have prevented the job 

losses yesterday, but for many of the workers — and they can 

heckle and laugh if they want — but for many of the workers 

that were laid off, a better procurement policy would mean 

other job options would be available for them. 

 

I don’t understand why this government is dragging its feet on 

changes to its current procurement policy, one that’s simplistic, 

one that’s naive, one that doesn’t get best value for taxpayers, 

and it puts Saskatchewan businesses at a competitive 

disadvantage. Let’s fix it now. Let’s put Saskatchewan first. 

Let’s create good jobs here in Saskatchewan. What does this 

Premier have against this? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for his 

question with respect to the procurement issue. And let me just 

say on the matter of the layoffs that have been announced, the 

Minister of Jobs and Trade for the government has obviously 

asked that our rapid response unit be deployed to those 

companies where layoffs are occurring. We also note that in the 

case of a number of them, especially on the manufacturing side, 

a great many of them are temporary, thankfully. 

 

We ought not to ever take anything for granted though, and 

that’s why this budget has some specific initiatives in it with 

respect to new incentives for new jobs created in manufacturing 

and processing, one that we’ll hope members opposite will 

support. I’m hopeful we’ll see some companies respond to these 

incentives very soon, as we see other sectors of the economy 

maybe pick up some of the slack from what’s happening on the 

energy side and in certain sectors. We see, Mr. Speaker, 10,000 

jobs on saskjobs.ca. 

 

Procurement is certainly part of the economic milieu and 

policies of the government. The minister responsible’s been 

working hard and consulting with companies across 

Saskatchewan, and I think very, very soon, very soon he’s 

going to have something to say on the matter of a procurement 

policy for the government that will serve the interests of 

Saskatchewan as a part of a free trade relationship within 

Canada but also to put a top priority on procuring locally. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we know that this 

government, that they aren’t good listeners, but if they were 

listening after that budget last week and if they were hearing the 

same things from businesses across Saskatchewan that I was, 

Saskatchewan businesses were hugely disappointed that this 

procurement bill wasn’t fixed, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Do you know what the current Premier’s approach to 

procurement looks like, Mr. Speaker? It’s trucks rolling in, 

truck after truck from Ontario and Quebec and from Texas and 

from California as this government doles out contracts to these 

companies from other jurisdictions. Meanwhile companies here 

in Saskatchewan, like steel fabricators, are in layoff mode 

because this government keeps bypassing them. That’s what 

this government’s procurement policy looks like. 

 

I can’t understand why this Premier is defending such a flawed 

procurement policy and slow walking important changes. He 

should fix it. He should put Saskatchewan first, boost our 

economy, create good jobs here in our province. Why won’t 

this Premier simply show some leadership and do just that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly true, as it always 

has been true, that as a result of agreements in interprovincial 

trade, Saskatchewan companies are competing with others 

across the country. The member has raised the example of a 

long-term care centre in my hometown where we’re able to go 

down the list and see a great many Swift Current suppliers and 

Saskatoon suppliers and yes, some from Calgary, and yes, the 

steel from Quebec. 

 

The issue of Quebec steel is one that we’ve been working on. 

The issue of procurement is one that we’ll continue to work on. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’d invite members to wait for just a matter 

really of days, and they’ll hear more from the minister 

responsible who’s been working hard on the file. 

 

In the meantime, in the meantime, I invite the Deputy Leader of 

the NDP and especially his seatmate, the Leader of the NDP, to 

practise what they preach, even in small things. You know we 

went on . . . You just have to Google search things that the NDP 

might be selling on behalf of their leader, and what you will 

find are T-shirts featuring the name of the Leader of the NDP, 

T-shirts that are available for sale for Saskatchewan people, 

supporters of his party. Where did they get the T-shirts from? 

Providence, Rhode Island, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Here it is. Here’s the website with these . . . Well he’s laughing. 

He’s kind of laughing. The Leader of the Opposition’s laughing 

about it. If he’s going to have credibility on the big things, he 

needs to be consistent on the little things. 

 

There’s lots of T-shirt manufacturers in the province of 

Saskatchewan. The Southwest Ability Centre in Swift Current 

will supply the leader his political shirts at a good price, Mr. 

Speaker, at a good quality. Now would be the time for the 

Leader of the Opposition to sort of stand up and apologize for 

saying one thing, lecturing about buying local and not actually 

buying local himself, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I mean that Premier is 

almost an artist of grandstanding. For him to get up, Mr. 



6794 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2015 

Speaker, with his policy that sells out the interests of 

Saskatchewan businesses and doesn’t provide best value for 

taxpayers and play these sort of games that have direct impact 

on businesses and the livelihoods of workers across 

Saskatchewan is unacceptable and hugely weak. That Premier, 

through his sellout model, in the P3 [public-private partnership] 

long-term care facility in his home community has Alberta 

rebar, an Ontario mechanical company, and Quebec steel, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s this model of procurement by this Premier. 

 

We put forward a better procurement bill, Mr. Speaker. It’s all 

about fairness for Saskatchewan businesses. It’s about boosting 

the economy and creating more jobs, and it’s about getting 

better value for taxpayers. That is common sense, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When will this Premier show some leadership, pull his head out 

of the sand, and finally provide value for taxpayers and boost 

this economy? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — First with respect to the long-term care 

facility, there are many, many more suppliers from Saskatoon, 

from Regina, from Swift Current for the long-term care facility. 

Is the Hon. Deputy Leader of the Opposition saying, even with 

new procurement policies, there won’t be suppliers from 

outside of our province that will be part of construction here? It 

has always been the case. It will always be the case. 

 

Can we improve the procurement policy after consulting with 

industry? The answer is yes. The minister is doing the work, 

and you’re going to hear very soon about what the position of 

the government is. 

 

In the meantime, I again invite the Leader of the NDP to stand 

up and explain this inconsistency. Why in the world would he 

hector and lecture the province about buying local, have a 

special day for buying local — not a bad idea — and buy his 

political T-shirts from Providence, Rhode Island, Mr. Speaker? 

The bad news is they’re not buying local. The NDP leader 

won’t even buy his shirts locally. 

 

Here’s the good news: they’ve only sold four of them, Mr. 

Speaker. He’s only sold four of them. So he can . . . Because 

I’m sure there will be a spike in sales after we’ve done some 

promoting here today, now is the time for him to dump his 

Providence, Rhode Island supplier for his NDP leader T-shirts 

and switch to a good Saskatchewan supplier. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave for an 

introduction, please. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to introduce 

guests. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker, and colleagues for 

leave. In the west gallery, there is a group of 16 grade 11 and 12 

students from Campus Regina Public. Their teachers are 

accompanying them, are Mr. Scott Gardiner and Chris Hartman. 

I look forward to meeting with them in just a few minutes. 

Please welcome them. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Do you want me to start recognizing 

members, perhaps? 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 

general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 

proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 

Wotherspoon.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 

again I’m proud to resume the debate on the budget that we 

began yesterday where we spoke about the incredible debt that 

this government is leaving for the future generations. And, Mr. 

Speaker, this debt has been very, very well defined. We have a 

lot of information as to what these amounts will come to, and 

basically, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated, there’s debt in every 

page that the budget has been presented. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what we want to be able to say to the people 

of Saskatchewan is this: what would the NDP do differently, 

Mr. Speaker? What we would not do, Mr. Speaker, is we would 

not spend $40 million on an American-based consulting 

company to run our health care system. We would approach the 

front-line workers to ask for their advice as to how we can 

improve the health care system in the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What the NDP would not do, Mr. Speaker, during a time of 

record revenue, is put the province $1.5 billion more into debt. 

We would not do that, Mr. Speaker. We would find ways and 

means in which we would reduce the debt and, Mr. Speaker, do 

strategic investment and continue working and building for the 

future of our grandkids and our great-grandkids, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we would also not do, Mr. Speaker, what we would not 

do is we would not increase consultants used to work for the 

Government of Saskatchewan by 227 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve raised that issue before. We’ve asked, what are 

consultants being used for? No explanation. And yet the auditor 

noted that there is a 227 per cent increase in consultants used. 

We don’t know what the consultants are going to be used for. 



March 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6795 

And, Mr. Speaker, that’s why it’s important as a government 

that you do strategic yet very well-defined and very appreciated 

and certainly value for money, encourage a good, strong, 

energetic civil service that would be able to serve Saskatchewan 

for years and years to come, as opposed to consultants that 

nobody knows what their role is. 

 

What we would not do, Mr. Speaker, is give $5 million to a 

company that sold us defective meters. The smart meter fiasco, 

Mr. Speaker, has cost the government an incredible amount of 

money, and this is not what the Saskatchewan NDP would do, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, we wouldn’t be cancelling road projects 

in northern Saskatchewan. The Wollaston Lake road is one 

prime example, Mr. Speaker, where this government made an 

announcement, and they ripped the opportunity for Wollaston 

Lake to enjoy an all-weather road, Mr. Speaker. That’s what the 

Saskatchewan Party done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

What we wouldn’t do, Mr. Speaker, is we wouldn’t confuse the 

potash industry. We’d work very closely with them to make 

sure that they continued investing into Saskatchewan. And one 

need not look any further than the Alberta example under the 

former Premier Stelmach, when he talked about the royalty 

issues with oil and gas, Mr. Speaker. And what happened is 

they came en masse to Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, under our 

former Premier Calvert, and they basically invested in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

So you’ve got to be very, very careful when you begin to talk 

about the potash issue, Mr. Speaker. This is something that 

Saskatchewan cannot risk. It’s very, very important that you 

work very closely alongside of our investors, and certainly an 

industry as important as potash is one particular sector that you 

want to be very, very careful with. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, if we had record revenue, as the current 

Saskatchewan Party does, Mr. Speaker, Pleasant Hill School 

would not have asbestos in it. Today as we . . . [inaudible] . . . 

in the province of Saskatchewan that there is a school in 

Saskatoon that has asbestos in it, and the government has 

refused to move it, Mr. Speaker. In Saskatchewan, the NDP 

would not ask parents to dress their kids up when they go to 

school because in the middle of winter they’ve got to open the 

windows to let fresh air in because there’s air quality problems 

in that school. We would not ask parents to dress up their kids 

extra warm because we were forced to open the windows to 

ensure that there’s fresh air in the classroom, air that of course, 

if the air flow’s not improved, certainly creates a danger for the 

children. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what we would not do, Mr. Speaker, is we 

would not ask for more MLAs, [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] Mr. Speaker. That’s one of the most important 

things that I think people ought to know that the Saskatchewan 

Party is doing as well. They’re adding more money, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And what we also ought to know, Mr. Speaker, and people of 

Saskatchewan know this, that perhaps the greatest grain 

transportation crisis in the history of Saskatchewan — and let 

me re-emphasize that — the greatest grain transportation in the 

history of Saskatchewan has happened under the Conservative 

watch in Ottawa and certainly under the Saskatchewan Party 

watch in Saskatchewan. And they cannot, Mr. Speaker, they 

cannot deny that almost $5 billion of crop was left in farmers’ 

bins over the last number of years, Mr. Speaker, because guess 

what? The Conservatives couldn’t get it to market, Mr. Speaker. 

And this grain continues sitting in the bins, and it’s under their 

watch, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:00] 

 

So as you look at some of the examples, and I’ll point out other 

examples that I noticed, Mr. Speaker. As we look at the . . . As 

we toured, the member from Saskatoon and I toured, and we 

saw some of the family farms around Yorkton being flooded, 

Mr. Speaker. And we heard about the incredible waste of PDAP 

money, provincial disaster assistance program money, in which 

they didn’t do things properly, the government didn’t, and they 

continue seeing flooding around the Yorkton area, Mr. Speaker. 

And then we toured the Humboldt area, Mr. Speaker, where we 

seen family farms being threatened by water, Mr. Speaker, all 

throughout that area. And it’s a huge, huge problem. 

 

So whether it’s a grain transportation crisis, Mr. Speaker, or 

whether it’s meddling with the potash industry or whether not 

addressing the water challenges that rural Saskatchewan is 

having, never mind the whole notion of health care, Mr. 

Speaker, we saw how the Saskatchewan Party have totally 

turned their backs on key areas and key people that had 

entrusted them to do the right thing. And with record revenue, 

they couldn’t get the job done, Mr. Speaker, and that’s really 

the most important thing that I think people of Saskatchewan 

are beginning to realize. They’re beginning to realize that not 

only has this government forgotten their way, Mr. Speaker, they 

simply have not delivered. 

 

So it’s really, really important that we know that the people of 

Saskatchewan are speaking up, and I want to recognize a few of 

them before I close my comments. 

 

But before I go there, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a bit about 

northern Saskatchewan as a whole. One of the reasons that we 

don’t support the Saskatchewan Party in this budget, or any 

other budget as a northern representative, Mr. Speaker, is the 

fact that they have taken away so much opportunity in the 

North, and they refuse to recognize some of the challenges of 

northern Saskatchewan. 

 

Why is it important to continue investing in northern 

Saskatchewan? Because, as they indicated in their budget, 

they’re taking hundreds of millions of dollars out of northern 

resources, Mr. Speaker, every single year, and they make 

money off the North. What do northern people want? They 

want decent highways, and that government has not invested 

any money in highways in northern Saskatchewan. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, not only did they take money away from Wollaston 

Lake when the announcement was made, Mr. Speaker, they also 

ripped away $65 million that was slated for northern 

Saskatchewan to fix some of the community access roads in 

Cumberland House, Pelican Narrows, Patuanak, Turnor Lake, 

Dillon. The list goes on. 

 

This government took that money, and they left the North with 



6796 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2015 

no money for infrastructure and for highways, Mr. Speaker. 

That is their record. And yet they go ahead and take as many 

resources as they can out of the North, Mr. Speaker, and not 

putting anything back. And the northern people are saying one 

thing: if you want to take the resources out of the North, put 

something back for the people of the North to at least see that 

some of our resources being taken from our land, at least there’s 

some value in terms of having some of the benefit returned to 

us. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, the other thing I want to notice is the 

Minister of the Economy. The Minister of the Economy comes 

along and he comes to northern Saskatchewan and what does he 

do, Mr. Speaker? What does he do? He really, he really pulled a 

fast one on the northern Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 

And what did he do? The Minister of the Economy, he came to 

northern Saskatchewan and he ripped away the term supply 

licence for the northwest communities, Mr. Speaker. This is 

where a collection of northern communities had the opportunity 

to look at forest industry possibilities, and what happened was 

the Minister of the Economy, he come there and he took away 

the TSL [term supply licence] and he gave it to someone else. 

 

And I’ll say to the people of the La Ronge area, and the La 

Ronge Indian Band, they’re looking at your TSL as well. They 

want to come along and they want to rip away that opportunity 

that was afforded to the northern Saskatchewan people by 

taking more of their resources. 

 

So one of the points that I’ll raise as you begin to take away and 

strip away resource opportunity from northern Indian bands or 

from the northern Métis communities, you have to honour the 

Crown in all these discussions. Because when many of our First 

Nations signed some of these treaties, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t 

just the First Nations that signed, it was the Government of 

Canada, and the intent there was to share the opportunities. And 

we see none of that, absolutely none of that in this budget where 

they have completely ignored and they have completely 

forgotten the North, Mr. Speaker. This is what’s really 

important, and that’s the reason it’s really important for us to 

remind people of what they have taken out and not put back in. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they have not put in anything of any 

significance in the North, and that’s one of the reasons why we 

vote against this budget, Mr. Speaker. We vote because they 

have forgotten so much and they have taken out so much, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s why we will continue voting against the 

Sask Party budget.  

 

That’s why as northern people we will continue, we will 

continue to fight for northern Saskatchewan, and we will 

continue asking for our fair return on the resources being 

extracted by the Saskatchewan Party government. Because 

we’re not just your playground to come dig resources out, 

you’ve got to make strategic investments and you’ve got to get 

with the program. And that’s what’s really, really important 

when it comes to northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They’re 

taking away highways opportunities, Mr. Speaker, employment 

opportunities, resource sharing of things like forestry. They 

have taken that opportunity away from us. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the most telling example, the most telling 

example of the lack of commitment to northern Saskatchewan is 

when this government came along and they started kicking 

people out of their homes. They started kicking people out of 

their homes, and the reason they kicked these people out of 

their homes was because they got a job. That’s why they kicked 

people out of their homes. They cancelled the home ownership 

opportunity for people because they were making too much 

money, is what the minister said. Why didn’t they give them the 

integrity and opportunity to own their own home? That’s what 

this government did. 

 

So as you take away the TSL, you refuse to commit to northern 

opportunities, you kick people out of their homes, you take 

away any opportunity for ownership, the list goes on as to how 

this government has penalized Northern Saskatchewan. And 

that’s why we vote against their budget, and that’s why we vote 

against them all the time, Mr. Speaker. We’re here to fight and 

stand up for northern people. 

 

Now my final point I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, is I want 

to recognize a couple of champions, as I’ve said, very quickly. 

One of them is the Prairie Spirit School Division. They have 

stood up and they have challenged this government. They have 

said, you’re numbers do not jibe with our numbers. We are 

therefore putting on public notice the fact that the Prairie 

School Division is going to fight back. And I applaud their 

effort, Mr. Speaker, I applaud their effort. 

 

And I also applaud one particular SARM [Saskatchewan 

Association of Rural Municipalities] delegate who stood up at 

the SARM convention and said that it’s time that SARM stands 

up to the government because you don’t have two political 

masters. You’re there to represent the RMs [rural municipality]. 

And there is so much, so many things that the former president 

of SARM didn’t bring forward to the government, and then we 

find out over time, he’s now the Sask Party candidate. 

 

I also want to recognize that delegate that stood up at SARM 

and saying, this is not acceptable — you represent the RMs; 

you do not represent the political masters in Regina. And you 

see, Mr. Speaker, we saw that kind of manipulation on a regular 

basis. So I want to recognize those champions that stand up and 

speak out and say, enough, enough of this. And that’s why in 

northern Saskatchewan, the northern MLAs will continue 

fighting. We’ll continue voting against budgets that ignore us, 

that rip away opportunities, that force families from their home, 

and don’t have any vision nor plan for northern Saskatchewan 

and many other areas throughout the province. 

 

And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, that’s why I say today that the 

NDP will stand up, and we will provide better government than 

what we have seen from the current government, Mr. Speaker. 

We will rebuild our schools, Mr. Speaker. We will build the 

best health care system available. We’ll make sure we protect 

Saskatchewan’s business interests. We will encourage 

investment, if you want to see the economy continue to build, 

Mr. Speaker, and not falter under the so-called Saskatchewan 

Party, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why I stand up today. That’s 

why I stand up today. 

 

And I tell my colleagues, do not fear because what we’re seeing 

there is we’re seeing that the Saskatchewan Party government 

are messing it up. We ask them for the last several years . . . you 

have messed it up. And what I wouldn’t mind doing, Mr. 



March 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6797 

Speaker, in my closing comment is to tell people this: in the last 

eight or nine years, or eight years that the Saskatchewan Party 

government has been in charge, they’ve had almost $100 billion 

at their disposal. And I could almost guarantee, the first eight 

years that the NDP were in power, I would say we probably had 

maybe 30 billion in total, Mr. Speaker. I’m hazarding a guess. 

But these guys had, they’ve had three times the revenue and 

they still can’t get the job done. And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, 

we will always vote against them. We will always stand up like 

the good prairie school division, the Prairie Spirit School 

Division, like that delegate at SARM, like the many people that 

speak out. We will stand up with them and we will 

acknowledge the champions. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, once again we say to them, they lack vision. 

They lack the opportunity to really build for the future of 

Saskatchewan, and they’re putting us further into debt and 

penalizing a lot of people and not responding to some real 

serious provincial challenges that many people have. So on that 

note, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that I will not be 

supporting their budget. I will be voting against their budget, 

and with the amendment by my colleagues on this side of the 

Assembly. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As ever, 

glad to take my place in this Assembly and join debate on the 

matters in front of us, in this case the budget speech. 

 

As is the custom, Mr. Speaker, you don’t get here on your own, 

and certainly there are a lot of people that each and every one of 

us, as members in this Assembly, have to be thankful for in our 

lives. First and foremost, of course, the people of Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre that continue to place their trust in me. 

 

And it’s a humbling thing, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the work 

that the people set out for us, and that’s certainly true in my 

case, Mr. Speaker. In terms of the constituency of Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre, a tremendously diverse place, lots of great 

neighbourhoods that are almost their own little worlds unto 

themselves, Mr. Speaker. But in terms of the heritage 

community, in terms of North Central, in terms of Regent Park 

or the old Warehouse District or downtown or Cathedral or the 

different places that I have the privilege to represent in this 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of great people and a lot of 

great organizations that make a tremendous contribution to the 

well-being of those communities and to the collective overall, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

In terms of the staff that we have the privilege of working with, 

it’s you know, again there’s a lot of work that goes on behind 

the scenes, and certainly in the constituency office or the caucus 

office as the case may be, and so the folks that are working with 

us there, Mr. Speaker, again I want to publicly get on the record 

my thanks and appreciation for all the work that gets done in 

that regard. So thank you very much to folks like Tim and to the 

folks in the caucus office that help us each and every day. 

 

And also to family, Mr. Speaker. Certainly the McCalls were a 

ragtag bunch and we’ve had some additions to the family. 

We’ve had some folks that sadly have passed on in recent 

times, Mr. Speaker. Again though it’s that family that gives you 

so much and more than you could ever give back into it, Mr. 

Speaker. But I’m certainly blessed very much in terms of 

having that family support, that family guidance, and as I think 

about the opportunity of, you know, talking about the budget 

and the affairs of the day with my father who recently 

celebrated his 81st birthday, to be able to talk about the issues 

of the neighbourhood and the province over a great dish of 

pickerel that the member from Cumberland had brought back 

for us, it was a great occasion, Mr. Speaker. I get so much from 

that guidance but certainly through the McCall family as a 

whole. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of the budget, again I think all of us take 

a look at these things in terms of what it means first and 

foremost for the people of your particular constituency, what it 

means for your different critic areas, and what it means for the 

province as a whole, and certainly in terms of what this budget 

means for the people of Regina Elphinstone-Centre. I’d be 

frankly wrong if I didn’t say that there were some good things 

that are in this budget and that I’m glad to see moving forward 

on all of these particular points. But in terms of how this nets 

out, Mr. Speaker, I’m reminded of the old adage that even a 

broken watch can be right twice a day, Mr. Speaker. There’s 

still a lot of other terrain to cover as regards to this budget, and 

how this budget nets out is why I’ll be supporting the 

amendment and voting against this government. 

 

Now again in terms of the things that are good to see in this 

budget, I’m certainly glad to see the reannouncement for Sacred 

Heart Community School, one of the largest schools in Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre, and certainly we’re glad to see that 

proceeding as it should. But again, Mr. Speaker, I’m so thankful 

for the leadership of people like Principal Starla Grebinski who 

is coming up on retirement this year after decades of service in 

the education system. And you know, we all gain so much from 

our teachers, Mr. Speaker, and certainly she was my teacher in 

grade 3, way back when. She did the best she could with me, 

Mr. Speaker. So any of the good things we’ll credit to that, to 

teachers like Starla, but of course all the bad is my own to take 

responsibility for, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:15] 

 

But we’re glad to see Sacred Heart moving forward. Again 

tremendous community effort had to be brought to bear to get a 

response from this government when the gym was falling down 

and the scoreboard was falling off the wall of the gym and the 

lights were falling off the roof, Mr. Speaker, and the continued 

refusal on the part of this government to listen to the Catholic 

school board and how that was a critical infrastructure that 

needed support. So I’m thankful for the work of people like 

Father John Weckend out of the Saint Cecilia’s and Sacred 

Heart parish, and the parishioners that rallied around the cause. 

 

I’m thankful for the work of people like Elder Mike Pinay who 

does a lot of work with the kids at Sacred Heart and certainly 

weighed in on this and the need for the kids at Sacred Heart to 

get a first-class learning opportunity. And I’m thankful for the 

many, many people in the community that stood up and said, 

this is unfair. These kids deserve . . . They’re not second-class 

citizens. They deserve a first-class education opportunity like 

anyone else in the province. 

 



6798 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2015 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be interested to see of course how this 

plan rolls out, because of course, not a stone’s throw away you 

have Scott Collegiate, which in the summer of 2007 was ranked 

second on the province-wide capital list, and then was reiterated 

as a priority for this government in the 2008 budget. And 

certainly, Mr. Speaker, I was on record then and I’ve been on 

record in different junctures over the years in terms of saying 

that I was glad to see the government make that announcement 

and make that commitment. And then of course the years go by, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now the fences are up and they seem to be on the verge of 

finally turning the sod on a project that they announced in the 

2008 budget, seven years ago, seven budgets ago, Mr. Speaker. 

We’re interested . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And of course I 

hear one of the former Education ministers saying some things 

from her seat, and certainly it’s interesting that that was the 

minister that saw fit to come around the neighbourhood in 

advance of the 2011 election and make a big announcement 

recommitting to the project in the gym at Albert School. And 

then of course, you know, the announcement goes by, and the 

election goes by, and the slow-walking continues. So we’re 

looking forward very much to that sod being turned, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

But I think that people like Principal Shannon Fayant and 

Vice-Principal Chris Beingessner and all the folks at Scott and 

all the folks that have made commitments to the North Central 

Shared Facility that Scott Collegiate will be the centrepiece of 

. . . Mr. Speaker, I can hardly wait. And I know that that’s 

certainly the case for the students as well, who again richly 

deserve a first-class education opportunity and not to be 

slow-walked or to be dismissed or to have games played with 

their education. And I also think about the seven years of 

students that have gone through there that didn’t have that 

opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So we’ll see if the shovels go into the ground, and I’m sure that, 

you know, it was the . . . As we moved into the election season 

last time, it garnered an announcement. Hopefully this time it 

will garner some actual action, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think about the situation at the Pasqua Hospital, Mr. Speaker, 

again down Dewdney Avenue. My colleague, the member from 

Regina Rosemont, does a good job describing what heavy-haul 

traffic has done to Dewdney Avenue generally. And certainly, 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of the medical transports that roll into the 

Pasqua Hospital, I’m not sure what the precise protocol is for 

those folks, but I’m sure there’s something that goes on because 

Dewdney Avenue is something of a roller coaster in terms of 

the up and down bumps that you have to endure to get through 

to get to the ER [emergency room] there. 

 

Then when you get to the ER, the emergency room, Mr. 

Speaker, often as not the ER wait times are quite frankly a 

mess. And you see this, you see this, Mr. Speaker, if you’re on 

the ground and if you actually talk to the people that have to 

rely on these services. But you contrast that against the sort of 

self-congratulation and the back-patting that goes on with this 

government as regards their approach to health care. It’s again 

the hype is very different from the reality, and in terms of what 

we see in places like the ER at Pasqua Hospital, tells two very 

different stories. 

Again we’re glad to see some things in this budget when it 

comes to seniors. I’m glad to see the seniors’ income plan 

receive another increase. I’m glad to see that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’m also interested to see that again, as per an earlier budget, 

though they give on one hand, they’ve turned to the drug, the 

prescription drug plan for seniors, to take yet again. So in an 

earlier budget, Mr. Speaker, for every $1 they gave in the 

seniors’ income plan, they took 2 on the other hand from 

increasing the premium on the seniors’ drug plan. Now again in 

this particular round of giving on the one hand and taking on 

the other, they’ve kicked 6,000 seniors off the rolls for 

eligibility with the seniors’ drug plan. So again, behind the 

announcements that are made by this government in terms of all 

the good things, there’s the fine print, and you’ve always got to 

read the fine print with these people in terms of the budget, Mr. 

Speaker. So you know, good thing on the one hand; 

questionable thing on the other. 

 

Another thing that will impact seniors, and one thing that I’ve 

heard a lot from seniors about in recent days, Mr. Speaker — 

because of course there are different announcements this 

government made in the lead-up to the budget, to get some of 

that bad news over the side to not step on their great budget 

story — one of the things was the change to how Sask Housing 

is going to be operating on behalf of the people of the province, 

and the approach to affordable housing versus social housing, 

Mr. Speaker. And this has caused a great deal of turmoil for any 

number of seniors in the riding of Regina Elphinstone-Centre, 

and I know that’s the case for other ridings as well. And they 

don’t appreciate it in the slightest, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One other thing that’s interesting to see and we’ll be watching 

to see how this looks out, and again apropos of earlier budgets 

on the part of this government, they’ll talk about the importance 

of housing, but when it comes to the Saskatchewan Housing 

Corporation, the direct vehicle by which this government has an 

impact in the housing market, they’re clawing $5 million from 

its budget. And again, this isn’t the $8 million that was taken 

out of the Sask Housing budget of the first budget on the part of 

this government. But again it’s, you know, there’s good words 

on the one hand, and what are the actions on the other? 

 

When we see what’s being put together on the social services 

file generally in terms of . . . Again we’re glad to see the 

increase to the SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for 

disability]. Good to see that, Mr. Speaker, no question. But on 

the other hand it’s always interesting to follow the rhetoric of 

this government. They talk about increasing the amount of 

money that’s going to the social assistance program. And you 

know, there are folks that would look at that and say, oh does 

that mean that they’re going to increase the amount being 

forwarded to people that are on social assistance? Well no, 

that’s not the case. They’re increasing the overall budget 

because the welfare rolls have grown under this government. 

 

Or you see the cut to the Saskatchewan employment 

supplement where the $1 million there, you know, lines up 

interestingly alongside the three more MLAs that they’re 

bringing to bear, Mr. Speaker, that it’s something else in terms 

of again, what the priorities are of this government. 

 

You know, we’ve seen in Regina a 20-per-cent-plus increase on 



March 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6799 

the food bank utilization rates the year previous to this one. And 

one of the things that you’d think is that when they get around 

to announcing an anti-poverty announcement or strategy in the 

fall and that they’re going to proceed with that, you’d think that 

then they would at least have the good sense to make decisions 

that line up with that. But you don’t, Mr. Speaker. What you see 

instead is cuts to things like the employment supplement, again 

the very same people who are the working poor, who are trying 

to get ahead. But when it comes to this government giving a 

hand up, they’re getting a bit of a shove, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 

no wonder in that regard in terms of seniors, in terms of the 

working poor, in terms of new Canadians that are the growth 

markets in terms of that 20-per-cent-plus increase at the Regina 

Food Bank. So when it comes to the way this government is 

talking about things and the actions on the ground, two different 

things. 

 

And it’s like that in a lot of different cases, Mr. Speaker. We 

didn’t see any action on child care in this budget. We didn’t see 

enough of an effort around the fact that Saskatchewan leads the 

country in terms of abuse of women. We didn’t see the kind of 

action that’s needed to make sure that the utilities that keep on 

going up . . . We’ve seen this government rely on the fact that 

they’re going to be squeezing the Crowns yet again and passing 

that cost on to the people of Saskatchewan. We’ve seen the fact 

that education and the kind of budgets you need there to make 

sure that teachers are getting the support they need and students 

are getting the support they need, there is a lot of questionable 

parts in that part of the budget, least of which is the P3 

approach. And you see the . . . 

 

You know, again you see some good things. You see the adult 

basic education again being increased on the part of this 

government. But, Mr. Speaker, I think it would make better 

sense to fix the problem in the first place and support the 

primary and secondary education systems in this province so 

that you’re not just adding to the adult basic education supply 

— which is good; don’t get me wrong — but you’re making for 

a better chance of success in the first place. 

 

As regards some of the critic areas, Mr. Speaker, at the . . . Oh 

where to begin? Again some good things in this budget. Glad to 

see the additional dollars to institutions like SIIT 

[Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies] or Gabriel 

Dumont or the Dumont Technical. Glad to see that, Mr. 

Speaker. But in terms of the overall approach of this 

government and the need for increased engagement between 

First Nations and non-First Nations in this province, this 

government, on a lot of other fronts, is not carrying the ball, 

least of which my colleague from Athabasca was up talking 

about the duty of the Crown to engage. And we’ve seen, you 

know, a fair chunk of change ripped out of this budget yet again 

by this government when it comes to putting their money where 

their mouth is when it comes to engagement. 

 

In terms of the University of Regina alone, when it comes to 

that post-secondary capital budget, Mr. Speaker, we didn’t see 

any action on the College Avenue Campus. We didn’t see any. 

We didn’t get a lot of assurance around things like the 50-plus 

roofs that are leaking at the University of Regina as referenced 

by the president of the University of Regina in her state of the 

university address early in the year to the Regina Chamber of 

Commerce. 

We see the changes to the graduate retention program, Mr. 

Speaker, and again in terms of changing it in a way where they 

can take $33.5 million out of the program and then try to say 

with a straight face that everything is fine. It’s kind of 

breathtaking, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the way that this 

government can say that with a straight face after having 

campaigned on it and after having done ads about it and have 

to, you know, go in to students and their families and saying, 

here’s the deal. Well you know, Mr. Speaker, they’ve 

fundamentally changed the program. 

 

And this adds to a situation where again we’ve seen tuition, you 

know, for the last number of years under this government, 

increasing year in and year out. And when they first came into 

power, Mr. Speaker, they were in for the tuition freeze but no 

more. It’s sort of like we’re going to cut your budget but on the 

other hand, you know, we’ll let you charge whatever the 

students will bear. And then in terms of the students, we’ll 

change the graduate retention program, which was our deal with 

them, and extend that further into the future. Again, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s a broken promise on the part of this government, 

and they should know better. 

 

I think the sort of height of it was the . . . There’s a lot of other 

different topics to get into, Mr. Speaker, but the last one I’ll go 

with is what’s happened on the University of Saskatchewan 

campus where we’ve had no lesser light than Alex Usher weigh 

in, Alex Usher of course a well-recognized authority on 

post-secondary education issues, not just in Canada but around 

the world. But talking about how this government’s approach to 

budgeting is sort of like having the institutions be mugged by 

their own government and, in terms of the savings that were 

garnered through a wrenching process by the University of 

Saskatchewan, having those in turn wrenched back from the 

University of Saskatchewan. And again it’s sort of the no good 

deed goes unpunished school of public policy, Mr. Speaker, in 

terms of the university going out there, making some very tough 

decisions, and then in terms of what are the benefits of all those 

wrenching decisions, well the government’s there saying, well 

thank you very much; we’ll be taking that. 

 

[11:30] 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, in terms of what we see going forward 

with this government, it’s going to be, you know . . . Again the 

institutions have some very hard decisions to make as regards 

what’s going to happen with tuition and what’s going to happen 

with the services. And I believe that there will be increases on 

the one hand, Mr. Speaker, and cuts on the other, and either 

way, students are not being served by this government as they 

should be. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of different things in this budget 

that, you know, have been covered very well by my colleagues 

on this side. You talk about what’s happened with the rainy day 

fund being drained, the way that, you know, $700 million in 

borrowing is being characterized as a balance. There’s some of 

the stuff that makes you think it’s like a tribute album to George 

Orwell, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the way that they keep huffing 

and puffing and saying, oh up is down, down is up, black is 

white and on we go. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the balanced budget and the 



6800 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2015 

purported balanced budget on the part of this government, and 

again in a time of record revenues, the way that this government 

has not saved a penny for the go-forward, Mr. Speaker, it’s a 

sad state of affairs in terms of the many blessings that have 

been bestowed on the people of Saskatchewan in this province. 

 

So how this goes forward, Mr. Speaker, we’ll see. Historically 

there have been some budgets at critical junctures in the history 

of this Assembly where there was one thing presented in a 

budget before an election and then it turned out to be something 

very different after. And I’m sure that they’ve got some ideas 

about what budgets those might be, but I think of the 1986-87 

budget that was presented by Gary Lane, back when a number 

of the leading lights on that side were tiny Tories toiling away 

in the ministerial offices of the Grant Devine Progressive 

Conservative government. And in terms of the budget that was 

presented and the way that that kicked the can down the road 

into a place where, in ’91-92, Mr. Speaker, the then Roy 

Romanow NDP government had to spend more on servicing the 

debt racked up by those individuals than they spent on 

education in its entirety. 

 

When they were running around with the old credit card, Mr. 

Speaker, there was a debt that came due, and the problem is, it 

wasn’t those individuals that had to pay it. It was the people of 

the province. 

 

So we’ll see how the fine hype job that’s done on this budget 

stacks up over the long haul. What we’ve seen around the 

accountability approach, the fact that they couldn’t get the third 

quarter numbers out and had to provide them in a big old 

information dump on the morning of the budget, I think that 

speaks about where this government’s going to be going with 

this particular set of numbers, Mr. Speaker. But for those 

reasons and for many more, I’m going to be supporting the 

amendment, and I won’t be supporting the budget. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

this morning to join into the discussion that’s been going on in 

this Assembly over the past days since the Finance minister has 

delivered the budget here to the province and in this Legislative 

Chamber. And I’m pleased, Mr. Speaker, to be able to add my 

thoughts and many of my concerns around this budget, 

following on the heels of my colleagues in the official 

opposition who have also expressed their views and their 

concerns about this budget. 

 

And you know, I have to say to the members on this side of the 

House, Mr. Speaker, how I’ve appreciated their focus, their 

attention, the remarks that they have made about the priorities 

that their constituents have, and not just their own constituents 

but the province as a whole, Mr. Speaker, as we are listening to 

the people in the province, bringing forward concerns and 

bringing forward good suggestions as to what should also be 

taking place, or should be taking place instead of the actions 

that we’ve seen. So I’ve enjoyed listening to their remarks, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I have to say I’ve also been quite surprised with the 

approach and the tone and the tenor that we’ve seen from 

government members through the course of this debate, through 

the course of this discussion. But you know, I think, Mr. 

Speaker, the tone which we have seen which is . . . I’ve seen a 

lot of anger, a lot of frustration. I’ve seen a lot of focus, Mr. 

Speaker, on politics as opposed to the priorities that the 

Saskatchewan people have. But I think in some ways that it is 

perhaps a default position that they have when they know that 

the product that they’re talking about, the decision that they’re 

talking about, the budget that they’re talking about, doesn’t in 

fact align and meet up with what the priorities are for 

Saskatchewan people and truly what the needs are for 

Saskatchewan people. So I’ve certainly had some concerns as 

I’ve listened to the remarks that the members on the 

government side have said. 

 

But I will assure you, Mr. Speaker, that on the opposition side 

we will stay focused on the priorities of the people of the 

province of Saskatchewan and be sure to call this government 

to account when the decisions that they’re making are missing 

the mark and the decisions that they’re making are not in the 

best interests of Saskatchewan people. And I’ll be getting into 

those comments further on into my remarks. 

 

Before I get into details around the budget discussion, I do want 

to offer a few words to different folks. Any of us in politics 

here, Mr. Speaker, we require a lot of support from a lot of 

people in order to do what we do. And I want to say thank you 

first of all to my caucus, to my colleagues for the co-operation, 

for the dedication, and for the diligent job that they do. I want to 

say thank you also to all the people that help us as MLAs, Mr. 

Speaker. And I think of our constituency assistants in our 

offices, the staff here in our caucus office, and those in party 

office as well. 

 

And I want to say thank you too, Mr. Speaker, to all of the staff 

of the Legislative Assembly. You know, sometimes we maybe 

take it a bit for granted that the cafeteria is operating and the 

building is clean and looking as great as it does, that all the 

support and all the background stuff just gets done. That’s only 

because and through the hard work of many dedicated staff who 

have devoted their careers to the Legislative Assembly, but 

more importantly devoted their careers to ensuring that 

democracy can take place and is alive and well in the province. 

 

I also, Mr. Speaker, want to say thank you to my constituents. 

And I know every MLA, I would hope, you know, appreciates 

their constituents and the feedback and the content and the 

advice that is given. And I want to say a special thank you to 

the people of Saskatoon Massey Place constituency for their 

support. And whether it’s interactions at the new rink the 

volunteers just built in Massey Place neighbourhood or whether 

it’s down in Hampton Village and Dundonald neighbourhoods 

or whether it’s on the other end of the constituency in Mayfair 

and Caswell, thank you so much for your support and for giving 

me the honour of working as your MLA. I truly do appreciate it. 

 

And all of us, Mr. Speaker, are — at least I would hope all of 

us, and I certainly am — grateful for the role of our families 

and our loved ones. And I want to say a special thank you to 

Ruth who, when I’m gone, does a fantastic job parenting our 

three girls, Ingrid, Clara, and Gudrun. I miss you very much and 

look forward to seeing you soon. 

 



March 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6801 

And I do want to say also a thank you to my Grandma Ferne, 

Mr. Speaker, in Outlook, Saskatchewan. And I know when the 

legislative sitting is on, Grandma always has the TV on. And so 

she doesn’t just watch members on this side. She watches 

everyone, Mr. Speaker, because the legislature channel is on 

loop. And I know she has good discussions down at mealtime 

as she’s enjoying her life there in the good community of 

Outlook, Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I think of this budget, I think of the many 

people who have come here to the legislature over the past 

weeks. And on day after day, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard stories 

from Saskatchewan people who have built up the courage, who 

have the conviction and the determination to share their stories, 

to voice their concerns, to talk about their ideas, and to share 

that with us as legislators here in this Assembly, and to share 

that with the broader public, Mr. Speaker. And I want to say 

thank you for all of those people who have come to the 

legislature. 

 

You know in a democracy, it’s so very important to have those 

freedoms: you know, the freedom of assembly, the freedom of 

expression, the assurance that we can be safe as we’re doing 

that and can be protected, Mr. Speaker. And I want to thank 

those people for their willingness to do that. We should never 

take that for granted and we should never minimize the ability 

to do that and the importance of that. 

 

You know, from the very first day of the sitting, I think of the 

70-some folks who came from the community of Craik, who 

came with a rally in front of the legislature to share their 

concerns, to share their concerns of what they see as an erosion 

of health care in their community. And it wasn’t just folks from 

Craik. There were people from Central Butte and from 

Coronach as well. And what I found interesting, Mr. Speaker, 

was that this really was a real snapshot of the community and it 

was a large percentage of the community. And it was people 

from all different walks of life and it was people from all 

different political stripes as well. 

 

I know in speaking with them, a great, great number of them 

talked to me about how they had supported the government in 

the past election. Some talked about being Liberals once upon a 

time, some talked about how they were still Progressive 

Conservatives or had been at one time, and some of them talked 

about being New Democrats as well, Mr. Speaker. But it was a 

snapshot of the community who came to the legislature because 

they had a concern. And they have a real frustration with this 

government on the decisions being made and what the 

implications will be for their community when it comes to 

health care that they’ve had for 100 years in the community. 

And I commend them for coming forward, and I want them to 

know that we will continue to fight so that they are heard and so 

that the right decisions are made for that community. 

 

I think of the parents who came here from the community of 

Esterhazy, who travelled here with concerns about the quality 

of their school building, talking about air quality, Mr. Speaker, 

that is far from acceptable as it’s being monitored and as the 

levels show, concerned about the ability for the kids to be safe 

and the ability of their kids to have the best learning 

environment possible so that they can be healthy, so that they 

can do well in school, so that they can advance. 

I think of Tony Kot’s mom, who came to the legislature. Tony’s 

34 years old. His neurosurgeon said that he required emergency 

surgery, Mr. Speaker, and it was difficult to hear his mother talk 

about his plight and how, because of a lack of space, because of 

a lack of beds for him, how that emergency surgery was being 

delayed and the pain and the agony that he was experiencing as 

a dad and as someone who wants to get better, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think of Dave Carr and Sara Bucsis-Gunn, who brought 

forward their awful stories of massive ambulance bills. 

Listening to Dave talk about his wife, who has passed away, 

talk about the huge interest charges that were being applied to 

these bills, how with minimum payments and the schedule that 

had been worked out, he was just falling further and further 

behind. 

 

The huge disconnect. I remember the remarks from Sara talking 

about when their little daughter was in the car turning blue, how 

they were having to think about whether or not they could 

afford this medical, this ambulance bill, whether they should 

call an ambulance or whether they should hop in the vehicle and 

drive as fast as possible. And how when she passed away, Mr. 

Speaker, their daughter Leandra, how there were still huge bills 

that had to be paid for that basic medical service. 

 

I think of Gail and Jim Sack, who spoke about the hyperbaric 

chamber because of the benefit that it had when they had carbon 

monoxide poisoning and how that helped save their lives and 

helped them recover. And we talked about that more again 

today in the Assembly. 

 

I think of the 88-year-old gentleman, Sorn Kear, who had that 

nightmare experience at RUH [Royal University Hospital] in 

the emergency room, how he was put in a temporary area 

behind a curtain, taken away. And when he was brought back 

that space was occupied and he was left in front of the 

admissions desk in his gown, in pain, nauseous, very 

embarrassed, Mr. Speaker, for hours. 

 

I think of the families of Kay Shumaker, Elizabeth Martens, and 

Ray Cherpin, who travelled to the Legislature from the city of 

Swift Current to express big concerns about the quality of 

seniors’ care that their families were experiencing, talking about 

how they have compliments for the staff for the hard work and 

the good work that they’re doing, but simply the reality of 

short-staffing and what that means for their loved ones, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I think of the story that we heard from Earl Luhr’s family, who 

without a diagnosis, Mr. Speaker, as the family says, was put 

into a converted storage closet, Mr. Speaker, and to have the 

government call into question this story of what the family is 

saying, of what the family is saying. And the Premier is 

heckling now, calling into question the story that a family 

would come forward, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so often we have seen this dismissive approach by this 

government, and it is so sad. And I know when family members 

come forward, Mr. Speaker, to have a dismissive approach by 

this government, to have an approach . . . and then the Health 

minister raises questions about the validity of this story. When a 

family comes forward, Mr. Speaker, and tells their story, we 

shouldn’t have an approach where a government dismisses 



6802 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2015 

them. We shouldn’t have an approach where the government’s 

willing to throw them under the bus, Mr. Speaker, with their 

story. It takes courage for a family to come forward and share a 

very painful story, especially when someone dies. And to do 

that, Mr. Speaker, sadly it’s become normal that we’ve seen 

from this government’s approach to families. 

 

We think of Lois Rein’s family, how they spoke out about 

seniors’ care getting worse. And today, Mr. Speaker, is Lois’s 

funeral. We think about the pain that their family has 

experienced, through the awful fall that she had, the broken 

femur that she endured, how she was on the floor, Mr. Speaker, 

for hours. It’s hard to exactly say how long she was on the 

floor, but we know it was a considerable amount of time, and to 

not having an ambulance called until 2:30 in the afternoon. 

 

[11:45] 

 

And then I think of Donna’s story today that we talked about in 

the legislature, Mr. Speaker, that Donna shared with us: how 

Donna valiantly and bravely fought cancer and beat it, but how 

the treatment took a toll on her body. And there’s concerns with 

her oral health, with her mouth, and how her dentist said that 

she could count on the hyperbaric chamber, Mr. Speaker, when 

she needed it, and how alarmed and concerned she was that this 

government would take that service away, that this government 

would provide no plan for that service. 

 

And we saw the evidence of no plan whatsoever today in the 

remarks by this government with the Premier saying, well it 

could be in the hospital. That’s contrary to everything that the 

Health minister has said, what health region officials have said, 

what Ministry of Health officials have said. And to me it just 

demonstrates how on this issue, they’re making it up as they go 

along, Mr. Speaker, on the back of a napkin. 

 

Well I say families and patients in Saskatchewan like Donna 

deserve a lot more than that, Mr. Speaker. Government 

members may not like that, but that is the reality. To take away 

a service that has been raised, that has been provided through 

donations of the good people of this province; during years of 

record prosperity, to build a hospital that is smaller than the 

previous and punt that important service out of it is not only 

short-sighted, Mr. Speaker, but it is rightfully offensive to those 

who raised the funds to provide that service and the health 

professionals who have been delivering it for so long. 

 

And that’s that same sentiment that I’ve heard from 

Saskatchewan people time and time again throughout this 

province, that after years and years of record revenues we 

haven’t seen the improvements to health care, to seniors’ care, 

and to education that should have been there. We haven’t seen 

those improvements to those areas, Mr. Speaker, the areas that 

families have every right to count on and have every right to 

expect, especially during the years of record revenues that this 

government has had — billions and billions of dollars more 

every year. And we haven’t seen that, Mr. Speaker. We haven’t 

seen that approach because of the misplaced priorities that 

we’ve seen from this government. 

 

You know, with that kind of money that they’ve been raking in, 

we should have some of the very best schools in the country. 

Instead, we see classes that are under-resourced, that are 

overcrowded. We see children not getting, students not getting 

the necessary one-on-one attention that they need; not enough 

educational assistants, Mr. Speaker, to support teachers; not 

enough professionals to provide services. And instead what we 

see from this government is a costly and a reckless approach 

that they are pushing on the people of the province for a 

privatized rent-a-school scheme, Mr. Speaker, that will cost 

more in the long run and will not be in the best interests of 

Saskatchewan students. 

 

With the kind of money that this government has raked in, we 

should have some of the best health care and the best seniors’ 

care in the country. Instead, Mr. Speaker, we hear stories like 

Sorn’s. 

 

And the member from Moose Jaw, the member from Moose 

Jaw North is heckling, Mr. Speaker. You would think the 

member from Moose Jaw, instead of directing his energy into 

heckling, Mr. Speaker, he would direct his energy to talking to 

the Minister of Health or the Premier, Mr. Speaker, to say 

Moose Jaw should have a hyperbaric chamber. You think he 

would go to bat for the people in his community. 

 

But this is the thing, Mr. Speaker, that we see from this 

government. They get angry. They’re more intent on petty 

politics. They’re more intent, Mr. Speaker, in creating an 

atmosphere, a tone in this House that doesn’t support 

democracy. It doesn’t encourage people to be involved because 

that’s their game plan, Mr. Speaker. And when faced with a 

budget that isn’t good for Saskatchewan people, that isn’t 

focused on the right priorities, Mr. Speaker, instead we see 

heckling, and we see dismissing the good Saskatchewan people 

who come forward to this legislature. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard again today from nurses who share 

their concerns about how the quality of care and how patient 

care is not improving, Mr. Speaker. Most nurses say there’s 

been no improvements whatsoever, and many nurses say that 

the quality of care and patient safety is actually getting worse. 

 

We think also, Mr. Speaker, of the seniors’ care crisis and how 

this government’s approach and, again, their dismissive attitude 

towards it has caused many problems for Saskatchewan seniors 

— people who deserve respect, who deserve dignity. You 

know, we see suffering because of short-staffing. And we also 

see, Mr. Speaker, the effects of this government having 

removed the minimum care standards that were in place. You 

know, what they should have done, Mr. Speaker, was to 

strengthen those standards as opposed to deleting them. That 

would have gone a distance in helping seniors in our province. 

 

As the member just before me spoke about, Mr. Speaker, we 

see challenges for many students in the post-secondary sector. 

We see everything going up for them, from utilities . . . We see 

tuition going up. We see costs going up, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And now we have, again, the second Health minister heckling 

from his seat, Mr. Speaker, the individual who represents rural 

Saskatchewan but is satisfied, Mr. Speaker, is content, Mr. 

Speaker, in having people in rural Saskatchewan pay more for 

ambulance fees. Happy to shovel millions out the door for John 

Black, but unwilling to reduce ambulance fees for people in 

rural Saskatchewan. 



March 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6803 

Mr. Speaker, we see this government who has inherited a 

fortune, has had an economic boom, and raked in billions and 

billions more every single year, and it sure spent a lot of money, 

Mr. Speaker. In fact we know it spent every last penny. It’s 

drained the rainy day fund, and it’s added billions of dollars of 

debt, 1.5 billion of new debt this year alone. 

 

Now the Premier argues and he’s made this argument recently, 

Mr. Speaker, and . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Someone just 

said, it’s not debt. I think it was the Minister for Post-Secondary 

Education, I believe. I don’t know which minister said it, but 

they said it’s not debt. Mr. Speaker, when you’re borrowing 

money to balance your books, you’re putting that burden on the 

people of Saskatchewan, not now but for future generations. 

And that’s what we see the legacy of this Finance minister. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier argues, well you know, that there’s 

this one credit card that we made some payments on, but on this 

other credit card, Mr. Speaker, and he says, well this is the 

credit card that was maxed out in the ’80s, Mr. Speaker. But 

this Sask Party government has been racking up debt on the 

other credit cards. 

 

You know, no family in Saskatchewan takes the approach 

where they’ve said, you know, we’ve made a few payments on 

our MasterCard, but they’ve racked up a ton of debt on their 

Visa. They’ve taken on a bigger mortgage. They’ve taken on a 

new truck payment. And then overall they pretend, Mr. 

Speaker, that they’ve reduced debt. That doesn’t pass the smell 

test with Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, and it ought not to 

pass the smell test with this government’s approach to our 

finances in the province. The truth is debt is going up. Make no 

mistake about it. 

 

You know, but despite spending every penny that’s come in, 

Mr. Speaker, as fast as it’s rolled in, despite that, Saskatchewan 

people have not been feeling the benefits. Because so much of 

that money, Mr. Speaker, has been spent on things that don’t 

really matter for Saskatchewan people. 

 

You know with that kind of money, Saskatchewan can afford to 

fix seniors’ care. They can afford to make proper improvements 

in our schools. And they can afford to make proper 

improvements in health care. They can afford, Mr. Speaker, to 

make life better for vulnerable people in this province. 

 

I think of Jerry Peequaquat in Saskatoon who froze to death in 

Saskatoon on a cold winter night in Saskatchewan. He could 

have benefited, Mr. Speaker, from proper wraparound supports. 

Again, Mr. Speaker, a reminder to all of us of how the 

vulnerable need support and how everyday families need 

support, Mr. Speaker. But the government isn’t doing this. 

What they’re asking, what they’re proposing in this budget, Mr. 

Speaker, is that families pay more and they get less. And it’s 

this government, Mr. Speaker, as I said, that is putting a ton of 

debt into the backpacks of our children and their grandchildren. 

And that is shameful. 

 

We see massive debt increases, and that will be the legacy, Mr. 

Speaker, of this Finance minister. And we see neglect of what 

really matters; that will be the Sask Party’s legacy. 

Saskatchewan people, the hard-working, the committed, the 

caring people of this province, Mr. Speaker, deserve a 

government that invests in their priorities, a government that 

works to ensure that our province’s prosperity is there to deliver 

opportunities for young people, affordability for families, and 

security and dignity for our seniors and our elders. 

 

Instead, Mr. Speaker, what we get from this government day 

after day is one that believes its own spin, one that dismisses 

major concerns as they come forward. We see it lived out in the 

examples of families who come forward and we see it lived out 

in their approach to the concerns that are raised forward on the 

floor of this Assembly. And we see this most glaringly, Mr. 

Speaker, in health care, in seniors’ care, in education. 

 

And we know many other areas have been left out as well. We 

think of agricultural producers, Mr. Speaker, about the huge 

concerns around grain transportation, the huge concerns . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Again, again they’re mocking, Mr. 

Speaker. No, what we’re focused on are the priorities of 

Saskatchewan people. The Premier, the Deputy Premier, they 

point, Mr. Speaker, they heckle, Mr. Speaker. Instead of that, 

how about some solutions for the grain transportation crisis for 

producers here in the province? And the Premier laughs. The 

Premier, the member from Estevan, the member from 

Martensville, they laugh, Mr. Speaker, at the same time as 

producers come here to the Assembly, as producers come here 

to the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, to talk about how there isn’t a 

solution, who express concern about what the federal 

government isn’t doing and lament the fact that this government 

has not done what it should be doing and working with the feds 

to have real solutions and real consequences for grain 

transportation companies, Mr. Speaker, that are not meeting the 

needs of producers here in the province. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, also of the many business owners in the 

province. I think of many whom I’ve met, Mr. Speaker, and 

I’ve heard their concerns about how this government has a 

failed policy when it comes to procurement, and this is a fact, 

Mr. Speaker. Again this government makes light of it. This 

government pretends that it’s a small matter. Well it’s not a 

small matter, Mr. Speaker, for those businesses in 

Saskatchewan, for those businesses in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, that have had to give out pink slips to workers, those 

businesses in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, who have expressed 

to me — and I know expressed to many members on the 

government side as well — their huge frustration to have big 

projects, Mr. Speaker, given to out-of-province corporations, 

Mr. Speaker, out-of-country corporations, Mr. Speaker, and 

have been hurting the Saskatchewan businesses that are 

committed here, the Saskatchewan businesses that employ 

workers and, Mr. Speaker, who pay mortgages, who pay taxes 

at the municipal level, Mr. Speaker. That’s the concern. And 

this government’s approach of simply looking at lowest initial 

price really is not getting the best value for Saskatchewan 

taxpayers — not looking at the quality of the product, not 

looking at the track record, the delivery schedule, the warranty, 

Mr. Speaker, looking at all those factors, let alone looking at a 

consideration for a local net benefit. And so I think it’s 

concerning to many in the province to see this government 

minimize this concern for the Saskatchewan economy. 

 

I think of residents, Mr. Speaker, in northern Saskatchewan 

who are shut out once again, who are missing a huge 

opportunity with the bad roads that they must endure, a failure 



6804 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2015 

to invest in education, and a cost of living, Mr. Speaker, that 

makes it harder and harder for the day to life reality that they 

face. I think of the report, Mr. Speaker, that the provincial 

chamber put out with respect to the opportunities that this 

government is ignoring when it comes to northern 

Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, I think about the fact that they imposed a so-called 

essential travel policy, Mr. Speaker, while at the same time they 

were happy to send people down to LA [Los Angeles], down to 

the States for different things, but they couldn’t attend, Mr. 

Speaker, they couldn’t attend an important meeting of 

private-public health sector in the Far North, Mr. Speaker, to 

hear what the concerns are and be part of it. They said that 

wasn’t essential. A real example again, Mr. Speaker, of the 

misplaced priorities and the lack of concern for such an 

important part of our province. 

 

I think of the university students, Mr. Speaker — high tuition, 

program cuts. But this government doesn’t seem to care. In fact, 

and we know, Mr. Speaker, this government broke its promise 

with the changes that it’s implemented now or is in the process 

of implementing with the graduate retention program, while at 

the same time satisfied to have students paying among the 

highest tuitions in the country . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Not true; they dispute Statistics Canada, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 

a standard game plan and approach that we see with this 

government. But I think, Mr. Speaker, of the example that was 

raised by the member from Elphinstone-Centre, talking about 

the amount that a single mother, a recent graduate, Mr. Speaker, 

would have to make to benefit from this program. Over $54,000 

I believe was the amount, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think of those families, I think of those 

individuals working to put their families ahead. And that’s who 

this government should be thinking about when it’s making 

these decisions. I think of low-income working families — they 

should be able to count on a bit of help from this government — 

who have had the Saskatchewan employment supplement cut 

back. And I think of the many families, Mr. Speaker, I think of 

the many families . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And now we 

have the lone voice, Mr. Speaker, here from Prince Albert also 

chirping in, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Think of the people, Mr. Speaker, you know, instead of 

thumping her desk, Mr. Speaker. Instead of thumping her desk, 

Mr. Speaker, you’d think she would voice some concern when 

this government plows ahead with a housing project, Mr. 

Speaker, that totally cuts out Prince Albert businesses and the 

community. That would be showing some leadership, Mr. 

Speaker. You’d think that member would speak up in the face 

of this government’s decision to eliminate good jobs in that 

community. And you know, Mr. Speaker, when they don’t like 

what’s being said, they yell; they bellow; they holler. That’s 

what they do, Mr. Speaker. But that will not prevent us from 

standing up for people throughout the province, whether it’s 

Prince Albert, Regina, Saskatoon, or Moose Jaw. 

 

[12:00] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think of those who need mental health services 

and how they’re being horribly let down by this government in 

this budget. And I think, Mr. Speaker, of this government’s 

approach to the environment. Once again, Mr. Speaker, it 

seemed like the environment had a major target on it with 

respect to their cuts. Over the last several years, this 

government has cut funding for green programs by more than 

85 per cent. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people deserve better 

than that. Saskatchewan people deserve a government that is 

focused on their priorities, not their misplaced priorities. 

 

Here are a few things, Mr. Speaker, that this government, that 

this Finance minister should have cut in the budget. They 

should have cut their obsession with this lean pet project that 

they’ve been going on and forcing on the province now for 

years including, Mr. Speaker . . . They say it’s over in a week. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, John Black may not show up in the flesh but 

the bills will be rolling in here for a long time going forward. 

That is clear. I’m curious if the Finance minister will be going 

to the John Black tea party later on this week. I don’t know, Mr. 

Speaker, but we know they have such great affection for this 

individual. Mr. Speaker, they should have gotten rid of the lean 

specialists that they have employed and created throughout the 

province. Mr. Speaker, we know that these kaizen operation 

teams are far more consumed with the communications efforts 

of this government as opposed to doing what’s best for 

Saskatchewan patients. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we see this government with bloated health care 

administration. You know, I think of the many conversations 

I’ve had with front-line workers who’ve said, you know, when 

people have been added, it’s someone who sits behind the glass, 

someone at a computer; it’s someone following me with a 

stopwatch. It’s not someone, Mr. Speaker, that can help me do 

my job and provide proper patient care to Saskatchewan 

residents, and that is a shame. 

 

You know, this government should have cut its spending on 

private consultants. They’ve increased the use of private 

consultants by 228 per cent. We see the tab now, Mr. Speaker, 

at $120 million and even though, Mr. Speaker, the independent 

Provincial Auditor points out that in 70 per cent of the instances 

there is no paper trail. There is no written explanation as to why 

these consultants are hired or what they’re doing. That is 

somewhere where they should have cut and they should 

certainly be providing more transparency. 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s $3 million contract with 

an American lobbyist, that would have been a place to cut, Mr. 

Speaker. The parties, the Oscar Hollywood events, Mr. Speaker. 

How they’ll shortchange artists here in the province but then go 

down to Oscar events in LA makes no sense, especially at a 

time when they’ll ignore an important meeting going on 

somewhere here in the province that could actually bring 

benefits to Saskatchewan people. 

 

I think of the $5 million research gift given to the American 

manufacturer of the failed and dangerous smart meters program 

that they’ve had. That should have been cut, Mr. Speaker. I 

think of the $18 million of Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money 

that’s currently held by the American manufacturer as part of a 

future purchase agreement, Mr. Speaker. They weren’t only 

content to give them a beautiful Christmas present for the 

so-called development of a meter that wasn’t a dud. They’re 

also content, Mr. Speaker, to have a huge amount of resources 

tied up in this American firm. I think of their ridiculously 



March 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6805 

expensive P3 rent-a-school approach which will cost more, will 

take longer, Mr. Speaker, and not bring the result and not bring 

the type of schools that we need here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we as a province could and should be doing so 

much better. You know, after a decade of resource wealth, we 

should have some of the best schools in the country. We should 

be covering ambulance costs, Mr. Speaker, rather than having 

the highest ambulance fees in the country. We should have 

excellent, well-staffed seniors’ care, seniors’ homes, Mr. 

Speaker, that bring dignity, safety, and respect, Mr. Speaker. 

We should have a futures fund instead of spending every penny 

as fast as it came in, Mr. Speaker. We should have seen some 

proper leadership. Instead we see a report commissioned; we 

see the inches of dust that it has collected. And we see, Mr. 

Speaker, that we should have policies in place that support 

Saskatchewan businesses, policies in place that support the 

Saskatchewan economy, that support jobs and allow 

entrepreneurs to do well, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Instead we see a government, we see a government with a track 

record and an approach, with a path and a trajectory of high 

spending but with low returns for Saskatchewan families, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s what we have seen with this government. And 

this budget, this budget, Mr. Speaker, is all about misplaced 

priorities instead of focusing on what really matters for 

Saskatchewan people. You know, it can’t just be about, Mr. 

Speaker, the province doing well. It must absolutely be about 

people doing well, and that is our focus on this side. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting this budget. Instead I 

will support the amendment that has been brought forward by 

the deputy leader, the member for Regina Rosemont, and 

seconded by the member of Nutana: 

 

That all the words after “that the Assembly” be deleted 

and the following be added: 

 

disagrees with the government for tabling a budget that 

increases spending to a record level but is full of waste and 

fails to deliver opportunities for young people, fairness 

and affordability for families, and dignity and security for 

seniors. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 

appreciate the chance to participate in the budget debate. I 

appreciate the opportunity to follow the Leader of the 

Opposition because it’s very important that whoever follows the 

Leader of the Opposition correct the record. It’s very important 

that whoever follows the Leader of the Opposition do a bit of a 

fact check and do a bit of cleanup, Mr. Speaker, and I hope to 

be able to do that. That is actually the definition and the purpose 

of debate so, throughout the speech, I’ll do that. 

 

But I think it’s also important to highlight when there might be 

areas of inconsistency in any of our arguments, including 

members opposite. You know, throughout his speech I heard 

the Leader of the Opposition pick on members who might have 

been talking from their chairs, and decry it and deride it as bad 

behaviour, Mr. Speaker. Just earlier today in question period, 

who was heckling from their chairs after questions their side 

asked? The Leader of the Opposition. Of course he participates 

in this thing and, you know, I think it passes just a little bit 

strange for Saskatchewan people to hear the Leader of the 

Opposition chastise, hector others in this House, probably those 

on his own side too in caucus, to adhere to some sort of 

standard that he himself does not meet, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This standard should also apply to facts presented in the House, 

facts presented in the Legislative Assembly where, by 

parliamentary rule, we are not allowed perhaps to characterize 

certain statements as we would otherwise. In this place 

therefore, it’s very, very important that we rely on the 

information that’s been brought forward by members. And I’m 

going to get into the perfunctories of the speech earlier on but, 

Mr. Speaker, there’s a couple of them in particular I’d like to 

raise here with respect to members and the particular debate 

we’ve just had, including his canvassing of an important issue, 

health care issue, that was brought forward with respect to 

somebody that was in what he characterized as a closet in the 

health care system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member will know, because we’ve corrected 

him, the Minister of Health corrected him on the record that this 

room that he has characterized still today as a closet, still said it 

today, Mr. Speaker, was a storage room, became a storage room 

under their watch when they were in government, in that 

hospital. What it was previous to that was a hospital room, Mr. 

Speaker. We are now in the process of cleaning up a lot of 

health care messes left behind by the member for Lakeview, left 

behind by the Leader of the Opposition’s party. One of them is 

to take hospital rooms and beds they’ve closed and reopen 

them, reopen them, including this particular room that he 

characterized as a closet. And we’re not critical of this family 

that went through a tragedy at all. It’s up to him, before he 

presents the facts in this House, to dig down and ask the 

questions. 

 

I’m in a moment going to go through a long list of 

budget-related comments made by that member, made by his 

colleagues, that are just wrong. They took information in the 

budget; they put out a press release that was just fundamentally 

wrong. 

 

I would provide some counsel to the members opposite. I know 

they want to increase their number in the next election. One day 

they’d like to form the government. At the core of that 

aspiration will need to be on their part, at the core of that 

aspiration will need to be on their part to earn the trust of 

Saskatchewan people. And in order to earn their trust, you can’t 

play fast and loose with the facts. You can’t put out press 

releases before they’re researched. You can’t make claims 

about the operations of government that are wrong and then, 

when you’re proven wrong — as this has happened to my 

friend, the Leader of the Opposition — to continue to tell the 

same story. 

 

Because whether it’s a budget debate or whether it’s about 

presenting to the people of the province the choice they will 

have in a year from now or maybe sooner . . . Maybe if the 

opposition, who really don’t like this budget, in the days ahead 

demand to have an election on the budget because of the change 



6806 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2015 

in direction, maybe we would have an election much sooner. 

On that occasion, in the months leading up to that, whenever it 

happens, and on the occasion of the next election, we’re going 

to see what happens to the NDP’s presentation of their case and 

the facts. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, make no mistake, debate is useful. And the 

Leader of the Opposition and members opposite have raised 

important cases in this House in health care, raised important 

issues to which there has been a response from government, not 

completely perhaps to the liking of members opposite but a 

response. And that’s when this place is working well, and we 

credit both sides for participating in the debate. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, what we’ll also be waiting to see in the 

months ahead is veracity in the statements they make and also a 

notion of what they might do differently, rather than running 

through a list of expenditure changes they would make that 

don’t come anywhere near to the billions in promises that 

they’ve made dating back to the ’11 election and now promises 

that this Leader of the Opposition has made. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to say a few comments about not just the 

budget itself, and I’m going to be brief because we should hear 

from the Minister of Finance today especially on this occasion. 

But I want to say, before I get into those remarks, a thank you 

to my family at home, to Tami and to Faith who are both at 

home, and we have two children as you know, Mr. Speaker, in 

Saskatoon at the University of Saskatchewan, Megan and 

Colter, and they remain just my greatest source of support, have 

enabled me to pursue public life for all of these years, and I will 

ever be grateful to them. So I want to say that. 

 

We have a great local team in Swift Current that have been very 

gracious with me, knowing that my schedule demands that I’m 

not always in the constituency as much as I would like. Nola 

Smith in the constituency office does an excellent job working 

on behalf of the people of Swift Current and others because of 

course in our office we hear from others from across the 

province. 

 

I need to acknowledge Everett Hindley who for years now . . . 

He would say way too many years. Frankly I might agree. No, 

we get along. We mostly just pretend to argue. He has been 

working with me since 1999 really, since I was first elected. 

He’s become indispensable in my efforts to carry out these 

duties, and he’s just become a very, very, good friend. And so I 

want to thank him, Mr. Speaker, as well. 

 

I want to thank all my colleagues for continuing to provide me 

the support and advice that I need to carry on, hopefully in 

some effective way, in this current job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the budget was delivered by the member for 

Canora-Pelly. And he has, by the way, he has heard the 

comments from members I think on both sides of the House. In 

a generous way I’d say thank you to the members opposite and 

to my colleagues. He’s heard from so many of them, and I’ve 

heard you mention in the speech your kudos to our friend and 

the Minister of Finance, the Deputy Premier. I particularly 

enjoyed the story of the member for Last Mountain with respect 

to his first meeting with Ken Krawetz, and Ken has . . . sorry, 

with the Hon. Deputy Premier and the Minister of Finance, Mr. 

Speaker. Soon we’ll be able to call him that other thing, but not 

just yet. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can inform members of the House that he has 

asked, through members . . . I think some of the members just 

on my right have confirmed that he has requested that we stop 

saying nice things about him. He’s nodding his head that he 

doesn’t want us to say . . . You know, Mr. Speaker, throughout 

all of our years together, I have listened to his advice, and I’ve 

listened to his counsel. And I think the government’s been 

better for it; I’ve been better for it. But on this occasion, I’m 

going to ignore what he has to say, and I’m not going to listen 

to his advice because it’s very important for me to be able to 

stand in this Assembly and acknowledge the great amount of 

work that happens with respect to every single budget. 

 

This is true no matter what side of the House has brought . . . 

what government was in power. We know the amount of 

pressure and work that resides with this particular position, the 

Finance minister’s job. He has a team and we have a great 

treasury board, and caucus helps and a wonderful ministry. The 

deputy, Clare Isman, has done outstanding work. But there is a 

unique pressure and focus that falls on whoever the Minister of 

Finance is, and that has been the case with our friend, the 

member for Canora-Pelly, the Deputy Leader of our party. 

 

Throughout all of these budgets, every one balanced, every 

single one of them balanced, all of them seeking to build the 

province, all of them seeking to aspire to a long-term vision of 

growth for this province, the province that he loves, throughout 

all of that, throughout all of those budgets, I don’t know if 

anyone has acquitted themselves, in our ranks I would just say, 

as well as, as competently, as professionally, with the great 

level of integrity as the member for Canora-Pelly, Mr. Speaker. 

I’m intensely proud to have been able to serve alongside him. 

I’ll never hear quite right out of this side perhaps, Mr. Speaker, 

for the rest of my life, but it’s a small price to pay to be able to 

have worked with this gentleman. And we thank him for his 

good work with respect to the budget. 

 

[12:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we do want to hear from the Finance minister, and 

so I just want to talk about a few things. There were some 

priorities that we had going into the budget, knowing there was 

a $700 million ditch to try to fill, decreased oil revenues that 

really no one anticipated. No one called 100 bucks to 50 bucks 

— no one, not one analyst. All of us who are energy-producing 

jurisdictions in North America, in the world really, are faced 

with uniquely challenging budgets. And while other 

jurisdictions have greater challenges to meet, including Alberta 

next door — they’ll table their budget today — we had a $700 

million hole in the revenues. 

 

So the challenge that the Minister of Finance put forth to 

government and the parameters that we set forth for the 

development of this budget would be that if we could avoid a 

tax increase, we ought to do it. And if we could also continue to 

see an infrastructure investment occurring, that we would deal 

with the infrastructure deficit that faces this province like so 

many other places in Canada. If we could do that in a very tight 

budget . . . These seem inconsistent goals perhaps or goals that 

are incongruous. But, Mr. Speaker, that was the objective: keep 



March 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6807 

taxes low, control operating spending. 

 

Let’s keep building the province, knowing that whatever’s 

happened in oil will change, maybe not as rapidly as the fall 

happened, but inexorably we know that oil prices will rise 

again. Some analysts are saying, you know, the new number is 

going to be 70 or 75 or 80. Those are going to seem like 

halcyon days compared to what we’ve been through. Not very 

long ago, that would have seemed to be disaster, by the way, 

when we were at 100. But when that happens, you know, we’re 

going to be in a unique position, and the province’s growth, 

which is continuing even now, is going to increase. 

 

GDP [gross domestic product] rates are already forecast to get a 

little stronger and a little bit stronger for our province in the 

years ahead. What will that mean in terms of infrastructure? It 

means that the infrastructure deficit we’ve been dealing with for 

seven years as a government will be exacerbated if we were to, 

say, stop building now in this difficult budget, that we won’t do 

the bypass and we’ll punt on the schools and we won’t do the 

health care capital and we won’t provide the funding to 

municipalities. Had we made that choice in this budget, what 

would happen in a year or 18 months when the economy starts 

to gain even more strength than it has now? And there’s still 

strength there. More on that in a moment. 

 

What would happen then in terms of the infrastructure deficit? 

We would find, Mr. Speaker, I think that we would be getting in 

the way of our own growth then. That infrastructure deficit, if 

we stopped now, if that’s what the Minister of Finance had said 

a week ago yesterday, that we’re going to just stop 

infrastructure investment, we would find out that we would be 

getting in the way of our own growth, that we would be the 

barrier to continued growth in the province. And I think we can 

all agree that, notwithstanding the challenges that come with 

growth, it’s much preferred to the opposite, which of course is 

decline, which this province knew too well for a very, very long 

time, a very long time. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, those were the objectives. Let’s control 

operating spending. Like just over a 1 per cent increase in 

operating spending, that’s remarkable in this day and age, 

knowing that there are the demands that we have heard from 

members opposite, frankly, and from the people of the province 

and from our own MLAs: control operating spending, no tax 

increases. Keep building the province of Saskatchewan 

 

With respect to the no tax increase piece, I want to talk a bit 

about education property tax if I can because this is an area of 

great progress that we’ve made in the province. We hear NDP 

members say, where did the money go? And maybe you’ve 

heard us now, Mr. Speaker, present a long list of where the 

money went. One area of investment that we made as a 

government is in historic education property tax reductions, Mr. 

Speaker. Members opposite will know that they had many, 

many years to deal with the issue, but they kept punting, and 

they’d go to SARM and say, maybe next year, maybe the year 

after that. And there was no progress — a few gimmicky 

rebates but not meaningful education property tax relief. 

 

We were elected on a platform that said, you know, currently in 

the province 60 per cent is coming from ratepayers on 

education funding; 40 per cent is coming from the government. 

We’d like to reverse that. Our long-term goal would be that 40 

per cent would only have to come from property owners, from 

families, and from small businesses; 60 per cent would be 

funded by general revenues. That was our objective. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the then minister of Education who is now the 

same Minister of Finance worked well with the current Minister 

of Government Relations, the member for Rosetown, and they 

presented to this House and to this province a brand new plan 

for education property tax relief, the net result of which was a 

reversal in the 60/40 split, as I’ve just explained. Actually we 

went a bit further. 

 

What the result was, by the way, also for farmers who had so 

long asked for members opposite to do something about . . . I 

mean there’s not a lot the provincial government always can do 

in the global world of agriculture. One thing, for sure — there’s 

more than one — but one thing for sure that this provincial 

government can do, whoever sits over here, is to make sure that 

education property taxes aren’t running wild on farm land. And 

they were. 

 

As a result of the changes made, we saw an 80 per cent, 78 to 

80 per cent reduction in education property taxes paid by 

agricultural producers in the province of Saskatchewan. In fact 

what we have seen in the intervening months is that the 

formula’s actually gotten to the point where now about 35 per 

cent, only 35 per cent is coming from ratepayers, 65 per cent 

from general revenues. 

 

So we talked throughout the budget process about getting to 

that 40/60 split again, and that would have meant a net decrease 

in EPT [education property tax] under our government but an 

increase in this budget. We did consider in earnest, but we 

remembered the directive of the Minister of Finance. We 

remembered the directive of the people of this province who 

said, let’s not immediately move to tax hikes if this is a 

temporary challenge that we have fiscally. Let’s not make these 

decisions on a temporary basis to solve some longer term 

issues. And so, Mr. Speaker, we chose not to increase the EPT. 

 

We looked at other issues on the operating side, on revenue 

sharing. Mr. Speaker, one of the promises we made as a 

government is to meaningfully improve the relationship and the 

partnership between the province and our municipalities. 

 

We’ve had fiscal challenges in this province before, Mr. 

Speaker. And make no mistake, what the New Democrats faced 

when they came to office in ’91 was a great challenge. It was a 

time of difficulty, and I think they made some good choices. I 

think they also made some choices that perhaps we would like 

to review. They might want to review them too. 

 

With respect to the latter category, I think mistakes were made 

with respect to municipal revenue sharing. One of the choices 

that they made in office, in the face of revenue challenges much 

like we’re facing today, was to off-load it to municipalities. The 

off-load was historic and unprecedented. 

 

We made a commitment that we would negotiate a new 

revenue-sharing deal that would have the municipalities sharing 

the revenue at the rough proportion of the province’s own 

source revenue. Mr. Speaker, the province’s own source 



6808 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2015 

revenue has increased 27 per cent since 2007; municipal 

revenue sharing is up over 100 per cent. And so we’d looked at 

that. We thought we’d actually over-delivered on the general 

commitment, and we looked at that as an option in the budget. 

We chose not to do it because we have made commitments. 

 

The one point on the PST [provincial sales tax] was a formula 

we wanted. It can work well. It’s simple. And though it seems 

to be unfair in terms of maybe perhaps being exceeding the 

original goal we had for revenue sharing, it’s not unfair, but the 

fact is, it is exceeding the goal. We had that as a candidate for 

change. We chose not to make that decision. 

 

Mr. Speaker, sometimes a budget is as much about what isn’t in 

it as what is in it. Mr. Speaker, there are no tax increases here. 

We didn’t change our commitment to municipal revenue 

sharing. We actually made increased investments in seniors’ 

care, an issue that has received a lot of attention in this 

legislature. We made strategic investments in a number of 

areas, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Yesterday I remember the Leader of the Opposition was 

standing in his place and demanding more maintenance, health 

care capital maintenance. And the Minister of Finance, as he’s 

wont to do, just off the top of his head quickly slid the exact, 

specific numbers over to me, demonstrating that we’ve 

increased maintenance funding by 20 per cent in a very difficult 

budget. It’s a millions of dollars increase. We’ve laid out a 

four-year plan to achieve more. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is a long list that my colleagues have 

canvassed very well in this Assembly of infrastructure 

investments being made, but I want this House to hear again 

that since we’ve formed government we’ve increased 

investment by $8 billion. 

 

And the members ask where the money went. It went to, well it 

went to this massive increase in infrastructure spending that we 

have made to help continue to build and grow our province. Mr. 

Speaker, in this particular budget $1.25 billion . . . Sorry, over 

the years 1.25 billion in infrastructure for our health care 

system; over a billion by the way on the government side, the 

line department side, on infrastructure in this budget; 2 billion 

from the Crowns, making this the historic infrastructure budget 

for the province of Saskatchewan. Within that 1.25 billion in 

infrastructure and health care alone, let’s not forget the good 

work of the member for North Battleford and the new Sask 

Hospital. We’ll be hearing more about that. 

 

Let’s not forget . . . And I heard the Leader of the Opposition 

sort of picking members out opposite. And I think he picked out 

the member for Moose Jaw North, when we were talking about 

some Moose Jaw issues here, and asked him, you know, what 

was he doing on certain Moose Jaw issues. Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell 

you what he was doing, and I’ll tell you what the other member 

from Moose Jaw have been doing. They have, since they were 

elected and before they were elected, been fighting for an 

important health care project in that city, one of our large urban 

centres, a brand new hospital that has been needed for a very 

long time. They were working towards a project that was 

ignored by members opposite, notwithstanding Moose Jaw 

members in the cabinet, notwithstanding an MLA from Moose 

Jaw as the premier of the province who knew the state of that 

Moose Jaw Hospital and kept punting it and kept delaying it 

and kept delaying it, Mr. Speaker. 

 

There’s many other investments been made in Moose Jaw that 

these members have fought for, but if there was only that one, it 

would answer that Leader of the Opposition’s question, what 

have the members from Moose Jaw been doing? They’ve been 

working to get the hospital built in Moose Jaw that should have 

been built long ago by the NDP. 

 

We’re going to continue to build long-term care facilities. We 

have projects in rural Saskatchewan, in Kelvington-Wadena’s 

constituency, and in my constituency, I will point out, Mr. 

Speaker, as well that’s the case. 

 

In fact with the LTC [long-term care], we’ve talked about the 

importance of clarifying the record with respect to the NDP. I 

want to be able to share, with respect to the long-term care 

project, exactly where the suppliers are coming from for the 

project because you’ll remember we had a debate about buying 

local. The member for, the deputy leader has made it is his 

passion, and the leader’s too, to exhort everybody to buy local. 

He wants a buy local day, people in the community, and they 

should. And all of that, you know, makes a lot of sense. 

 

But to make his case, he doesn’t always provide all of the facts, 

Mr. Speaker. The long-term care project in Swift Current: 

design, Stantec Architecture, Regina. Surveying comes from 

Swift Current; site stripping, Wiebe Contracting, Swift Current; 

building backfill, Swift Current; site services, Knudsen 

Excavating, Swift Current; concrete foundations, PCL, Regina; 

mechanical — and I think I heard him say the mechanical was 

outsourced — mechanical, Modern Niagara, Saskatoon; 

electrical, Humboldt Electric, Saskatoon. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, there are suppliers that are working on the 

project from out of province, as there has ever been in 

Saskatchewan and in every other jurisdiction in the country. 

You’re going to want procurement that is respectful of free 

trade agreements but also puts a priority on local businesses, 

and in that environment, you will always have suppliers from 

other jurisdictions who will win certain bids. But in his 

comments, he characterizes LTC as being out — the project in 

Swift Current — as being completely outsourced, and the facts 

don’t back him up, Mr. Speaker. The LTC project is in the 

budget and moving ahead, and I think we’ll talk a little bit more 

about buy local later on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s significant investment in highways and 

transportation; I think the largest, once again the largest, a 

record investment in highways and transportation infrastructure 

in the budget, Mr. Speaker. And we know it’s a record because 

it’s a record that breaks the previous record that was set by this 

government, which broke a previous record that was set by this 

government, and you can go all back for seven years. 

 

Every year in office we’ve said we are going to invest in 

highways and infrastructure, transportation infrastructure. 

We’ve kept the promise. We keep breaking our record. And we 

all, by the way, travel the highways, Mr. Speaker, and I know 

you do as well. We know that the work’s not over. We had a $1 

billion pothole left behind by members opposite. That’s not our 

numbers. It was the CAA [Canadian Automobile Association]. 



March 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6809 

The CAA basically said — and I’m paraphrasing a little bit — 

they said, good luck, whoever the government of Saskatchewan 

is, because after years of neglect you’ve got a $1 billion 

infrastructure deficit in highways alone, Mr. Speaker. This 

budget seeks to close the gap, and we’re going to continue to 

make progress in that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, from an operational standpoint, I want to talk 

about health care for a moment. The Cancer Agency funding 

under this government has increased almost 100 per cent since 

2008, and there’s more support for the Cancer Agency in this 

particular budget. There’s another $10 million to enhance 

seniors’ care, bringing the total to 14.5 million in 2015-16, with 

a focus on the HomeFirst program, something that has been 

well received and is highly regarded. Dementia behaviour units 

in Saskatoon and Regina will receive some resources, increased 

choice and flexibility in care options, Mr. Speaker: 2.8 million 

in capital renovations at RQHR [Regina Qu’Appelle Health 

Region] to develop specialized units for individuals with 

dementia; 700,000 to develop a new geriatric program. That’s 

the first ever I think in the province of Saskatchewan, in 

southern Saskatchewan, and that’s a project that is also funded 

in a very, very tight budget. 

 

May I just say this, Mr. Speaker? The Leader of the Opposition 

brings forward mostly health care cases, and I think he’s quite 

effective. I think he’s an effective Health critic for the 

opposition, and government needs to be accountable for the 

individual cases that come before the House as well as the 

overall care that’s being provided. Mr. Speaker, day after day as 

the cases are brought forward . . . I also want to make a 

comment about the response from the Minister of Health. Mr. 

Speaker, I hope this is the response of governments throughout 

the country, frankly, and I hope it’s the response of all of us in 

this government, and that it might be one day, if there ever is 

another government here run by members opposite, that they 

too would conduct themselves as earnestly, with the 

compassion, but as earnestly and as competently and as 

effectively as the member for Weyburn-Big Muddy has through 

now many sessions of the legislature. 

 

Moreover I want to say that in this very tight budget, the 

Minister of Health has been able to fight for significant 

increases in health care spending at a time of austerity. 

 

[12:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I must inform the Assembly that under rule 

31(8), it is my duty at this time to interrupt the debate to allow 

the Minister of Finance to exercise his right to close the debate 

on the motion and the amendment. That’s the rules. 

 

It is my duty pursuant to rule 31(7) to inform the Assembly that 

the Minister of Finance is about to exercise his right to close the 

debate and afterwards all members will be precluded from 

speaking to this question. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a tradition in this Assembly that the 

Minister of Finance is the last person to speak before the vote 

on the amendment and the budget takes place. 

 

I want to first of all begin by saying thank you. Thank you to all 

of the people that I recognized a week ago as I stood in this 

legislature and delivered my fifth and final budget. I mentioned 

a few names, but I do want to also mention some names that are 

up . . . of people who are sitting in the gallery opposite, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I want to personally thank Dawn Popescul, Jane Johnston, and 

Natalie Pepper. These are staff members that are in my office. 

They make sure that I am organized and that I know exactly 

where I’m going and on what day I’m doing it. So I want to 

extend my appreciation to them, and I’d ask members to join 

me in doing that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the pleasure for the last five days of 

listening to members on this side of the House speak, including 

members on that side of the House, and I want to thank all of 

them. I want to thank all of them for their passion, for their 

interest, and of course their commitment to the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And I know in speaking to our Whip that not all members had 

the opportunity to speak. I understand about six, about a 

half-dozen probably, were not able to be fit within the timeline, 

And in fact the Premier was not able to finish his remarks today 

because of the timelines that we must follow. 

 

So I want to say thank you to the member from Wood River and 

the member from Kelvington-Wadena. Both of those members 

are also joining the group that I will be doing, and that’s going 

to be referred to as a past MLA. So I want to thank those two 

members who did not get an opportunity to address the House. 

But I do want to thank the members for Melville-Saltcoats, 

Moosomin, Saskatoon Greystone, Estevan, Regina South for 

your comments, and of course the fact that these members are 

also indicating that they will not be seeking re-election. Thank 

you. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to express my appreciation to our 

newest member here in the Legislative Assembly, the member 

for Lloydminster who seconded the budget speech. And I read 

her speech, Mr. Speaker. I was already out doing some 

post-budget speeches that Thursday afternoon of last week, and 

she did just a terrific job. So I want to say thank you to the 

member from Lloydminster. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this Legislative Assembly, as my colleagues 

remind me, I’ve been here a while. I've been here almost 20 

years. And I can say, Mr. Speaker, that you know, opposite, I 

believe there are two members opposite who were here back in 

1995, elected in ’95. 

 

And on this side of the House, I believe there are six members 

who were elected at a time when Hansard said something, Mr. 

Speaker. Hansard, and I guess Hansard is part of the archives 

of the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, back on April 

the 17th, 1997 . . . Okay, so those of you who were not here 

know that that’s most of you. And you had the opportunity to 

watch this on the legislative channel because I know you were 

watching in 1997, even though you weren’t elected. Mr. 

Speaker, I was in a debate with the minister of Education — 

now of course no longer a member — Pat Atkinson, I can use 

her name.  

 



6810 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2015 

Pat Atkinson and I had a debate about funding of education and 

negotiating contracts. And we got into some discussion about 

being a have-not province and the fact that the province of 

Saskatchewan would qualify for equalization payments. And I 

kept asking her a series of questions until finally she says this, 

and I quote: 

 

When you put together a budget it’s what you think might 

happen, and maybe some day you’ll have the opportunity 

to do this. And it’s . . . well maybe someday you will, but 

I’m sure that we’ll . . . [all be] gone [by then]. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was the quote from the minister of Education. 

And I look around the Assembly now and, as I said, there’s 

only eight of us here and over on that other side of the House. 

All of those or most of those members except for the member 

from Regina Lakeview and the member from Athabasca are the 

only two left, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I also want to talk about a vision. And it’s 

remarkable, Mr. Speaker, because not too long ago, I believe it 

was last summer, we recognized the leadership of our first 

premier in this province, Walter Scott. And reason I mention 

that today, because we’ve had debate about whether or not a 

government should borrow for infrastructure, ensuring that this 

province moves forward. 

 

And I want to put this on the record, Mr. Speaker, because we 

did some searching. We searched the archives over and over, 

and they did produce a lot of interesting information. Mr. 

Speaker, from the Act of 1907. And I’ll put it into context, Mr. 

Speaker, because you have to understand that. What was the 

budget of the entire government at the time in 1907? $2.4 

million. The entire budget of the province of Saskatchewan, 2.4 

million, sort of like our 14.2 billion today. 

 

What did the government do under the leadership of Walter 

Scott? Well they passed an Act. And that Act was assented to 

on April the 3rd, 1907. And it said this through an order in 

council— and I’ll get through the preamble, Mr. Speaker — 

says that the government of the day should borrow “. . . two 

million dollars for the purpose of defraying the cost of the 

public buildings and permanent public improvements . . .” 

 

Mr. Speaker, from the archives we’ve been able to get this 

information that said the vision of Walter Scott was that we 

would build this province. We would build the infrastructure. 

And of that $2 million, this building was going to cost $1.75 

million. You know, but the other interesting thing also 

contained in this message from the archives and it says this: 

“The said sum of money or any portion thereof may be 

borrowed for any term or terms not exceeding forty years at a 

rate not exceeding four per cent . . .” 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, when you think about that and you think about 

the fact that the government had a budget, had a budget of $2.4 

million and they had a vision, they had a vision to build roads 

and hospitals and schools and this great building, and they 

borrowed $2 million, Mr. Speaker, and they paid for it over 40 

years, almost the entire budget of the province was borrowed to 

ensure that this province would move forward. I think, Mr. 

Speaker, we learn a lot, we learn a lot from history and the past 

and, Mr. Speaker, I love digging into the archival . . . 

[inaudible] . . . because, as most of my colleagues on this of the 

House will know, a lot of time they have to go into my files and 

dig into those archives over and over again to ensure that the 

information is in fact accurate. Because at all times, at all times 

you have to have factual information and that’s where the 

archives come in. 

 

The members opposite know that I love numbers. And I love 

numbers for a reason, because numbers are what is going to 

keep you on that straight and narrow. They’re going to give you 

the information. They’re going to tell you what kind of 

expenditures occurred in agriculture, in health care, in the past. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to report of course that we 

continue on that path. 

 

But in my closing remarks, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to mention 

what I consider five important numbers and I want to put these 

numbers on the public record. I think these numbers, Mr. 

Speaker, will indicate just how far our province has come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the first number I want to talk about is 5 billion, 

$5 billion in total tax reduction since 2007. Mr. Speaker, it 

doesn’t matter whether you talk about the personal income tax 

and the fact that we’ve made changes to the exemptions, we’ve 

made changes to the brackets. We in fact this year . . . The 

Premier commented on the fact that we had no tax increases. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, we also had a tax decrease because we 

follow an indexation and on January 1 all of the exemptions 

were enhanced by 1.7 per cent, and as a result of that, an 

additional — and I say additional, Mr. Speaker — $10.6 million 

is now in the hands of people for 2015. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s a relatively small number, but when 

you think about the changes that we’ve made since 2007, all of 

the changes that now mean that a senior earning $25,000 of 

income in a year, taxable income, that senior, Mr. Speaker, for 

2015 will pay $16 of provincial income tax — $16, Mr. 

Speaker, from the time when the NDP used to enhance the 

labour rate . . . minimum wage. They used to enhance the 

minimum wage, Mr. Speaker, and then they’d tax the people, 

they’d tax them. So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve made some very 

significant changes. I want to compare 2007 to today, Mr. 

Speaker. If we didn’t make those changes, we would have $490 

million more this year in the treasury of the province instead of 

in the pockets of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, my colleagues will probably roll their eyes 

on this one, but I do have to talk about education property tax 

and mill rates. Mr. Speaker, I want to give two examples 

because I think, as the Premier commented, right till the very 

end at treasury board we were looking at changes. We were 

looking at the fact that maybe we should change the mill rate 

across the piece — agriculture, residential, commercial, 

resource — change the mill rates in the province of 

Saskatchewan by one mill, and the province . . . The revenue 

coming from that increase is 110 million, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m going to give you an example, and it’s an 

example that everyone is a little bit different because school 

divisions didn’t have the same mill rate. But for a school 

division like mine that had a 22 mill levy in 2008 — because 

we made the change in 2009 — if you had $500,000 worth of 

taxable agricultural land, 22 mills would give you a tax bill, an 



March 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6811 

education property tax bill of $11,000. Now let’s take you 

today, or in fact let’s take you to last year because we’ve 

maintained the same rate. We’ve only lowered it each and every 

year since 2009. Today because the mill rate is 2.67 mills on 

that same $500,000 taxable assessment, $1,335 worth of tax — 

11,000 to 1,335. Now you know, Mr. Speaker, why we don’t 

have tax revolts anymore. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ll give you an example of a residential property. 

Residential property, let’s just assume that the taxable 

assessment is $200,000. Twenty-two mills at $200,000, that’s 

$4,400. At 5.03, which is today’s mill rate, $1,060, Mr. 

Speaker, 25 per cent. 

 

My second number, Mr. Speaker, is eight. Eight consecutive 

balanced budgets, Mr. Speaker, by this government, and five by 

myself as Finance minister. Mr. Speaker, we’re going to move 

forward with summaries. We know there are many things that 

we have to do, but we’re going to continue to build as the 

Provincial Auditor has recognized and we’re going to move 

forward with the Q1 [first quarter] and Q3 based on summaries. 

 

[12:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, third number: two, two AAA credit ratings for the 

first time in our province, Mr. Speaker. And a quotation I want 

to put on the record, Mr. Speaker, from September of 2014 

when Moody’s rated the province with a AAA, and this is a 

quote directly from the Moody’s statement, and it says this: 

“Saskatchewan’s AAA rating reflects the province’s fiscal 

discipline and sustained low debt levels, which underscore 

prudent financial management practices,” Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. 

Speaker, I think you can see very clearly that because of the fact 

that we inherited a 6.8 operational debt, we paid down $3 

billion of that, Mr. Speaker, saving cumulatively, over the 

period of time, $1.2 billion in interest, and as a result of making 

those kinds of decisions, we have now two AAA ratings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fourth number I’d like to leave for the people 

of Saskatchewan is 20 billion, $20 billion worth of 

infrastructure investment by this government since 2007. That’s 

remarkable, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the fact that 

Crowns, Crowns continue to need to build. We need to deliver 

services. We need to replace aging infrastructure, and they’re 

continuing to do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

One very quick example. On March 15th, I was sitting at home 

and the power went out. That was Sunday morning. I called 

SaskPower and they said, there’s no power outage anywhere in 

Saskatchewan. You have a problem specifically to your farm. 

So out came the serviceman an hour later, and he said, I don’t 

know if we can fix your power today. I go, well what do you 

mean you can’t fix it today? He said, well the pole is so old — 

I’ve noticed that the insulator broke off — and the pole is so old 

I don’t know if I can safely climb it, and I’ll have to call a 

bucket truck. So, Mr. Speaker, as he drove away after fixing it 

an hour later, he said to me, make sure the capital budget for 

Crowns isn’t cut. 

 

Mr. Speaker, within that same infrastructure investment, we 

also commit dollars to people. We invest in people. And I’m 

going to leave you, Mr. Speaker, with a comparison, a 

comparison for health, education, and social services and 

assistance, which of course are the themes now within our 

summary budget. This year’s expenditure on those three areas is 

$10.4 billion, Mr. Speaker, 10.4. 

 

And the reason I use that number now, to ensure that people 

understand it you have to go back to 2007, same areas, 

comparing apples to apples. Can’t do the NDP math and do 

apples to oranges as they like to do. You’ve got to do apples to 

apples. The expenditure in 2007 was $4.3 billion less, or in 

other words, now we’re spending 67 per cent more on those 

three areas of health, education, and social services, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the fifth and final number is 1,132,640. My 

colleagues know that number well because they’ve heard me 

use it many a time. Mr. Speaker, that’s the population, the new 

population of the province of Saskatchewan revealed last 

Wednesday. Mr. Speaker, Statistics Canada has indicated that 

our province’s population has risen over the last seven years by 

122,000 people, Mr. Speaker — 122,000 people. 

 

That brings challenges, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we need to 

build more highways. That’s why the Minister of Highways 

needs to build the Warman and Martensville interchanges. 

That’s why we need to do the Regina bypass. That’s why we 

need to hire more nurses and doctors and teachers. That’s 

because we have a growing population, Mr. Speaker, and that is 

why, since the vision of Walter Scott, now under this Premier, 

we have the highest ever growth in the population of the 

province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to close by indicating that serving as the 

Finance minister has been the greatest opportunity, the greatest 

challenge, the greatest privilege, and the greatest honour of my 

career. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 

Rosemont, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Nutana, that 

the amendment read: 

 

That the words after “that the Assembly” be deleted and 

the following be added: 

 

disagrees with the government for tabling a budget that 

increases spending to a record level but is full of waste and 

fails to deliver opportunities for young people, fairness 

and affordability for families, and dignity and security for 

seniors. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 



6812 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2015 

The Speaker: — The nays have it. Call in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 12:51 until 12:52.] 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour, please rise. 

 

[Yeas — 9] 

 

Broten Forbes Wotherspoon 

Vermette Belanger Chartier 

McCall Nilson Sproule 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed, please rise. 

 

[Nays — 45] 

 

Wall Morgan Stewart 

Wyant Duncan Krawetz 

Boyd Eagles McMorris 

Reiter Harpauer Toth 

Huyghebaert Doherty Moe 

Docherty Campeau Heppner 

Cheveldayoff Harrison Tell 

Ottenbreit Norris Hart 

Kirsch Bjornerud Brkich 

Makowsky Weekes Cox 

Wilson Marchuk Ross 

Bradshaw Michelson Hutchinson 

Young Jurgens Steinley 

Merriman Lawrence Tochor 

Elhard Parent Doke 

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the amendment, 9; 

those opposed, 45. 

 

The Speaker: — I declare the motion lost. 

 

On the main budget motion as moved by the member for 

Canora-Pelly, the Minister of Finance, and the member for 

Lloydminster: 

 

That the Assembly approves in general the budgetary 

policy of the government. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — No. 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say nay. 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 

 

The Speaker: — The ayes have it. Call in the members. 

 

[The division bells rang from 12:55 until 12:56.] 

 

The Speaker: — All those in favour of the motion please rise. 

[Yeas — 45] 

 

Wall Morgan Stewart 

Wyant Duncan Krawetz 

Boyd Eagles McMorris 

Reiter Harpauer Toth 

Huyghebaert Doherty Moe 

Docherty Campeau Heppner 

Cheveldayoff Harrison Tell 

Ottenbreit Norris Hart 

Kirsch Bjornerud Brkich 

Makowsky Weekes Cox 

Wilson Marchuk Ross 

Bradshaw Michelson Hutchinson 

Young Jurgens Steinley 

Merriman Lawrence Tochor 

Elhard Parent Doke 

 

The Speaker: — All those opposed please rise. 

 

[Nays — 9] 

 

Broten Forbes Wotherspoon 

Vermette Belanger Chartier 

McCall Nilson Sproule 

 

Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the budget motion, 

45; those opposed, 9. 

 

The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried. I recognize the 

Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. Monday. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:58.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6785 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6785 

  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6785 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6785 

  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6786 

  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6786 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6786 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 6794 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6786 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6786 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6786 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6787 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6787 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Purple Day 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6787 

  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6787 

 Saskatchewan’s Living Fiddling Heritage 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6788 

 Habitat for Humanity Build in Moose Jaw 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6788 

 Volunteers Make a Difference to People Living With Diabetes 

  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6788 

 Peacock Senior Girls Win Regional Basketball Finals 

  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6789 

 Carrot River Midget Loggers Take Northern Championship 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6789 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Hyperbaric Therapy and Moose Jaw Hospital 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6789 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6789 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6790 

 Quality of Care and Patient Safety 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6791 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6791 

 Government Procurement Policy 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6793 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6793 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 

(BUDGET DEBATE) 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6794 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6797 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6800 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6805 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6809 

 Recorded Division (amendment) ............................................................................................................................................... 6812 

 Recorded Division (main motion) ............................................................................................................................................. 6812 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


