
























































Hansard: March 04, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 28A  WEDNESDAY, MARCH 4, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6421 
 March 4, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition calling for greater protection for 
Saskatchewan citizens from developers who default on 
fixed-price contracts. And we know that in September of 2014, 
this government walked away from a new 48-unit affordable 
housing project in Regina here, allowing a private developer to 
instead take control of and then rent the units at full market 
price. This government allowed private developers to back out 
of a fixed-price contract without any penalties, setting a 
dangerous precedent for this type of default. And further, when 
asked to explain the government’s decision, the Minister of 
Social Services said, and I quote, “You’re assuming that there’s 
these desperate homeless people,” showing how disconnected 
this government is from the realities within our communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: cause the government to recognize that 
there are indeed desperate homeless people in our 
province, and to immediately reverse its policy of now 
allowing private developers with whom the government 
has close relationships to default on fixed-price contracts 
for affordable housing projects. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise to present petitions on behalf of concerned citizens as it 
relates to the unsafe conditions created on Dewdney Avenue by 
actions of that government, Mr. Speaker. Dewdney Avenue has 
been inundated with heavy-haul truck traffic because of that 
government’s failure to adequately plan and make sure that a 
safe route was in place. Of course this impacts all residents on 
this residential artery but also all users, Mr. Speaker. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina, communities, and residents. 
 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 
Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition for real action on climate change. The undersigned 
people who have signed this from Saskatchewan want to bring 
to the attention of the Assembly the following: that 
Saskatchewan produces the highest greenhouse gas emissions 
per capita in all of Canada; that Saskatchewan’s emissions have 
continued to grow to 74 million megatonnes as reported by 
Environment Canada in October 2013, and show no signs of 
decreasing; that the Saskatchewan government has failed to 
tackle climate change, reduce emissions to the province’s own 
targets, or put in a real plan to protect the natural environment; 
and that slashing programs such as the Go Green Fund and the 
EnerGuide for Houses energy-efficiency program set the 
province on a backwards course; and that since 2009, the 
Government of Saskatchewan has reduced climate change 
funding by 83 per cent, including another 35 per cent cut in the 
’14-15 budget: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact a real 
plan and allocate appropriate funding in the provincial 
budget to tackle climate change by reducing greenhouse 
gas emissions, helping families transition to 
energy-efficient homes, and encouraging everyone in the 
province to take real action to protect the environment. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is submitted by folks from the good city of 
Prince Albert. I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Prince Albert Citizen of the Year 
 
Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to recognize a truly outstanding citizen, Jeanette Eddolls. 
On February 13th, Ms. Eddolls was celebrated as the 2014 
Prince Albert Citizen of the Year during a ceremony held at the 
Prince Albert Inn. My colleague from Saskatchewan Rivers 
recognized Jeanette’s tireless contributions over the past 30 
years through a wonderful letter which she then presented to 
Jeanette at the end of the evening. 
 
This honour, awarded annually by the Prince Albert Daily 
Herald and the P.A. [Prince Albert] Kinsmen Club, recognizes 
individuals who have made significant contributions to make 
our city a better place. More than 20 letters were written in 
support of Jeanette’s nomination reflecting the wide reach on 
her endless generosity. 
 
She has also contributed to the youth of the community as an 
educator, principal, and administrator in the Saskatchewan 



6422 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2015 

Rivers School Division. Jeanette also works actively with 
Catholic Family Services, serving as board Chair. Other groups 
she contributes to include the YWCA [Young Women’s 
Christian Association], Our House shelter, the P.A. food bank, 
SUNTEP [Saskatchewan urban native teacher education 
program], St. Michael’s Parish, and many more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Jeanette Eddolls on being named the 2014 Prince Albert Citizen 
of the Year and thanking her for her selfless contributions. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

How Saskatoon Eats 
 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On January 28th I 
attended a very unique dinner hosted by Engineers Without 
Borders, University of Saskatchewan chapter. Unfortunately I 
was only served a can of pop, a cold corn dog, and a bag of 
chips. The event was entitled How Saskatoon Eats, and it was 
centred around the concept of food deserts — areas of the city 
where good food is difficult to access. 
 
The purpose of the poverty dinner was to give participants a 
hands-on understanding of how citizens in Saskatoon may eat 
by assigning each person in attendance with a particular 
neighbourhood and lifestyle. I was set up to live in the 
neighbourhood of Pleasant Hill in a low-income family without 
a personal vehicle. Because of these circumstances, it can take 
over 40 minutes to reach a supermarket by bus, and restaurants 
are also few and far between. 
 
I only had to live in this situation for a couple of hours, but for 
many of the constituents in my riding, this is their everyday 
reality. Because there are so few grocery stores nearby, many 
buy their food at corner stores where the food is marked up 30 
to 60 per cent. This often leads to diabetes and other serious 
health concerns, which then puts a tremendous strain on our 
health system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 
Madeline Berezowski, Alyssa Kimber, and Angela Howell and 
other members of EWB [Engineers Without Borders], U of S 
[University of Saskatchewan] chapter, on this very successful 
initiative, and I ask that we all consider the serious costs that 
food deserts have for our citizens and for vulnerable people. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 

Annual Bridges Awards in Saskatoon 
 
Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the end of 
February, I had the great opportunity to judge at the 23rd 
Annual Bridges Awards in Saskatoon. The Minister of 
Education was able to attend the evening gala. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the awards ceremony is hosted by the Saskatoon 
& Region Home Builders’ Association and celebrates the best 
of the best in Saskatoon’s residential construction industry. 
Awards are given out to companies who advance the goals of 

the industry and offer affordability and choice to their 
consumers. It was a great honour to be one of the judges for this 
prestigious awards gala ceremony. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many home builders, renovators, and designers 
were nominated for the ceremony’s numerous awards. I would 
like to mention the names of some of the more notable award 
winners. Salesperson of the Year was awarded to Sarah Gerow 
of Montana Homes. The Renovator of the Year was awarded to 
Delonix Construction, and Home Builder of the Year was 
awarded to Maison Fine Homes and Interior Design. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the Saskatoon & Region 
Home Builders’ Association for putting on this amazing awards 
ceremony. I would like to ask all members to join me in 
congratulating all the winners of the evening and the association 
for hosting such a successful event. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Recognition for Regina Community Leader 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, some 18 years ago Regina’s 
YWCA was in the market for a new executive director. At the 
time the organization was experiencing some significant 
challenges. Staff was underpaid, the main YWCA building was 
in disrepair, and the organization was in debt. Fortunately the 
YWCA board of the day had the wisdom and foresight to hire 
one Deanna Elias-Henry to take over the top position, and with 
her arrival the YWCA was soon back on track. 
 
The organization stabilized and began offering a wider range of 
much needed services: child care, a permanent homeless shelter, 
and a place for children in emergency situations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thanks to Deanna Elias-Henry, and as she would 
be the first to acknowledge, the people she worked with over 
the years, the YWCA is now well positioned to respond to the 
changing and increasingly complex needs facing our 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the course of four decades, with all of her 
strength and compassion, Deanna Elias-Henry has worked to 
alleviate the suffering that results from domestic violence. We 
are all better off for her efforts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to congratulate Deanna Elias-Henry for her excellent 
work at the YWCA over the last 18 years, and I ask all 
members to join me in sending our thanks to her for her 
unwavering commitment and lifelong dedication to serving our 
community. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 

Improvement in Joint Replacement Wait Times 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Monday, CBC’s 
[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] Peter Mansbridge, on The 
National highlighted the frustration of family members and 
patients awaiting hip replacement surgery. 
 
I’m proud to say that Saskatchewan was singled out as the only 
province to make significant progress in joint replacement wait 



March 4, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6423 

times. The Fraser Institute’s annual report on patient wait times, 
released in November, confirmed that our patients are getting 
surgeries sooner. 
 
Statistics show that the wait-list for joint replacement at other 
provinces continues to skyrocket. From 2009 to ’14, BC 
[British Columbia] patient wait times increased by 30 weeks, 
Alberta’s by 10 weeks, and Ontario’s by 10 weeks. 
Saskatchewan wait times dropped from 78 weeks in 2009 to 24 
weeks. That’s a 69 per cent reduction in our wait times for joint 
replacement. Across all categories of surgery, more than 89 per 
cent of patients now receive surgery within three months. 
Compare that to the NDP [New Democratic Party] record, who 
in 2007 had the longest wait times in the country, according to 
the Fraser Institute’s surgical wait times report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the front-line orthopedic 
specialists, surgical teams, therapists, home workers, and other 
health care providers in Saskatchewan who work so diligently 
to provide the best possible care. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Regina Pats Qualify for Conference Playoffs 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sunday night was an 
exciting night at the Brandt Centre in Regina. The Regina Pats 
once again defeated their rivals, the Moose Jaw Warriors, in 
another instalment of the Trans-Canada clash. 
 
On Sunday the Pats got the game going when Padakin scored 
on a penalty shot at the end of the first period. Mr. Speaker, 
thanks to their 6 to 2 win, the Pats booked themselves a trip to 
the post-season with just nine regular season games remaining, 
becoming the first Saskatchewan team to clinch one of the eight 
eastern conference firsts for this year’s WHL [Western Hockey 
League] playoffs. 
 
This was a big night for the Queen City Sport and 
Entertainment Group, who purchased the Pats earlier this year. 
The more than 4,200 fans who took in Sunday night’s game can 
now look forward to watching the Pats compete in the playoffs 
for the Ed Chynoweth Cup and the right to represent the WHL 
at the MasterCard Memorial Cup being held in Quebec City. 
With Sunday night’s big win, the Pats are one step closer to a 
first-round playoff matchup that will likely see them travel 
further down the No. 1 Highway to take on the Swift Current 
Broncos. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 
the Regina Pats on a terrific season and in wishing them the 
best of luck in the playoffs. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Food Park Facility for Nipawin 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, on February 24th I had the 
privilege of attending the announcement of Hanfood, a new 
Canadian agriculture and food company, on their plans to build 
an innovative, 100-acre agriculture food park facility for 

Nipawin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this new investment into rural Saskatchewan is a 
result of municipal collaboration between the rural municipality 
of Nipawin, the rural municipality of Torch River, and the town 
of Nipawin on economic and social sustainable development. 
By working together, this not only brings in new jobs during 
and post construction, but provides another option for producers 
to export more of their high-quality products. This will add to 
their value many diverse and niche products grown in this 
province, and allow them to export into the Asian and North 
American markets. This region of Saskatchewan has the 
potential to supply the demand through the Hanfood marketing 
network. 
 
Hanfood plans to be in business March 1st and to be actively 
trading before their first project is completed in Nipawin. The 
Nipawin project’s first phase will consist of a 46 000 tonne 
grain and oilseed terminal with a 134-railcar spot loop, the 
second of its kind in Western Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the work of those 
municipalities and their MOU [memorandum of understanding] 
on revenue sharing to grow their tax base by attracting new 
investors. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[13:45] 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Ambulance Service Fees 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Catherine Olund had 
terminal cancer. The Melville hospital sent her by ambulance to 
Regina. She spent 8 hours on a stretcher in the hallway at the 
Pasqua ER [emergency room] before she was seen by a doctor. 
The doctor said the trip to the Regina ER was unnecessary and 
sent her straight back to Melville by ambulance. 
 
Catherine’s husband, Dave Carr, believes that this nightmare 
ambulance and ER experience contributed to her early death, 
which is heartbreaking. And to make it all worse, Mr. Speaker, 
Dave was billed thousands of dollars for that round-trip 
ambulance. Dave is here today because he doesn’t want another 
family to have to go through what he and Catherine 
experienced. Will the Premier agree to meet with Dave today, to 
hear Catherine’s story, and to look at options to start fixing 
this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the 
government, we’d extend our deepest sympathies on the loss of 
Mr. Carr’s wife and commit to look into this particular case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been the effort of this government over the 
last number of years to make some unprecedented new 
investments in health care in Saskatchewan: investments in 
human resources, so over 2,600 more nurses of every 
designation practising; and investments in new doctors for this 
province, in new facilities and different ways of ambulance care 



6424 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2015 

as well, including STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society], 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But obviously when cases like this are brought forward it’s 
heartbreaking for everyone, most of all for the family involved. 
Mr. Speaker, if I’m for whatever reason not available to meet 
today, I know the Minister of Health will, to see if we can’t get 
to the bottom of this particular case and see if we can be of 
some help to Mr. Carr here today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know Mr. Carr’s not 
asking for a long meeting, but a few minutes even to share the 
story would be very appreciated, to speak with the Premier. 
 
Over the course of about a month, Catherine was transferred six 
times between three hospitals. For those six transfers, Dave was 
billed $5,045.74. He arranged to pay $30 per month. It would 
have taken him 14 years to pay off that ambulance bill, but 
that’s all that he was able to afford. But then they started 
charging him interest of $60 per month so Dave couldn’t even 
keep up. Now thanks to the generosity of Canadians and 
Saskatchewan people, Catherine’s ambulance bills have been 
paid off. But Dave is very worried about other families, and he 
wants this fixed for all Saskatchewan people. 
 
You know it’s especially ironic, Mr. Speaker, that the daily 
amount, the daily amount that this government gives to each 
sensei and interpreter for the wasteful John Black lean project, 
Mr. Speaker, could have wiped out the sky-high ambulance 
bills that Dave had. My question to the Premier: does he think 
that this is acceptable? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Certainly I think members opposite will know that ambulance 
fees in this province are heavily subsidized by the taxpayers of 
this province. I think it’s over 70 per cent of ambulance fees are 
actually borne by the taxpayers, by the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We do have programs that are available, Mr. Speaker. For 
instance we have our seniors’ program that does cap that cost. 
We also have, as the Premier has mentioned, we have invested 
into the ambulance system through now having STARS. That 
fee is capped, Mr. Speaker, thanks to generous fundraising from 
the private sector and from individual donors as well, Mr. 
Speaker, as a $10.5 million investment each and every year by 
the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would be pleased to meet with the gentleman 
to understand the specifics of his case, Mr. Speaker, but I think 
people will know in this province that fees are heavily 
subsidized already. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, there were no programs available 
to Dave and Catherine. And, Mr. Speaker, this wasn’t a car 
crash at the side of a road for STARS. These were transfers 
between health care centres at the recommendations of doctors. 

It’s not just seniors, Mr. Speaker, affected by this. Leandra 
Bucsis-Gunn was just 7 years old when she died. She was born 
with a congenital condition, had a compromised immune 
system, and she had endured awful seizures. Leandra’s mom, 
Sara, has many frustrations with what this government has done 
to health care, including cuts to pediatric services here in 
Regina, but she is especially frustrated with the concerns 
around the cost of ambulances. Sara talks about, she talks about 
how she and her husband started to drive Leandra on their own 
instead of calling an ambulance, even though they desperately 
needed an ambulance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it hugely concerning that a family would not 
feel free to call an ambulance when their little child is sick, 
facing death, that they would instead be forced to transport 
them in their own vehicle. It’s wrong and it’s unacceptable, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
My question to the Premier: does this concern him, and what is 
he doing about it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I think members will know that this government has 
invested significantly in our regional health authorities that do 
operate, own and operate their own EMS [emergency medical 
services] services or that do contract with the private sector to 
provide ambulance services. Mr. Speaker, provincial funding 
for ground EMS in this province has increased 50 per cent in 
the last seven years from $49 million in 2007 to $73.5 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we do have a number of programs for those that 
are on supplementary health benefits. For those seniors, as I 
mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker, I would certainly hope that 
people that feel that there is an emergency situation, that they 
do call for an ambulance, call 911, make that determination 
whether or not an ambulance is needed, Mr. Speaker. And 
certainly we encourage our health regions to work with their 
clients, with their residents, and with those that do use the 
ambulance to make whatever accommodations are necessary for 
them to use the service and pay their bill afterward, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, these bills that the families are 
receiving are real, and the struggle and the decisions that they 
are making are real, Mr. Speaker. They’re not imaginary. When 
Leandra died, when the little girl died, Sara still owed over 
$7,000 in ambulance service. And get this — she’s says the 
interest that they kept adding on to the bill was worse than that 
on her credit card. Sara begged this government for help and the 
only thing she got, Mr. Speaker, was an email showing 
programs that she did not qualify for. 
 
When asked about these types of heartbreaking cases, when 
presented with facts that show many Saskatchewan people are 
afraid to call an ambulance because of the bills that they will 
receive, a government official had this to say: “We as a health 
system need to do a little better job in terms of looking at our 
coverage programs.” 
 



March 4, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6425 

Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. Is this happening? 
Is the government reviewing coverage on programs so no other 
family has to go through what Catherine and Dave went 
through? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we continually do evaluate the programs that we offer in the 
province of Saskatchewan. We compare where we are at in 
terms of other provinces, Mr. Speaker, because ambulance fees 
are subsidized to the tune of 71 per cent of the ambulance 
service in this province. That has allowed us to do things like 
cap the cost for seniors in this province where they do need an 
ambulance, Mr. Speaker, where I note that British Columbia 
doesn’t have a seniors’ program. Manitoba doesn’t have a 
capped seniors’ program. So these are some of the choices that 
we have to make in terms of the allocation that we do have for 
EMS services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also do look to what services we want to augment the 
services that already exist. That’s why we did make the decision 
to invest not an insignificant amount, $10.5 million last year, 
Mr. Speaker, and in this current budget year for something like 
STARS to offer the people of this province that live in rural and 
remote areas. Those are the decisions that we’ve had to make, 
that we have made, Mr. Speaker. But we will continually 
evaluate the programs to see whether they are effective and 
whether they are in comparison with other provinces. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Speaker, these two examples of these 
families that we’re speaking about today, this is Ituna. This is 
Regina. This is part of the necessary medical treatment that 
their families required. And for the minister to use these 
examples from across the country really shows a failure to 
recognize where Saskatchewan sits in this, where we are one of 
the worst when it comes to coverage for ambulances. 
 
Despite record windfall revenues, this government has not 
improved ambulance fees one bit. In fact, Mr. Speaker, it was 
this government that jacked up ambulance fees despite record 
provincial revenues — Saskatchewan. The minister was talking 
about examples in the country. Saskatchewan is the only 
province, the only province that charges a patient for medically 
necessary transfers between health centres. That needs to stop. 
 
Saskatchewan is one of only two provinces without a cap on 
ambulance fees. We need to start fixing that. There are many 
people who need an ambulance other than those who are 65 and 
up. And this whole thing about charging huge interest rates on 
ambulance bills is absolutely obscene, and that needs to stop. 
 
My question to the Premier: will he listen to Dave and Sara and 
a majority of Saskatchewan people? Will he commit to start 
fixing our broken ambulance fee system now? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
will look to work with the regional health authorities on the 
specific question of the interest fees that they’re charging. 

The Leader of the Opposition has said here in the House that in 
this one case the interest rate that was charged to that family 
was higher than a credit card interest rate, Mr. Speaker. I think 
that that’s something that obviously I’ll want to look into to see 
what exactly the region’s policy is when it comes to charging 
interest and the cases that they do decide to either waive the 
interest or in fact waive the fees. Because we do know that that 
has happened in some cases where fees are waived. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I’ll say that this government has invested in 
ground EMS — leaving aside air ambulance, leaving aside the 
$10.5 million in STARS — in seven years a 50 per cent 
increase in what we fund in terms of EMS, both in terms of 
ensuring that we have coverage in communities, in the cities 
across this province, meaning adding cars, adding ambulances 
to the system, Mr. Speaker, as well as ensuring that we have 
trained professionals to operate those ambulances, Mr. Speaker. 
But this is, as with all of our programs, something that we 
continually monitor. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Release of Third Quarter Financial Report 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Will the 
Finance minister confirm today on the public record that he is 
actually delaying the release of the financial third quarter until 
budget day? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And I mean for the record, this very conversation took place 
yesterday between the member for the New Democratic Party 
and myself at which time I indicated to him yesterday, because 
of the change to the summary financial statements and the 
preparation of that report for the first time, it is a bit delayed. 
And we are going to ensure that the accuracy of that is 
completed, and I will present that on the day of budget, which is 
the exact answer I gave him yesterday. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Just too complicated, he says, Mr. 
Speaker. Last year the financial third quarter was tabled on 
February 14th. In 2013 it was tabled on February 15th. In 2012 
it was tabled on February 10th. But this year we won’t see the 
financial third quarter report until budget day when it’ll be 
buried deep in all the budget documents because this 
government supposedly just isn’t ready to report the true state 
of our finances. To the Finance minister: how can he justify this 
total lack of accountability and transparency? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
can assure the member opposite and everyone in the province of 
Saskatchewan that there will be nothing buried deep except for 
maybe the NDP.  
 
Now the real situation, Mr. Speaker, as the member knows, the 
Provincial Auditor has been asking the Government of 
Saskatchewan to produce one system, one financial recording, 



6426 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2015 

and that is the summary financial statement, Mr. Speaker. The 
auditor asked for it. The NDP asked for it. And we’re doing it, 
Mr. Speaker. We are going to ensure that we’re going to 
prepare a Q3 [third quarter].  
 
And, Mr. Speaker, of the five provinces that prepare Q3 — the 
others don’t at all — Mr. Speaker, they also present them just 
very near to budget day. In fact four of them do that; four of the 
provinces, they do it just before. Mr. Speaker, this is the first 
year of the conversion to a summary financial budget. We’re 
going to do it, Mr. Speaker, at budget day, and we hope to 
ensure that the system is in place for subsequent years. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, those excuses are utter 
nonsense. The Saskatchewan people will recognize it as such. 
What the Finance minister is basically saying is that it’s just 
way too difficult to properly report the true state of our finances 
to Saskatchewan people, that he just can’t figure it out, so 
they’re not going to issue the third quarter report this year. 
Saskatchewan people deserve so much better than that. This is 
nothing more than a government trying to bury important 
information that it’s trying to hide. To the minister: how on 
earth is this acceptable? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated back a 
number of months ago when we produced the mid-year based 
on both the summaries, we introduced that at the last budget. 
We’re going to continue to follow that practice. Mr. Speaker, I 
can also tell him that he should stay tuned to the fact that last 
year’s summaries are indeed going to be balanced, Mr. Speaker, 
something that that government is not familiar with. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s only, it’s only two weeks from today. I’m 
sure the member opposite will be able to look into the records 
of the budget from last year, the mid-year, and he will 
understand that this government is about balanced budgets. It’s 
about economic growth, and we’re going to continue to move 
forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Occupational Health and Safety Inspections  
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, since 
2012 the number of occupational health and safety inspections 
has dropped by 69 per cent. In 2012 there was an average of 
385 OHS [occupational health and safety] inspections every 
month. This year that has dropped in number to 120 inspections 
per month, and the OHS unit no longer does proactive 
inspections. They wait for something to happen and then they 
go inspect. To the minister: how does this make any sense? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for the 
question. I want to correct something that he stated, it was that 
there was no proactive inspections or no random inspections 

taking place. That simply is not in fact correct. They’ve got a 
method now where they choose to target inspections where they 
feel they will have the most success at reducing the injury rate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell you this: that our injury rate in our 
province is simply too high. One injury is simply one too many. 
We’re now trying through the ministry to try targeted 
inspections. We support that. We’re going to watch and see 
how that works. The injury rate has come down under that 
system, obviously not as fast as we would like it to, but it is 
coming down and continuing to come down. So what appears to 
be effective, Mr. Speaker, is putting our resources where we 
think it will have the most effect. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, along with the big drop in OHS 
inspections, this government is also issuing 94 per cent fewer 
violation notices. To the minister: why has this government so 
dramatically scaled back OHS inspections and enforcement? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve got a quote that I 
would like to read. It makes reference to the injury rate reaching 
a high of 4.95 per cent under the NDP in 2002. Mr. Speaker, 
this is the quote: 
 

I agree totally with the minister in terms of occupational 
health and safety. It’s one that we should just really do as 
much as we can. It was one that as a government we . . . 
struggled with and we hoped that we could do much more. 
So I believe we should talk about it specifically and it’s 
really something we can get behind.”  

 
That was the member for Saskatoon Centre at a College of Law 
event in 2002. Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to read from a briefing 
note prepared, Mr. Speaker, this is a briefing note prepared for 
the NDP during the time they were in office: 
 

Particular priority will be given to the 10 employers who 
top the list — that is those with the highest number of 
injuries over the last three years. Using an injury 
assessment formula, these 10 large employers account for 
over 10 per cent of the total time-loss injuries in the 
province, but only 5 per cent of the WCB-covered 
workforce. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, that was something that started under the 
NDP, continued under this administration. If it works, I don’t 
care where the idea came from. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre.  
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much. And if he’s quoting me, 
it probably was 2012, not 2002. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this would be like the RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police] announcing that they’ll only enforce a speed 
limit on a certain portion of Highway No. 1 because that’s the 
road on which people speed the most. And that gives free rein 
to drivers on every other road because they know no one else is 
paying attention. Saskatchewan has the second highest injury 



March 4, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6427 

rate in the entire country and this government should be taking 
it seriously. To the minister: will he restore random inspections 
and reinstate proper enforcement for occupational health and 
safety here in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education.  
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I have another briefing 
note from 2006: 
 

The OHS division targets inspections to those employers 
with the highest percentage of time loss injuries in the 
province. The OHS division will continue to conduct 
inspections and investigations in the workplace based on 
specific incidents.  

 
Mr. Speaker, that was what happened when the NDP were in 
office and, Mr. Speaker, we will continue to do that as well as 
having random inspections. Random inspections have some 
significant benefit. They have always been done; they will 
continue to be done. And, Mr. Speaker, in fact we gave a 
direction earlier today that we want to do more random 
inspections. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana.  
 

Creative Saskatchewan Expenditures 
and Support for the Film Industry  

 
Ms. Sproule: — Yesterday the Culture minister was asked 
about the likely cost of this government’s plan for a big Canada 
Day party in Hollywood: “Any ballpark? Is it like something 
that costs a 100 grand or is it something that costs 10 million?”  
 
The minister said, “I have absolutely no idea at this point.” So 
he admits the government is planning a big party in Hollywood, 
yet he has no idea how much it might cost, and he doesn’t even 
dispute a figure as ludicrous as $10 million. To the minister: 
when can we expect him to take some responsibility for his 
portfolio, and when will he finally have some answers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As per usual, 
I’d like to set the record straight, as our government has had to 
do far too often regarding comments made by the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana with the Saskatchewan film industries 
yesterday. We can start with the fact that CEO [chief executive 
officer] of Creative Saskatchewan didn’t attend the Oscars. That 
was on a Sunday. The CEO of Creative Saskatchewan returned 
on a Friday. So he wasn’t even there for the Oscars. 
 
Yesterday, yesterday this member from Saskatoon Nutana said, 
we have to really wonder why we’re going down there when we 
don’t have a film industry to represent. I would direct the 
member opposite to page 13 of the Creative Sask annual report, 
where she will see that today Creative Sask has provided $4 
million for screen-based media alone. 
 
I have numerous quotes from various people across the creative 
industries who were pleased with the opportunity . . . progress 

made available by this agency. But I’d like to share just one 
quote with everyone here today: “It’s our job to be out 
promoting the province every time you can and not to miss an 
opportunity which is national, international.” Do you know who 
said that, Mr. Speaker? Former premier Lorne Calvert.  
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Still no answer, Mr. Speaker. But we’ve also 
learned that Creative Saskatchewan sponsored the after-party at 
the Canadian Screen Awards in Toronto this past weekend. This 
government killed the film industry in our province and drove 
hundreds of families out. Yet this government apparently has no 
end of money to host parties in Hollywood and at film events in 
Toronto. Where is the sense in that? 
 
To the minister: how much did Saskatchewan taxpayers pay for 
this big party at the Toronto film event? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 
opposite also talked about the lack of a film tax credit. We’re 
the only jurisdiction that doesn’t have a film tax credit. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, several provinces and states don’t have a film tax 
credit. Alberta, PEI [Prince Edward Island], Yukon, and 
Nunavut do not have film tax credits, but they do have a grant 
for films. And in other states, four states — Tennessee, Texas, 
North Carolina, South Carolina — have a grant for films. 
Fourteen states don’t even have any incentives at all. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan, we support the film industry as well as 
the creative industries. We’ve invested $4 million in 
screen-based media since the inception of Creative 
Saskatchewan. That includes 56 different development and 
production projects. This includes films such as WolfCop and 
Corner Gas, 17 market and export development grants, six 
business capacity research grants, 31 market travel grants. In 
regard to the member from Saskatoon Nutana’s comments 
yesterday regarding the film industry, I would like her to 
apologize for her misleading statement. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, there’s still no answer. The 
inability of this minister to answer the most basic questions is 
appalling. Saskatchewan people expect cabinet ministers to take 
responsibility for their portfolios. Saskatchewan people deserve 
to know how much money this government is wasting on its 
misplaced priorities. To the minister: when will he finally take 
responsibility for his portfolio and start providing some 
answers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Parks, Culture 
and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — I do nothing but take responsibility for 
my portfolio, as we do in government, period. We will stand 
behind this portfolio and we will stand behind the creative 
industries as we have always — all of the creative industries, 



6428 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2015 

not just film, all of the creative industries. We’ll continue to do 
that, not like the NDP that absolutely threw the rest of the 
creative industries under the bus. Thank you. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 149 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 149 — The 
Health Administration Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
to speak to Bill No. 149, The Health Administration Act. Just 
last night actually I had the opportunity to put some remarks on 
the record on this particular bill. This bill transfers health 
registration responsibility from the ministry to eHealth, Mr. 
Speaker. I know when this bill moves into committee we’ll 
have many, many comments and questions to ask of the 
minister. For right now though, at this point in time I would like 
to conclude my remarks. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the Minister of Health that Bill No. 149, The Health 
Administration Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a second 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 149, The Health Administration 
Amendment Act, 2014 be sent to the Standing Committee on 
Human Services. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Bill No. 158 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 158 — The 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2014 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to enter into a brief debate here today of Bill No. 158, 
The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act. We will be 
dealing with this bill very . . . Well we’ll be referring here today 
to committee because I think that that’s the best forum for us to 
have some of the answers provided to the questions that we 
have at this point in time. We certainly continue to invite any 
feedback from the public at large as it relates to this bill. 
 
Certainly the Saskatchewan Pension Plan has a solid track 
record. It has flexibility to it, has portability to it, and it’s a tool 
for Saskatchewan people. And so it’s a plan that certainly we 
want to make sure is managed in an appropriate way, that 
decisions that govern it and legislation that governs it ensures 
that it’s in good stead well into the future. 
 
[14:15] 
 
I know we’ll be interested in knowing specifically who’s been 
asking for the specific changes. We want to make sure that we 
have a full understanding of who’s been consulted in this 
process. It’s critically important that this government hasn’t 
done what it often does and just rams forward without any 
consultation with the impacted stakeholders because this plan is 
certainly a very important plan, and it’s important for it to be 
viable. It’s important for those members who have invested 
within it. It’s important for those that will enter into the plan in 
future years. 
 
But certainly I’d like to recognize and thank those individuals 
who have directly governed, who have administered this plan 
here in this province. They’ve done a fine job of that, and it’s 
certainly an important tool available to Saskatchewan people. 
 
With that being said, it’s important for us to note that voluntary 
plans like this — while being important and while being a tool 
for Saskatchewan people to consider — are a good option, we 
need much more meaningful focus from this provincial 
government and the federal government around income security 
as a whole. We’ve seen a real . . . We see a challenge for far too 
many, Mr. Speaker, who are hoping to retire, that have retired. 
And if you look at the pressures on many of the next generation 
that are working right now in their 20s and their 30s and their 
40s and their 50s, Mr. Speaker, we need to make sure there’s 
broad expansion for retirement solutions for those potential 
retirees. This is why it’s so important that this government 
reverse its position on not supporting the expansion of the 
Canada Pension Plan. The Canada Pension Plan is a very 
important tool. It’s a very important plan. It’s universal. It’s 
portable. It’s incredibly efficient, and it, you know, it serves all 
workers. And it’s something that can provide broad-based 
support to every retiree, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it’s been disappointing. While we’ve been watching other 
premiers, other Finance ministers from other provinces stand up 
and speak to this important issue, urging the very affordable 
expansion of this very efficient and important Canada Pension 
Plan, this Premier and this Finance minister haven’t been 
willing to stand up for Saskatchewan people and ensure that we 
can secure a future that ensures income security for all, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So we’ll certainly engage in committee as it relates to the 



March 4, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6429 

changes to this bill, or the changes brought forward within this 
bill, make sure we have a full understanding of all 
consequences intended and potentially unintended. Certainly I 
recognize good value in the Saskatchewan Pension Plan. It’s an 
important tool. I thank all of those that are a part of its 
management and its governance, Mr. Speaker. They do a fine 
job. 
 
But really, Mr. Speaker, we need to make sure that we take the 
opportunity to make the point that the current income security 
environment for Canadians and for Saskatchewan people isn’t 
adequate. Without an adequate response, it’s a crisis that’s 
awaiting far too many households, and us as a province, to be 
frank, Mr. Speaker. And it’s the kind of issue that can be 
addressed in a very affordable, common sense sort of a way, 
allowing Saskatchewan people to be a part of securing their 
financial futures, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So with that being said, I will move Bill No. 158, The 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2014 to 
committee. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion by the Minister of Finance that Bill No. 158, The 
Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2014 be now read 
a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 158, The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 
Amendment Act, 2014 be sent to the Standing Committee on 
Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 

Bill No. 161 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Moe that Bill No. 161 — The Wildlife 
Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1998 
sur la faune be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise again to speak to Bill No. 161, An Act to amend The 
Wildlife Act, 1998. On November 24th, the minister gave his 
second reading speech and set out in fairly comprehensive 
fashion the reason for this particular legislation. And I think that 
that information there has outlined clearly where and why this 
legislation has been presented. 
 

Practically, we’ve had a chance to look at a number of the 
different issues. It’s interesting. Some of the clauses relate to 
some very specific things. But I think ultimately everybody 
agrees, especially those who are involved with hunting animals 
in Saskatchewan, that basically the message is we’ll make sure 
the laws are fair, make sure that they treat everybody 
appropriately, and do it in a way that’s enforceable. 
 
We know that we’ll end up having some more questions as this 
bill proceeds to committee, but practically there are quite a 
number of things here. It’s important also to note that one of the 
parts of the legislation which is new relates to the fact that the 
government has contracted out the issuing of hunting licences to 
an organization outside of Canada. And so they had to change 
the legislation to make sure that that particular agreement was 
within the law. 
 
Now we’ll still have some questions about this, as it may not 
always be the best practice to send all the private information of 
our Saskatchewan residents out somewhere else, but I think we 
can ask those questions in committee. 
 
Another area which is interesting, but I think we don’t 
necessarily disagree with it, is the whole issue of requiring 
wildlife research people to apply for licences for scientific 
permits. And so they’re basically, they’re setting up a form of 
scientific permits. And what’s interesting about this is that 
practically permits were only issued for harvesting of animals 
or killing of animals, and when you actually end up with a 
situation where you’re just observing the animals but disrupting 
their activity in their habitat, that also can cause difficulty for 
the wildlife. 
 
And so in this legislation we now have a proposal whereby 
there will be special permits for scientific research. I think the 
ultimate purpose in that is to make sure that the research is 
publicly available for individuals, but also for the resource 
officers within the Ministry of the Environment. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the one area where we think that everything 
seems to be going in the right direction, but still we’ll have 
some questions, and we’ll be asking more questions about this, 
does relate to how these amendments can be implemented 
without causing difficulties for existing First Nations and Métis 
hunting rights in our province. 
 
So we will have some questions about that, and we’ll want 
further explanation about that as this bill proceeds through the 
further process. But practically, it’s legislation that appears to 
have been relatively well explained and it raises some 
questions. Those questions can be more fully understood in the 
committee process. I have no further comments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the Minister for the Environment that Bill No. 162, The 
Enforcement of Money Judgments Amendment Act, 2014 — 
161, sorry — be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 



6430 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2015 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 161, The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2014 
be sent to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

Bill No. 162 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 162 — The 
Enforcement of Money Judgments Amendment Act, 2014 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise once again to speak to Bill No. 162, An Act to amend The 
Enforcement of Money Judgments Act. This legislation is, as 
described by the Minister of Justice on November 24th, 2014, 
this legislation is presented to make some minor adjustments to 
legislation that will correct some issues that arose, and deal with 
some other matters that have come up with the previous major 
revision to The Enforcement of Money Judgments Act. 
 
Now I think we need to make it clear that this legislation is 
about using sheriffs or other remedies to enforce judgments that 
one gets for a cash amount, and quite often it relates to civil 
disputes and often it also includes issues around the 
enforcement of maintenance payments, child support payments. 
And so those kinds of changes are often looked at with a great 
deal of sort of clarity or looked at very carefully because we 
want to make sure that the interests of individuals are protected 
at the same time as we want to make sure that people 
appropriately pay money that’s owing by them. 
 
Some of the things in this legislation streamline the process 
allowing for the sheriff to move a little bit more quickly or to do 
things in a much more expedited manner. We always need to 
look carefully at that because sometimes the traditional debt 
enforcement process, the money judgment enforcement 
processes, have always allowed a bit of extra time to give 
people a chance to clear up their debts because practically I 
would say 99.9 per cent of the people who owe money 
legitimately want to pay it back. And this particular kind of a 
bill assists in making sure that they make those payments in a 
timely fashion, but we want to make sure that for those people 
who are in sometimes quite difficult spots, that they do have 
that little bit of extra time to get all of their affairs in order so 
they can pay off their debts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that some of the very practical technical 
questions around the legislation can be answered in committee 
and, as the minister said before, it’s about tweaking or 
clarifying the process, and I think practically we’ll be able to 
get those answers very quickly. So, Mr. Speaker, I have no 
further comments. 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 162, The Enforcement of 
Money Judgments Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a second 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
designate that Bill No. 162, the enforcement of money 
judgments be sent to the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
The Speaker: — The bill stands referred to the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 
[14:30] 
 

Bill No. 163 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 163 — The 
Education Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi 
de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
enter into debate as it relates to Bill No. 163, An Act to amend 
the Education Act, Mr. Speaker. You know, I guess it’s awfully 
frustrating that we see this as being the contribution from this 
government again in education when we see this going back 
and fixing mistakes made by this government that had they only 
had the respect for the education sector when they were making 
these knee-jerk announcements, they would have been able to 
get it right in the first place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We see a government that has had no willingness, no respect, 
no time for the education sector in this province, not the 
teachers, not the school boards, not the educational 
administrators. And they jump off with simplistic 
announcements that have a whole host of unintended 
consequences, Mr. Speaker, and this very much embodies this 
government’s record in education, one that’s been marred in 
failing the students of Saskatchewan, one that has a heavy price 
to the future of Saskatchewan without addressing it, and it’s one 
that I know many Saskatchewan people are incredibly upset 
about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
During this time of unprecedented opportunity in 
Saskatchewan, this government has failed students in this 
province and has failed the education sector, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve seen class complexity across Saskatchewan grow. We’ve 
seen class size grow. We’ve seen no recognition for the 
important roles of supports. We’ve seen failed response as it 
relates to the real supports for learning that boards and that 



March 4, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6431 

students need and deserve, Mr. Speaker. And this unfortunately 
has large consequences for all of us, Mr. Speaker. The 
education of each and every child in this province is critically 
important to each and every child that’s entering into those 
classrooms, but it’s critically important for all of us, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In this bill here we see, you know, the government going back 
and fixing up its flub-up from an election, the last election, Mr. 
Speaker, but we’ve seen as well this government fail to listen to 
educators and to school boards on so many other fronts, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve seen them go off and monkey around with 
things like the school day and number of hours while not doing 
their due diligence, Mr. Speaker, and not reflecting best practice 
or the evidence that would truly support better engagement and 
better outcomes, Mr. Speaker. And it’s that sort of 
single-mindedness that we’ve seen from this government that 
frustrates so many parents and fails so many students and 
certainly frustrates the teachers of this province who have really 
received outright disrespect from this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We see the conditions of our schools across Saskatchewan not 
being improved and, in far too many cases, we see the 
conditions of those schools becoming ever more critical. And 
this is evidenced by the example of one school division, Mr. 
Speaker, that engaged in a special inspection. When they did 
that, Mr. Speaker, and they studied the degradation to the beams 
and structural supports of the school, they learned, Mr. Speaker, 
that five of those schools within their division were actually 
unsafe, unfit for students, and they had to barricade off parts of 
the schools. 
 
And as we speak, Mr. Speaker, as we sit in this beautiful, 
glorious building, students in those communities are sitting 
there with portions of their buildings blocked off with 
two-by-sixes and two-by-fours propped up in other places. This 
is absolutely unacceptable for a province as well off as we’ve 
been, and it certainly embodies a government that has been 
unwilling to work with the school boards of this province, the 
elected trustees, the teachers of this province, or parents in 
addressing what is most likely the most important priority that 
every government should be focusing in on, that being the 
education of the next generation. 
 
So you know, we certainly . . . And government members can 
heckle and make noise if they want. They’d be better off 
though, Mr. Speaker, to go listen to some parents. They’d be 
better off to go listen to some teachers. They’d be better off to 
sit down with some of the hard-working trustees across this 
province who recognize that this government’s agenda in 
education has been a failed one, a failed one for which the 
students are paying the price and for which we all pay the price, 
economically, socially, culturally, Mr. Speaker. So it’s an area 
that’s critically important for us to see meaningful action on. 
It’s past time that education became a priority. 
 
We see in this bill as well some changes around lending with 
school boards, but we still see the lack of common sense when 
it comes to the fact that this government controls all the purse 
strings for education but yet they’re still forcing school 
divisions to go out and borrow money at a higher interest rate, 
only to then be paid off by the direct transfer from the 
provincial government, Mr. Speaker. This policy itself defies 

common sense. It’s cumbersome for school divisions. It’s time 
consuming for school divisions, and it wastes money needlessly 
on a high-interest scheme for education, Mr. Speaker. So this is 
just another example of something that needs to be addressed. 
 
Maybe there’s going to be opportunities through the committee 
process to address some of these facts, Mr. Speaker, but you 
know, there’s no way to sugar-coat the record of this 
government when it comes to education, when it comes to the 
treatment of students across Saskatchewan. And we’ll be proud 
as New Democrats to stand strong for the hard-working 
educators, the devoted school board members and, most 
importantly, Mr. Speaker, the incredible students that deserve 
nothing less, all across Saskatchewan. But at this point in time, 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll adjourn debate of Bill No. 163, The Education 
Amendment Act, 2014. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 163, The Education Amendment Act, 2014. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 164 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 164 — The 
Health Information Protection Amendment Act, 2014 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to enter into debate here this afternoon as it relates to 
Bill No. 164, An Act to amend The Health Information 
Protection Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I understand, this bill replaces Saskatchewan Health 
Information Network with eHealth, Mr. Speaker. That may, you 
know, be practical and make sense. What we need to really 
press on this government though is they need to manage with 
the resources they have and start to deliver for Saskatchewan 
people. eHealth is a very important initiative and program, but 
what we’ve seen is a lot of money flowing out the door from 
this government but a failure to get the job done on this very 
important file despite many years and despite untold hundreds 
of thousands of dollars, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know from this bill as well that section 6 I believe allows 
the minister to appoint someone to take control of records that 
have been abandoned. We’ll want to just maybe have a full 
understanding of that provision. 
 
We’ll be looking to other aspects such as section 8 which makes 
abandoning health records a strict liability, a.k.a. [also known 
as] puts a reverse onus on. You know, it’s a reverse-onus 
offence, which makes it easier to convict somebody of 
abandoning records. Certainly this seems more than reasonable. 
We’ve just got to make sure that it’s practical in nature, but 
protecting the private health information of Saskatchewan 
people is critically important. We’ve seen this government 



6432 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2015 

certainly be reckless on this front and have far too many 
breaches of that private health information. 
 
And you know, we know as well that this bill seems to respond 
to some of the stories of medical records being dumped, Mr. 
Speaker. I believe that was back in 2011 and so, you know, we 
want to make sure that these changes brought forward are as 
effective as they can be to making sure that Saskatchewan 
people’s health information is protected — something that 
should be paramount, something that shouldn’t be 
compromised, something that shouldn’t be breached, something 
that unfortunately has, far too often under this Sask Party 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ll be following up with broad consultation with 
Saskatchewan people and experts in analyzing best practice on 
this front, and we’ll certainly be coming forward to committee 
to engage with the minister to ensure that this bill is as strong 
and effective as it can be, Mr. Speaker. When it comes to the 
personal health information, the private personal health 
information of Saskatchewan people, there’s little more 
important than that, and we need to make sure that we take 
every opportunity to get it right when it comes to all aspects 
that legislate and impact its keeping. 
 
So with that being said, at this point in time I will adjourn 
debate for Bill No. 164, An Act to amend The Health 
Information Protection Act. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 164, The Health Information Protection 
Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 165 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 165 — The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2014 
(No. 2)/Loi n° 2 de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la 
réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hazard 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to rise to 
speak to Bill No. 165, An Act to amend The Alcohol and 
Gaming Regulation Act, 1997. This legislation was introduced 
by the minister in late November, and he provided his second 
reading speech on December 1st. And at that time, he set out 
what the purpose for this legislation is. 
 
We know that The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act is a 
fairly large piece of legislation. These amendments relate to 
some very specific purposes that relate to an announcement by 
the Premier last August, and the announcement is around the 
question of whether Saskatchewan residents can have alcohol 
shipped directly to them from out of the province. And this 
sounds like a simple statement. It sounds like a simple thing 

that one can do, but practically it has all kinds of interesting 
twists and turns to actually implement this. 
 
I think what we have in this legislation, Mr. Speaker, is the first 
attempt at trying to sort out how this is going to happen for 
Saskatchewan residents, and I guess what I would say is that the 
detail of the regulations that are made pursuant to this 
legislation will be the part that tells us exactly how this is 
supposed to work. Because as we can see from the explanation 
given by the minister and by the officials, this legislation will 
allow for direct-to-consumer shipments of certain alcohol 
products, but to get to that point, you end up having to enter 
into agreements with the federal government and/or provinces 
and I assume territories as well. 
 
And so we will look forward to exactly how this is going to be 
done. I think we’ll have a chance when we meet with the 
minister and officials in the committee to get a bit more of an 
idea, but I think practically even they are not totally certain how 
this is going to work. 
 
But we have the announcement from the Premier last August. 
We now have the legislation put forward by the minister. We 
don’t have the regulations themselves yet, but we know that 
there are all kinds of thorny issues related to delivery, collection 
of appropriate taxes both in the producing province, a 
producing province of the alcohol product, and obviously 
Saskatchewan which . . . People here in our province want to 
make sure that the appropriate taxes are collected here that are 
part of the system. And so the legislation itself is quite 
straightforward, but the actual implementation of this, I think, is 
going to be very interesting as we move forward. 
 
The key probably is the amendment to section 185 which is the 
regulatory section of The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act 
and they’ve added into this regulatory clause the ability for the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council to make regulations prescribing 
beverage alcohol or classes of beverage alcohol for the purposes 
of subsection 7(4)(ii), which effectively is the clause which 
allows for people to bring the product directly to them from 
outside of the province. 
 
[14:45] 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, this is, I think, something that’s done to 
enhance the ability of our local producers in Saskatchewan to 
also ship outside of the province because clearly other 
provinces are not going to allow for products from Cypress 
Hills wineries or some of the brew pubs out to other places, to 
go to other provinces if in turn their products can’t come here. 
And it’s clear that many of the wines from British Columbia, 
for example, are an important Canadian commodity which also 
has a world market. And basically we’re trying to figure out 
how those producers in those provinces can deliver products 
directly to our citizens in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the legislation itself we think will allow for the first steps 
in doing that. I know we’re going to have a number of questions 
about the actual process. I know some of my colleagues also 
have some further comments to make about this particular 
legislation, so at this point I’ll move to adjourn debate. Thank 
you. 
 



March 4, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6433 

The Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 165, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment 
Act, 2014 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 166 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 166 — The Local 
Government Election Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to weigh in briefly on Bill No. 166, The Local 
Government Election Act, 2014. Certainly I look forward to the 
committee process with the minister as well to expand on some 
of the remarks and to be more specific in some of the actual 
questions. 
 
This is important legislation, important to make sure that it’s 
balancing the needs of the sector. When you think of the locally 
elected leaders across Saskatchewan from a rural municipality 
perspective, and from an urban municipality perspective, I 
always think we have such a fine group of committed, devoted, 
common sense leaders that stand up within their respective 
community, whether that be a town, a village, a city, or a rural 
municipality, Mr. Speaker, and put their name forward and then 
serve their community. And many, many, Mr. Speaker, have 
served for many years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s a service that’s valued I know by their members of 
their direct community but it’s one I don’t know that they get 
thanked for enough, Mr. Speaker. And certainly running for 
local government isn’t one that brings financial reward, Mr. 
Speaker; it’s a very modest payment for what is so often very 
significant service and leadership. 
 
So at this point at time I would want to thank and recognize the 
leaders within SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities], the leaders within SUMA [Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association], Mr. Speaker, the leaders 
within New North who, you know, across this province put 
their names forward to represent their community, and as well 
to represent broader interests around the needs of municipalities 
and rural municipalities in this province, which is why this bill 
is critically important to make sure that it’s doing all that it can 
to support their very important work, Mr. Speaker, to do all it 
can to support the engagement with the public at large, to do all 
it can to allow Saskatchewan citizens to get out to the polls and 
be engaged in those elections as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know there’s a few practical changes that have been brought 
forward that certainly seem to make sense, such as the 
extension of the term that will now be extended to rural 
municipality or rural municipal councillors and reeves as well, 
the same extension that’s occurred with urban municipalities, 
Mr. Speaker. That seems to make sense, just the same as some 
of the changes that might be of a modernization or a 

housekeeping nature brought forward by this minister which 
would, I guess, be in many ways a harmonization with some of 
the changes that the urban municipalities experience, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So I know I will be interested in hearing directly from rural 
municipal leaders, from SARM delegates, Mr. Speaker, on any 
of the changes made within this bill. I invite that dialogue, that 
discussion. I invite their submissions as to the specific changes 
and if there’s specific concerns to note, those concerns, I’ve 
always valued those discussions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I see as well that this does address potentially extending 
residency exemptions for voting for members of the Canadian 
Armed Forces who may not be directly in their home 
community during voting time. That only makes sense, Mr. 
Speaker. These individuals are likely in service to us as a 
province and a country potentially in another location. We need 
to make sure that we are supportive of that opportunity for them 
to cast their vote back in their respective home community. 
 
And I know that there’s a few other changes that have been 
brought forward here that we’ll want to — around advanced 
polls and other pieces — that we want to make sure are as 
robust as they can be. When you’re given the opportunity to 
open up an Act, it’s important that a government fully surveys 
the opportunities to strengthen that Act and strengthen the 
opportunity in this case for, of course, locally elected 
individuals to be effective in their roles but also for 
communities and for citizens to engage in that voting process, 
one that’s really important. I know sometimes we see lower 
turnouts at the polls in municipal processes. That’s not always 
the case, Mr. Speaker, but I hope that the opportunity has been 
taken to work with rural municipal leaders, with urban 
municipal leaders, and with stakeholders from other 
perspectives that have a body of work around encouraging that 
sort of turnout. 
 
We know that some of the changes brought forward by this 
government in its election Act of 2012 changed rules around 
provincial elections and tightened rules around voter ID 
[identification]. These changes in many ways were baseless, 
Mr. Speaker, and without evidence. They very much were in 
line with what we’ve seen with really sort of right wing 
initiatives throughout parts of the United States, Mr. Speaker, 
that have been more intended to suppress the vote of certain 
groups of people, Mr. Speaker, those that may be struggling in 
poverty, Mr. Speaker, different people from across the 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so when we look at those changes that we stood opposed to 
when this government brought forward that very much sort of 
emulated some of what was happening out of the right wing in 
the United States and some of the stuff endorsed by folks like 
the Tea Party and certainly aspects of the Republican Party, Mr. 
Speaker, we believe there’s a better approach here in Canada. 
And we need not let government do what it’s doing on this and 
to fearmonger and to pretend that there’s some sort of an issue 
with an outlier that’s really not a reality, Mr. Speaker. What 
government should be doing is serving all Saskatchewan people 
and doing so based on evidence, doing so based in a body of 
practice that has brought about better engagement from our 
citizens. And you know, as was noted at that point, it was 



6434 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2015 

disappointing that this government undertook the initiatives 
they did to disenfranchise far too many across Saskatchewan 
from voting. 
 
But as it relates to the specific pieces of this bill, those are all 
aspects that were brought forward in The Election Act of 2012. 
This bill here, we look forward to spending some time with the 
minister and getting a greater understanding of the consultation 
process that they engaged with. It’s our full expectation that 
they’ve worked directly with the fine rural leaders in this 
province, the fine urban leaders in this province, with New 
North, with the city clerks, with all the folks that are 
stakeholders in this sector to make sure that they’ve built 
legislation that will serve municipal representation and 
municipal governments well into the future. 
 
So with that being said, Mr. Speaker, I will adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 166, The Local Government Election Act, 2014. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 166, The Local Government Election Act, 
2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 167 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 167 — The Local 
Government Election Consequential Amendments Act, 
2014/Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 
intitulée The Local Government Election Act, 2014 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As it relates to 
Bill No. 167, these are simply the consequential amendments. 
And you know, I’ve put the comments that I have onto the 
record, put my thanks to the local leaders across Saskatchewan 
— rural, urban, and the North, Mr. Speaker — and I’ve 
referenced the important role of government to ensure that 
legislation serves the best interests of Saskatchewan 
municipalities, rural and urban and the North, Mr. Speaker. So I 
know we’ll seek some clarity on various fronts in committee 
with the minister and draw upon some of his consultations that 
we’ve expected have occurred. 
 
We thank all of those that have been a part of this process to 
date, Mr. Speaker, but at this point in time this is simply the 
consequential amendment to Bill No. 166, so I’ll adjourn debate 
on Bill No. 167. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 167, The Local Government Election 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 

Bill No. 168 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 168 — The 
Government Relations Administration Act be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise to speak to Bill No. 168, An Act respecting Government 
Relations and making consequential amendments to certain 
Acts, other Acts. Now, Mr. Speaker, this legislation is 
legislation that, for legislation in the whole municipal area, is 
actually quite short. But it has some fairly significant 
consequences for the whole area of government relations 
between provincial government and the various municipalities, 
whether they’re urban or rural or villages and others. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, the good thing to note from the minister’s 
second reading speech on December 1st is that there appears to 
have been substantial consultation within the provincial 
government and various departments, and also with the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association, the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, and New 
North. 
 
And so let’s take a look and see what kinds of things are being 
proposed in the legislation. I think the most substantial part of 
this is the fact that this legislation is going to replace four Acts 
that we have had as our friends for many years here in this 
legislature. So we will now have one Act that will consolidate 
responsibility of legislation which was previously under The 
Urban Affairs Act, The Rural Affairs Act, The Rural 
Development Act, and The Northern Affairs Act. So now all of 
those particular pieces of legislation will be subsumed in this 
particular bill, No. 168, which is An Act respecting Government 
Relations. 
 
Now we all know that for the legislative drafters of those four 
previous Acts, they were always trying to make sure that they 
didn’t do something in one piece of legislation that wasn’t 
happening in the other. This will eliminate that problem, and I 
think as legislators we appreciate that, but even more so I’m 
sure the lawyers who have been involved with this appreciate 
that as well. So what this will do is make sure that there’s a 
consistent perspective from the minister and from the ministry, 
and I think that’s a good thing. 
 
Now also there’s a whole area related to this which is the fact 
that as the ministry is currently organized, virtually all of the 
responsibilities of the Minister of Government Relations will be 
in this particular legislation because it includes references to a 
whole number of the responsibilities of the minister. 
 
[15:00] 
 
The second area that this legislation gets at is to provide some 
fairly specific powers to the minister to make sure that the 
appropriate rules and regulations are followed by the various 
organizations that are under the Act. And so we’re assured by 
the minister that there aren’t any dramatic new powers being 
given to the minister, but at the same time we’re also assured 



March 4, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6435 

that local governments will continue with most of the powers 
that they have right now, or perhaps all of them. But we know 
that’s not always quite the case as we move forward in dealing 
with this, but I think the important thing is that they’ll be 
consistent right across all of the various types of local 
governments in Saskatchewan. 
 
The next aspect of the bill which is interesting and I think 
important relates to the changes that were made in the Ministry 
of Education. As we all know, the Ministry of Education took 
over the financial management of the boards of education in the 
province in the sense of the central collection of the finances 
from local education taxes, but they’ve done it in a way that 
continues to have municipalities give the money directly to the 
local boards. 
 
And so what this legislation I think is trying to do, and we’ll see 
whether it actually accomplished that, is to make sure that if 
there are any delinquent municipalities who hold on to the tax 
money they’ve collected on behalf of a school board a little 
longer than they should, that the minister actually has some 
power to step in and make sure that the amounts are paid to the 
appropriate school boards. And I think that’s obviously a good 
administrative practice. It’s also good to have the ultimate 
hammer available to the minister to make sure that the 
appropriate amounts are remitted to the school boards. Now 
clearly that type of a power given to the Ministry of 
Government Relations is one that you would rarely if ever use, 
but ultimately it’s one that you want to know that somebody has 
the ability to force a recalcitrant municipality to pay the school 
taxes to the appropriate school board. 
 
Now the final area of changes in this legislation relates to the 
whole issue involving disputes between municipalities where 
there aren’t dispute resolution mechanisms already in place. 
And there are some provisions already in these previous Acts 
which are being consolidated that relate to voluntary dispute 
resolution, but sometimes there’s a necessity to actually have a 
directed form of a resolution of a dispute, and it appears that 
this legislation is going to put in place something like that. I 
think this is an area where we will probably have some 
questions as the matter goes to committee because I think we 
would like to know exactly how and when this might be 
implemented. And more importantly, I think local 
municipalities would be quite interested to know when the 
boundary or when they’ve made the mistake that’s such that the 
minister would step in. 
 
We know that there have been a number of issues in the last 
while that have involved the Minister of Government Relations 
getting involved in reviewing various things that have happened 
within municipalities, and we know that there may be some 
enhancement of that ability for the minister to do that. 
 
We’re basically I think interested to see exactly what’s intended 
by the legislation. We know that, like all kinds of legislation, 
there will be probably certain regulatory functions that are 
attached to this. But practically, you know, the legislation 
appears to be coming forth as a result of consultation. It appears 
to be coming forth with the intention of having harmonious 
relations between the provincial government and local 
municipalities, between local municipalities with each other, 
and obviously with the citizens of the province. 

So we’re happy to continue to look at this. I know some of my 
colleagues have some comments on some other aspects of this 
legislation, and so at this point I will move to adjourn debate. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 168, The Government Relations 
Administration Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 170 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 170 — The Fire 
Safety Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to enter into debate on Bill No. 170, The Fire Safety 
Act. I’ve reviewed the minister’s comments when he introduced 
the bill and reviewed the legislation. I’ll keep my comments 
brief here today because I know we’ll be able to follow up in a 
more substantive way and constructive way through the 
committee process. 
 
Certainly fire safety in Saskatchewan is of critical importance. 
You know, we have a recent example, a very tragic example 
that is just so incredibly sad at the loss of two young babies, Mr. 
Speaker. And we’ve seen that far too often in communities all 
across our province. 
 
That being said, there are very good people and very good 
processes in place in some areas for fire safety. We certainly see 
really strong and impressive efforts from many small 
municipalities, Mr. Speaker, working together to ensure the best 
they can around fire safety. And we see of course our 
exceptional professional firefighters in our urban centres, Mr. 
Speaker, that we just couldn’t thank enough for what they do 
every single day to give us some peace of mind and some 
needed protection in facing a potential crisis, Mr. Speaker. So 
this is an important bill. 
 
We see gaps as well in this province. We see inadequate fire 
protection in many parts of Saskatchewan. We certainly see that 
on First Nations, Mr. Speaker. And it’s going to be a 
requirement for a thoughtful, respectful, balanced discussion 
with all in this province, recognizing that every single child and 
every single person is a Saskatchewan citizen and making sure 
that they’re afforded the protection they deserve, and working 
with an entire province to come up with earnest, common sense 
types of solutions that we know are there, Mr. Speaker, to 
address some of these gaps, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know when I look at the minister’s bill, he speaks to that it’s 
going to do a few different things. It’s going to replace the 
current Act and “will update powers, definitions, and . . . 
terminology to better reflect the current realities and 
requirements of the full scope of modern fire departments, and 



6436 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2015 

better support fire safety and response across the province.” 
 
We’ll get the minister to expand on those comments, but that in 
many ways reflects that he’s modernizing language and 
potentially not making substantive changes with that statement. 
But we’ll follow up to make sure we have full understanding. 
 
The minister goes on to say, “it will provide local authorities, 
their firefighters and fire inspectors with more transparent rules 
regarding entry in situations involving fire, along with . . . 
measures to prevent the risks of fires and other emergencies.” 
 
You know, we’ll be looking forward to what specific measures 
are in place here, what sort of resources are flowing as well, Mr. 
Speaker, but certainly that’s an important statement. Then the 
question is, what’s the actual plan and what are the 
consequences, intended and unintended, Mr. Speaker? 
 

And third, that the new Act will provide the province, 
through the fire commissioner, with clear authority and 
greater ability to assist and support communities and local 
fire departments when requested or required by a fire 
situation or emergency event. 

 
And that’s an important statement again, Mr. Speaker, the 
objective of that. What we’ll want to make sure is we have an 
understanding of how this is going to be practically applied and 
how this will ensure that there’s improvements brought to 
ensure fire safety, fire protection is in place for all across 
Saskatchewan who certainly deserve a level of fire safety. 
 
I know as well we sit down every year with the professional 
firefighters of Saskatchewan. They bring forward some very 
important recommendations. I will, you know, be interested in 
hearing from the minister as well. They’re not contained, I 
believe, within this legislation, and I’d be interested in 
understanding why he chose not to work with some of those 
important submissions. Certainly we’re ever thankful for the 
leadership and the service, the selflessness of that service, of the 
firefighters across Saskatchewan, volunteer and professional, 
Mr. Speaker. And when we look at some of the 
recommendations that have been brought forward, they’re ones 
we should be looking directly to. 
 
I know that there’s an incredibly solid case that has been 
brought forward about the need for additional funding for fire 
service in Saskatchewan, and laying out the risks and the costs 
and the impacts and the lives that are at risk, Mr. Speaker, 
without doing so. And I think that it’s this sort of common 
sense proposal in this case that we’ve seen from the 
Saskatchewan Professional Fire Fighters Association that we 
need to be listening to and that we need to be responding to, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We know as well that firefighters subject themselves to all sorts 
of toxins and risks that simply are outside the realm of what 
many other professions are subjected to, Mr. Speaker, and the 
health consequences are potentially huge. They’re potentially 
fatal, Mr. Speaker. When we look at some of the 
recommendations around breast cancer considerations and 
prostate cancer and skin cancer and some of the other illnesses 
that have been identified, it’s critically important that 
government look to that submission and look to what’s going 

on in the rest of Canada but also not be afraid to lead here in 
Saskatchewan, as we’ve done before, in providing some of the 
coverages for those who give so selflessly to provide each and 
every one of us peace of mind, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I know we need to look at the case that’s been brought 
forward by professional firefighters of sort of the smaller 
communities or smaller cities, Mr. Speaker, where this 
government with Bill 85 a few years back, Mr. Speaker, that 
this government rammed forward with, took away some 
important rights, collective bargaining rights and binding 
arbitration of firefighters in communities like North Battleford, 
communities like Moose Jaw, communities like Yorkton, 
communities like Swift Current. And this is important. 
 
What I recognize when I’ve met with firefighters from Swift 
Current and met with firefighters from Weyburn and met with 
firefighters from North Battleford and Yorkton is that in fact, in 
many of those cases, they’re amongst the lowest paid in 
Canada, Mr. Speaker — in Canada — not just lower paid in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
If you can imagine, Mr. Speaker, having these individuals that 
are so critical to protecting our families and our property and 
providing peace of mind, protecting lives, Mr. Speaker, in a 
community like Weyburn — let’s just use the example of 
Weyburn, Mr. Speaker — trying to keep up with the rising cost 
of living. We know the inflationary pressures that those in that 
region have been subjected to. We know the challenge to find 
affordable housing, Mr. Speaker. And the fact that in a 
community like Weyburn, right on the cusp of the incredible 
Bakken oil play, Mr. Speaker, that’s seen an unprecedented run 
of prosperity, Mr. Speaker, that we would think, deem it 
acceptable or that government would deem it acceptable that 
they be of the lowest paid firefighters in all of Canada just 
defies common sense, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it speaks to a real set of misplaced priorities, and I believe 
you can take that same argument directly over to Swift Current 
and the other communities that are impacted, Mr. Speaker. And 
this is an area that really is about ensuring that you’re going to 
have people retained and attracted and in place to ensure the 
safety of communities, and it’s ensuring some dignity and 
quality of life to those that are serving our communities. 
 
And I just find it to be such disrespect for these very important 
roles, Mr. Speaker, that this government would’ve rammed 
forward with measures to have taken away the ability for those 
firefighters to be effective through their collective bargaining 
processes, Mr. Speaker, taken away fair processes and are 
relegating them, Mr. Speaker, to the lowest paid, as the lowest 
paid firefighters in Canada, Mr. Speaker. And this is an area 
that certainly should have been addressed by this minister and 
this government with this legislation. 
 
[15:15] 
 
I know there’s a discussion as well about the role of the fire 
service in emergency medical services. And these are the kinds 
of earnest discussions that government should be open to 
having, to understand what sort of proposals are possible, to 
understand what sort of solutions are potentially there, to make 
sure, quite simply, that emergency services and fire protection 



March 4, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6437 

is able to be as effective as it can be to all of us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we’ll look forward to committee to follow up directly with 
the minister on some of the changes that have been brought 
forward. I’m disappointed, when I’ve highlighted some of these 
other areas, that this bill doesn’t go at addressing some of these 
issues in a more substantive way. And as I’ve said, when you 
look at the disparity in fire service protection for many across 
the province, we have to, we have to do a better job, and this 
government has to do a better job in providing leadership to 
make sure that all communities are protected. 
 
And it can’t become a divisive political game of the 
government, Mr. Speaker. It has to be one of earnestness and 
common sense, to go out and work with communities across 
Saskatchewan, rural and urban and First Nations, Mr. Speaker, 
to ensure that fire protection is available in an effective way, in 
a reasonable way, for communities moving forward. And you 
know, the galling lack of fire service protection on so many 
First Nations and the funding challenges with the federal 
government are simply matters that need to be resolved. And 
what they don’t need is political games and divisiveness from a 
governing party, Mr. Speaker. What they require is an aim 
towards addressing this in a substantive way, in a 
common-sense way, and working with all in good faith, Mr. 
Speaker, to do just that. 
 
And it’s one of these examples again, Mr. Speaker, where we 
see sort of an approach of this government that far too often 
wants to play sort of divisive political games with very 
important issues, as opposed to providing real leadership that 
can provide solutions for all, and in fact, Mr. Speaker, unify this 
province on very important issues as well. So with that being 
said, Mr. Speaker, I adjourn debate on Bill No. 170, The Fire 
Safety Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 170, The Fire Safety Act. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 172 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 172 — The 
Naturopathic Medicine Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure for me to enter into this debate this afternoon on Bill 
No. 172, An Act respecting the Practice of Naturopathic 
Medicine and the College of Naturopathic Doctors of 
Saskatchewan. And it’s a relatively straightforward bill. We’ve 
seen this kind of bill come before the House many times when 
we were talking about recognizing the professional attributes 
and qualities of a certain group of people in our society. And 
today we’re going to be talking about naturopathic doctors and 
the practice of naturopathic medicine. 
 

And as the Minister of Health has recognized in his opening 
comments for the second reading, he talked about how this has 
had an established history here in Saskatchewan, well over 
60-some years, going back to the ’50s. And so we’re not talking 
about a new field in medicine. This is one that has been alive 
and is present in Saskatchewan here. And so it’s only fair and 
reasonable that they have their own piece of legislation that will 
guide them in their creation of their college and their council. 
 
Of course we always want to make sure that there has been 
appropriate consultation and that we’re not back fixing some of 
these things up at a later date, and that there has been 
appropriate and sufficient consultation, that the folks involved 
feel like it is the right fit, It’s the proper way to go forward. 
 
And of course I assume, and I’ll be looking at section 18 that 
talks about membership and people on the board, that there are 
. . . Actually it’s section 9, the public appointees. Always very 
important to have, particularly in the health councils, that we do 
have an eye on the affairs and that it’s a professional approach 
to it — but still a public approach, that it doesn’t become a silo 
and there’s no connection to the real world, but there’s a sense 
of common sense, because when we get into these professional 
colleges and councils, that in fact they are professional and they 
should be acting professionally. But we need to make sure they 
have their . . . [inaudible] . . . grounded in some common sense 
too, and I hope that’s what the public eye brings, and the public 
appointees bring to the table. 
 
So we’ll have some questions to make sure this is a reasonable 
framework. It’s probably a typical template in terms of how this 
professional organization is organized. We do recognize that 
it’s unique and very special. They offer a unique and alternate 
approach to medicine but one that is very legitimate and one 
that has been successful. And it has been successful for many 
decades here in the province, and therefore they do deserve the 
recognition of a professional college and council. 
 
And so this is important, particularly when it comes to 
protection of the title and protection, doctor of . . . a 
naturopathic doctor, and that there is some protection. And we 
know that if you see some advertisement or some notice around 
that, you know that they have a way of making sure they are 
certified, that they’ve trained according to standards and that 
there are processes in place in terms of discipline and that again, 
as I say, it’s not totally internal but there is some public scrutiny 
through the public appointees. It’s very, very important to have 
this. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know that many others will want to speak on 
this for sure. It’s one of those pieces of legislation that we will 
all want to think at some length on. But clearly, as I said, it’s 
probably a framework piece of legislation that’s applied to 
professional organizations. And we do want to make sure that 
that’s pretty rigorously followed too, because you don’t want 
too many organizations having a unique approach to it, that we 
understand that there is a training aspect to it, recognition of 
that training, protection of title and what that means, and a 
disciplinary aspect of it as well. 
 
So that’s laid out in the Act. And so with that, at this point, I 
think with Bill No. 172, An Act respecting the Practice of 
Naturopathic Medicine and the College of Naturopathic 



6438 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2015 

Doctors of Saskatchewan, I would move that we adjourn the 
debate. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 172, the naturopathy Act. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 174 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 174 — The 
Registered Teachers Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to enter 
into the debate on Bill No. 174, An Act respecting the 
Regulation of Teachers and making consequential amendments 
to other Acts. And I think this is a very significant Act, being 
one that is certified as a teacher today, and so this is one that I 
feel that I have a few comments to make and I appreciate the 
opportunity to enter into this debate here before us. And it’s 
quite . . . It is a significant Act because it has changed . . . it will 
be changing the way we do things here in Saskatchewan and we 
want to make sure that we get it right, that there are no 
unintentional consequences, that we take . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Will the member for Athabasca please 
return behind the Sergeant. Do not pass between the mace and 
the Sergeant, and bow when you cross the centre line. Please do 
so. Thank you. I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 
opportunity again to enter into the debate here. But, Mr. 
Speaker, this is a very significant Act and I will be talking a bit 
about the events that led us to this. 
 
I do want to recognize though that this has been . . . will be a 
significant change in the way we’ve done this for many 
decades, I think going back to the ’30s or ’40s when the STF 
[Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation] was first created. And the 
changes that happened . . . I’m not sure how long the previous 
process was in place but . . . and I will be talking about some of 
the comments I made a few years ago and what got us to this 
point, some of the concerns, and why we are where we’re at the 
point we are today. And I think it’s an important one to take 
some time to get my comments on record, and I’ll elaborate 
why that is so critical in a few minutes. But this is a significant 
piece of legislation, and I will talk more specifically about some 
of the parts as we get going further. 
 
But I do want to take a minute right off the bat to talk briefly 
about the minister’s comments. I always like to do that, because 
it’s an important way to frame the conversation. First, what 
does the minister say in the second reading? People may, at 
home who are watching this, may not know what the minister 
said in his second reading speech. It’s very, very important, 
because the second reading speech by a minister really sets the 
tone. 

And from my own experience, I was instructed that my 
comments were to be as straightforward and to the point and 
mean what I say, because they could be later used in either a 
court setting or some setting. Because these are the things that 
people will use for further interpretation of what the bill is. It’s 
an interpretive tool for the bill. 
 
So Bill 174, the minister — and this was back on December 8th 
— got up and talked about The Registered Teachers Act, and it 
will create a new regulatory body for teachers in Saskatchewan. 
And he says, I quote, “I think it’s safe to say that the 
government has done its homework on this file.” 
 
Well I do have some questions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we 
will find out whether it’s done its homework when we get to 
committee. Because as I will go through my points here, this is 
not just a . . . We were worried when this was first launched that 
it was a knee-jerk reaction to a news story, and the government 
wanted to get it off its plate as quickly as possible. Some time 
has passed, and I think a lot of people have done their 
homework, but the proof will be in the pudding in committee 
when we ask some questions about what’s the future of this, 
what’s the future of that. So I will talk more about that in a 
minute when we talk about the context going back to the spring 
of 2013, two years ago. 
 
So he talks about how the minister is responsible for certifying 
all Saskatchewan teachers. Fair enough. And then he talks about 
how the STF is responsible for disciplinary matters and how 
this is something that needs to be looked after. 
 

Disciplinary processes concerning administrators, such as 
directors of education, superintendents, are held by the 
League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 
Superintendents. Meanwhile teachers at independent 
schools, custody care facilities, and post-secondary 
institutions fall under disciplinary responsibility of the 
ministry. 

 
So it’ll be interesting to see when we talk about post-secondary 
institutions, are teachers there . . . Now quite often we might 
refer to them as sessional lecturers. We might refer to them as 
professors. Are they part of this? I’m not sure. So he’s sort of 
implying that maybe they might be, you know. 
 
[15:30] 
 
But I guess this is the thing. This is the thing. And I’ve always 
been very clear about this, you know, and very proud of it, that 
many people will call themselves educators, many people will 
call themselves an educator, but you need to have a licence to 
teach. You need to have a licence to teach, and that licence is 
the one that you get after completing your training and you 
apply to the Government of Saskatchewan and the Minister of 
Education — very, very, important difference. So to be a 
professor or a sessional lecturer, you don’t need a licence; you 
don’t need to be registered. So there will be some questions 
about that comment that he has there. Who does he see at 
post-secondary institutions? What does that mean? 
 

[So] The Registered Teachers Act will consolidate the 
responsibilities for teacher certification and discipline 
within one legislative framework by which the new 



March 4, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6439 

Saskatchewan Professional Teachers Regulatory Board . . . 
 
And that will be governed. Now it talks about the overview 
first; the establishment of the board, second; the establishment 
of the nine-person board of directors, including seven registered 
teachers and two members of the public. And now it will be 
interesting, and I may come back to this, but right off the start, I 
think this is interesting that we have a board, a nine-person 
board of directors, and there are seven registered teachers and 
two members of the public. But you know, when we take a look 
at who makes up the seven, there is no mention of the 
universities. And I’m curious about why, why that is, what was 
the reasoning for that. And we’ll talk more when we get into the 
Act, who is on the board and who makes up the board. 
 
But I’m curious about why is there not . . . There used to be a 
really strong relationship between the University of 
Saskatchewan, and it used to be sort of the group that would 
help a minister or lead change in education for teachers, School 
Boards Association, the government. Those were the three key 
ones. But there was also the universities very much involved in 
the whole thing. And now we see the universities not being 
included in the development, or in this board. So I’m just 
wondering, how do they feel? Have we talked to the deans of 
Education to say, so even if you are providing the service, and 
we’ll tell you what service we need, the deans have no role. 
They cannot appoint anybody to this board. So I’m wondering 
how . . . Maybe they’ll be on some committees. Maybe they’re 
happy with this. But the minister’s unclear about this for sure. 
 

Thirdly, it prescribes the duty of the SPTRB 
[Saskatchewan Professional Teachers Regulatory Board] 
to serve and protect the public and to exercise its powers 
and to discharge its responsibility in the public interest. 

 
Now I just want to stop there for a minute, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
He talked about, “to serve and protect the public.” You know, 
one of the things, and I’ll be quoted here later, and I do 
appreciate that the minister does take a look at what I say. Even 
in question period today, he quoted me but he had the wrong 
year. He was out by a decade. The quote was from 2012, not 
2002. But at any rate it was a good quote and he was accurate, 
just the timing. But at any rate, he quotes me. 
 
The question is this, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker: when 
he quoted me, I talked about how the children were number 
one, that they were what we were really wanting to make sure. 
And he says, it prescribes the duties to serve and protect the 
public. Yes, that’s important. The public interest is very much 
present; it’s paramount. But the very most important issue is 
safety of the student and the child. And he doesn’t really talk 
about that in his comments. He talks about the public interest. 
So I have to say I have some concerns about that, because 
where are the children in this debate? Now he’ll quote me later 
on in his comments, and well I’ll continue this discussion. 
 

Fourthly, it prescribes the objectives of SPTRB, which are 
to establish and administer the professional certification 
and standards of professional conduct and competence of 
teachers for the purpose of serving and protecting the 
public. 

 
This is what I was getting at earlier, and I’ll read from a 

comment, an article from The StarPhoenix on May 31st, 2013, 
“Province will change teacher training.” Now it was one of the 
many things that were put on hold, and I’ll get back to that 
because some of the professors at the University of 
Saskatchewan were contacting me. At the time I was critic for 
Education. I am no longer; I am the associate critic for 
Education. But I had been approached about some alarming 
changes that were coming down the line. And this is why I 
think it’s really important to have people from the university on 
this board, but I see that they’re omitted and so I’m curious 
about that. And that will be one of our questions in committee: 
what is the role of the teacher colleges, the Faculty of 
Education, the College of Education, when it comes to the 
SPTRB? What’s their role? 
 
An Hon. Member: — We have an answer. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Well I’m waiting for committee. If it’s not 
here, it’s not here. It’s not here, but we will get into that. A 
debate may break out on the floor here. And this is the question 
I have. And I will quote from the article, and if the minister 
does want a copy of the article, I’ll make sure he will get the 
article. Because it is a couple of years old, and I know the 
professor will appreciate the review of that. 
 
But he goes on to talk about, fifthly, it grants the board the 
authority to issue teachers’ certificates. And as I said, that’s a 
hugely significant piece in terms of, you know, when you’ve 
gone to college and you’ve taken your teacher training, and 
when you get your certificate, it’s a pretty, pretty special day. 
And when I received mine in I guess it would have been in the 
spring of 1982 . . . It was 1982, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m proud to say that on our side of the House, one-third of 
our caucus are teachers and have a teacher’s licence, and are 
active. And that’s really important. I think that’s hugely 
important. So we really appreciate the fact that we’ve known 
what it’s like to get that teacher’s certificate in the mail, and 
what it really means. 
 
Sixth, it grants the regulatory board responsibility for intake, 
investigation, hearing on the professional misconduct and 
incompetence, and that’s hugely, hugely significant. And that 
really was in many ways the driving force of what happened in 
the spring of 2013 that caused the minister at the time to start 
these changes. 
 
Now it’s interesting. It talks about the transition committee and 
it was interesting that you did have on people from the ministry, 
from the administrators and superintendents, the School Boards 
Association, FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations]. And again I don’t see the universities. Not that I’m 
. . . You know what happens when you get nitpicky on this. You 
tend to focus on some things that are glaring in their omission, 
but I don’t see the universities. I don’t see the college or the 
faculties of Education. And we’ll have to talk to them and say, 
so what do you think about this because you’re an active 
participant? They’re going to be the groups who are going to be 
delivering the training of teachers. They’re the ones who are 
going to be working in the field to make sure teachers are great 
teachers. And yet for some strange reason, they’re not part of 
the conversation at this point. 
 



6440 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2015 

Now it’s interesting. And this I do have to share with the House 
here, and I quote: 
 

Mr. Speaker, we also know that members opposite have 
taken a keen interest in this. I’m going to quote from The 
StarPhoenix article dated June 29th, 2013. The article 
stated that the member for Saskatoon Centre would, and I 
quote, “. . . also spend the summer doing extra homework 
on teacher regulation practices across Canada.” Mr. 
Speaker, I look forward to hearing from the members 
opposite about everything they found. Mr. Speaker, the 
member opposite also stated in the . . . 
 

Well I just want to stop there, that I did actually do some 
homework here and I’m going to be quoting extensively from 
that today because when I have the invitation to talk about 
educational matters, I do take it up . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . We’ll be looking forward to that. We’ll be looking forward 
to that. Will it be random? I hope it’s not just a random 
inspection but he’s listening fully and completely to every word 
I’m saying. But he also says, and this is what I want to get back 
to earlier. He’s quoting me: 
 

We want to make sure that the public and parents and 
colleagues in the profession, everyone has full confidence 
in the system and the process. That means it’s transparent, 
it’s accountable, but it’s also fair, and that student safety is 
the No. 1 issue here. 

 
And he goes on and says he couldn’t agree more, and I couldn’t 
agree more. I stand by those words quite . . . I have absolutely 
no problem, and I appreciate people quote me here because that 
I really mean what I said, and that’s really, truly the case. 
 
And this was what we get back to the public interest. Clearly 
when you have public schools, there is a huge public interest to 
serve. But when it comes to safety in our schools, it’s really 
important that we make sure safety of the child, the student is 
number one, and we are all, we are all on the same base of that. 
So I just find it interesting that when the minister talked about 
public interest he didn’t put, didn’t state the issue about student 
safety. And I think that’s hugely, hugely important. 
 
This is a interesting quote from the minister, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. He goes on and he says, “We know that the member 
from Saskatoon Centre has admitted to doing a bit of nitpicking 
at times when he tries to find a reason to criticize some 
government bills.” Now I do have to say it’s passing strange 
that a lawyer would say to a teacher that I’m being nitpicky. I 
find this really odd, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I’m the nitpicky 
person, and he’s the lawyer and he’s the minister. Hey, it’s just 
me doing my job, and this is what I get paid to be, paid to do, 
and so I will be nitpicky today. So bear with me as I go through 
these issues. But I had to say that it was an odd comment that I 
would be . . . A lawyer calling a teacher nitpicky — now that is 
something else. 
 
So anyways he goes on and he talks about . . . But you know 
what? And he talks about the different supports and different 
things like that. And I think that’s fair enough, but as I said 
though the . . . And it’s good to see that he’s got momentum 
behind this Act. We’re glad to see that the STF is saying 
positive things about this and we’re glad to see the 

Saskatchewan School Boards Association is, as the quote says, 
“. . . encouraged by the movement toward increased 
transparency and clarity.” And that’s strong, and I think that’s 
fair enough. 
 
But as I said, that the thing that I thought rather odd is where 
are, where are the universities on this? What are the universities 
saying about this? And I don’t have an expectation either way 
that they would be either positive or negative. I’d just be very 
interested in hearing what their comments are, and so we’ll be 
asking them for that. And as I said, I’ll refer to one of their 
articles that they had that talked about some of the concerns. 
 
But I do want to say that the minister was quoting from an 
article in The StarPhoenix when he was quoting me, and that’s 
fair enough. The article was from June 29, 2013. I don’t know 
why they assigned myself homework on the very last day of 
school. It sounds like summer school to me, and I don’t think 
that’s always a great idea. But it was an important thing to be 
doing. 
 
And the article is “Regulation of Saskatchewan teachers to 
undergo changes.” And that was by the previous minister at the 
time. And I was quoted: 
 

NDP Opposition education critic David Forbes said that 
the party will also spend the summer doing extra 
homework on teacher regulation practices across Canada. 
 
“We want to make sure that the public and parents, and 
colleagues in the profession, everyone has full confidence 
in the system and the process,” Forbes said. 
 
[But this is important.] “That means it’s transparent, it’s 
accountable, but it’s also fair, and that student safety is the 
No. 1 issue here.” 

 
[15:45] 
 
So that’s that. But then the article goes on, and I think this is 
very important for the minister to hear and others who thought I 
may be repeating myself. I haven’t said this, but I will say it 
probably a few times before the end of the day because this is 
the irony. This is the problem with this government. And I go 
on to say, and I quote, I quote the article: 
 

The questions the ministry documents raised [and what I 
say] “have really highlighted some areas that we really 
need to take a look at,” Forbes said. “I think that’s a good 
thing. I think in terms of transparency and accountability, 
there are real questions. We’re going to take a good look at 
this. Clearly, it needs to be reviewed.” 
 
What worries Forbes is the government making any 
changes in haste. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party government “has a penchant for 
making announcements that catch everybody off guard,” 
Forbes said. He pointed to changes made with little 
consultation, such as a required minimum number of 
instruction hours in the school year, mandating classes 
begin after Labour Day and introducing a new standardized 
testing program. 



March 4, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6441 

And I’m quoted as saying: 
 

“What I also see happening in Saskatchewan is a real 
situation where we see relationships between the 
educational partners becoming very fractured. I don’t think 
that’s helpful to anybody, said Forbes, who worked as a 
teacher for 18 years. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, here we are. Here we are in this House 
debating. Just before me in the House, we were debating 
another bill that was The Education Amendment Act, talking 
about the school year calendar and how they rushed into that. 
Oops, now here we are getting that fixed up after those folks 
over there couldn’t figure out the calendar. And here we have, 
we’ve just resolved a contract that has left many teachers with a 
lot of questions because they couldn’t vote on it, but one of the 
things that they’re working on is a number of instructional 
hours that came out of . . . Where’d that come out of? And now 
we’re resolving that problem. 
 
So we have a whole list of problems in education. And of 
course, and we can make light of the fact of standardized 
testing, but I tell you in the spring of 2013, there was a lot of, a 
lot of concerns. And maybe I’m being nitpicky but I remember 
one question in estimates — that wasn’t this minister, but the 
former minister — when I asked for a list of books of what 
proved the worth of standardized testing. And they gave me a 
list, and then I asked the obvious question that any teacher 
would ask: did you read the books? And the resounding answer 
was no, we haven’t read the books. We hadn’t read them. And I 
was looking at these . . . the minister, I couldn’t believe this. 
They had a list of 10 books that I should read but I said, well 
you’ve brought them to me. Have you read them? No they 
hadn’t. 
 
And so the government backing off of standardized testing and 
for very good reason and particularly, and I have to . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . I actually have read them. That was 
the summer. I have read them. I have read them. It has been a 
couple of years. I won’t take the test on them today, but I did 
want to read them because I wanted to understand, and I wanted 
to understand what their thinking was. And of course that was 
the irony, that was the irony. You don’t go there because you 
never know when you go down that kind of rabbit hole what 
will happen. 
 
But you know, it was interesting when I shared that list, when I 
shared that list with some university professors who were 
familiar with the literature on standardized testing and 
appropriate measurement, that they were saying, well these 
books, I mean, they don’t even support standardized testing. 
Many of them don’t. And so I had to have a good look through 
them, but clearly if I’m being nitpicky when I ask questions 
like, have you read the books, have you read the material, I 
think that’s really important. 
 
Again I am going to back to the universities on this and saying, 
so where are they on all of this. Because you know, I do have to 
thank the university and some of the faculty members who’ve 
brought forward their concerns about standardized testing and 
clearly outlined the problems that they saw. And that’s their 
role in our community, and we look forward to working with 
those folks because they’re the academics and they know. 

They’re the ones who are writing these books, these articles on 
how to test children, how to measure academic growth. And yet 
I see them not being included. I see them not being included. 
 
So this article that I’m quoting from was June of 2013, but that 
wasn’t the only thing that was happening in that spring. Of 
course the whole standardized testing fiasco was happening, 
and the government at that time was still hanging on tight. And 
it wasn’t until the next year that we heard the brakes were being 
put on on that change. 
 
But the one that I think, and this is the one that I will, after I’m 
finished speaking, send over to the minister because I’m not 
sure if he’s aware of this, if he’s done his homework on this 
one. But this is the debate and the article is from Friday, May 
31st, 2013. And this is why we do debates like this. And I know 
the professor will be . . . I hope she’ll appreciate the opportunity 
to have this quote on the record because she had written me 
several times and had felt really stonewalled in 2013 about the 
process. 
 
The professor was Bev Brenna, and the article is “Province will 
change teacher training.” And this again was by Janet French 
who was doing an outstanding job of reporting on educational 
matters. And unfortunately, you know, it’s one of the things I 
do miss in our newspapers when people do get into detail, do 
get into detail of subject matters and really bring up all the 
points. So she talks about, Janet French writes: 
 

The debate about whether school teachers should be 
generalists or specialists is resurfacing as the 
Saskatchewan government moves to change the education 
requirements for teachers. 

 
Now I understand this has been put on hold, but as soon as this 
Act is put into place and put into action, that this will start up 
again. And I would really encourage and will be talking in 
committee about what are the plans around teacher certification. 
And I will go back to talk about this in the parts of the Act that 
empower different bylaws. 
 
But I do want to read some significant parts of this: 
 

After years of discussion and consultation with the four . . . 
postsecondary institutions that train teachers, a provincial 
board has drafted new requirements for teachers to be 
certified in the province. 

 
So this is back in the spring of 2013 that there were new 
requirements that were drafted. And I quote: 
 

“The argument of generalists versus specialists has been 
going in education circles for years,” says Prof. James 
McNinch, dean of education at the University of Regina. 
“This is the one hot spot in these recommendations.” 

 
So it talks about: 
 

In charge of setting the requirements for teachers to teach 
in Saskatchewan is a Teacher Education, Certification and 
Classification board. Members of that board had earlier 
commissioned a report which recommended changes to the 
education requirements for Saskatchewan teachers, said 



6442 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2015 

Trevor Smith, the board’s secretariat and the man who 
oversees individual teachers’ certification. 

 
The TECC board is now in its fifth draft of 
recommendations, which Smith says he hopes will go to 
the Minister of Education this fall for approval. 

 
And of course all things went off the rails when they decided to 
get Dr. Kendel involved and his report. And so this is really 
important. You know, and when he talks about if the minister 
does approve them, it could be four years before the changes 
take effect because there are current students who are already 
enrolled in the teacher education programs and they need to 
finish their classes. But it does take time to implement the new 
certification requirements. 
 
Now this is what is interesting: “Although the TECC board did 
talk to the universities, McNinch said it wasn’t soon or 
thorough enough.” 
 
And so that’s why I’m flagging the universities. They play an 
integral part because if they’re the foundation. They’re the 
foundation. If you’re not talking to the universities or having 
them involved in an integral way . . . maybe they are, but I 
haven’t evidence of that. 
 
It goes on and I quote the article: 
 

Changing certification requirements, like the government’s 
decision to start school after Labour Day [Here we are 
again talking about that.] and expand standardized testing, 
“have all been pushed without the kind of dialogue I think 
we would expect,” McNinch said. 

 
So here we are two years later, we’re still talking about 
standardized testing and starting school after Labour Day. And 
we have that amendment, that Act before us that is clearing that 
up. 
 
He goes on to say, “There’s a sense of them listening to their 
constituents rather than the educational stakeholders. It’s a shift 
in how things are done, and I regret that.” 
 
So this is the thing. Now maybe they have been consulting, and 
we’ll find out in committee, but we want to make sure that 
circle of stakeholders include the universities. It’s very 
important that we have strong faculty, a strong Faculty of 
Education, a strong College of Education. I’m a product of that 
at the University of Regina. My colleague is a product of the 
University of Saskatchewan, I believe the College of Education 
there. And so we were well grounded in this and we really do 
think this is an important thing. 
 
It goes on to talk about: 
 

The board wants to extend teacher candidates’ minimum 
time spent as a student teacher to 10 from eight weeks. 
[That might be fair enough.] It would also require both 
elementary and high school teachers to amass 24 credits in 
teaching instruction — like lesson planning, the use of 
technology [that type of stuff] . . .  
 
Instead of a “major” and “minor” teaching area [and that’s 

probably what we’re all familiar with] high school teachers 
would [now] be asked to take classes in three teaching 
areas. 

 
So it goes on to talk about how the rationale behind this, and 
why this might be a good idea. But again what we really need to 
do is make sure that we’re involving all the stakeholders. Now 
McNinch, and I quote again: 
 

McNinch said some high school teachers will argue 
knowledge of a subject is critical to success. However, 
good teaching is also about engaging and encouraging 
students and sparking their interest, he said. 

 
So this is really, really interesting. Now he also points out — 
and I think this is Trevor Smith, I think that’s who is saying this 
— talks about some of the issues when we have people coming 
from Ontario who want to teach in Saskatchewan, but they have 
spent less time in the classroom than we have. I’m not sure how 
that works out. 
 
But I do want to get to the point that professor Beverley Brenna 
. . . and I met with her and this is why I’m bringing this up, 
because I think it is a critical piece and one that we will be 
following very closely: 
 

Teachers will have to study how to teach English, math, 
science, social studies but not for a set number of 
credits . . . 

 
That suggestion troubles Beverley Brenna, a curriculum 
studies professor in the University of Saskatchewan’s 
College of Education. Brenna points to studies that 
demonstrate the benefits teachers get from two 
university-level classes in methods of teaching language 
arts as compared to one . . . 

 
So what they’re saying is they want to go from two classes of 
language arts instruction down to one, and she’s really worried 
about that because we know, we know — and I’m from the 
Saskatoon Public board, and we’ve done an awful lot of work in 
literacy — that if we start to weaken our language arts 
component then we have a real problem. 
 
So this is a quote from Bev Brenna: 
 

“I challenge the government to provide evidence 
supporting the opposite — that offering no fully developed 
courses explicitly designed to teach ELA is a practice 
somehow beneficial in terms of a teacher education . . . 
[program],” Brenna said in an email. 
 

And it goes on to talk about, “Brenna is encouraging people to 
contact their MLA and the minister of education before the 
changes take . . . [place].” And I would finish with this: 
 

“I would advise that the Ministry of Education consider 
fully all potential challenges that might emerge as a result 
of not delineating a minimum number of semester hours in 
English language arts methods training,” she writes. 

 
Clearly here’s somebody who knows a little bit about teacher 
training and what works in our classrooms and how we can 



March 4, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6443 

make sure they continue to achieve success. And we know one 
of the areas we have great concern about is really around 
literacy, and this is one that I really hope . . . And I will get it to 
the minister when I’m finished teaching because I think it’s a 
very important article that talks about what happens next. What 
happens next? 
 
We can all agree to this Act, and we all recognize that within 
the Act there are bylaws, and the power’s the bylaws. But we 
see that the universities may not be as actively involved as they 
once were, and what does it mean in terms of . . . We know that 
the spring of 2013, there were many, many things afoot, many 
things afoot that caused teachers a lot of concerns. 
 
One of the things I was surprised that the minister did not refer 
to was . . . And I just want to thank Dr. Dennis Kendel for his 
work. His report was very thorough, helped a lot, I think it 
helped a lot of people and I think helped the department. It was 
a good foundation for people to start to have a conversation 
about where do we want to go, and he did an outstanding job on 
this. And I was surprised that . . . And I will acknowledge the 
good work that Dr. Dennis Kendel did on this. I was concerned 
that how, you know, as a teacher that we often think only a 
teacher understands, but I think that he really grasped the issues 
at hand. 
 
I just want to read a couple lines from the introduction because 
I think this is really, really important. What he writes, and I 
quote: 
 

You might then assume that this report is all about 
teachers. It’s not. While it refers to teachers many times, 
it’s really all about students. How we regulate teachers is 
critically important to students. The decision that the 
Government of Saskatchewan ultimately makes about the 
best way to regulate teachers must, above all else, protect 
and advance the interests of students. Simply put, it must 
work for students. 

 
[16:00] 
 
I think this is the gist of the whole thing, isn’t it? It must work 
for students so students can reach their full potential, but they 
can do it in a safe, safe environment. He wrote a very thorough 
review, and I do want to thank Dr. Kendel for his work because 
while . . . And it’s always a hard thing when change is driven by 
newspaper articles or it appears to be, that people do feel 
threatened, do feel misunderstood, and we know that. We’ve all 
had experience in this House, on both sides of the House, where 
we felt our points weren’t as well taken in the media as they 
might have been, and our points may lead us to be 
misunderstood. But the fact of the matter is — as we both 
agree, and I think everybody has a common thing — that this 
must work for students. And that’s hugely, hugely important. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, of course the STF did their work, and they 
talked about public assurance, professional commitment, 
teacher quality, and it talks about their work and how this is 
important. And you know, one of the things about the STF is 
that they always do such thorough, thorough work in terms of 
understanding how we can support teachers so that they can do 
the best for students and how deeply committed they are for 
student success. But they know one thing. If you’re going to 

have great students, great kids, you’ve got to have great 
teachers and great schools. They go together hand in glove; you 
can’t have one without the other. And so an investment in 
teachers really pays off with our children, and I think that’s 
what we all look for. And I appreciate the frame about public 
assurance, and I think that’s really important. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you know, the minister did challenge me 
to share my homework, and this is what I . . . I won’t read my 
whole report here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I did ask. I wanted 
to get a sense, an environmental scan of what were the issues. 
What were the concerns and emerging issues in public 
education in Saskatchewan? 
 
And of course, you know, it was interesting because when 
we’ve talked about education, it’s hugely important we 
recognize the changing nature of our schools — very, very 
different. Of course we’ve talked at length, and we’ll wait. The 
Finance minister, as he said, just a couple more weeks until 
budget time, and we’ll find out if in fact these folks on the 
government side will step up and support schools or really what 
are their priorities. 
 
And so we talk about how, you know, we think this is really 
important, and yet we know schools are crowded, overcrowded. 
We’ve seen, we’ve heard, and I know that the whole cabinet 
were there at SUMA to hear from a parent in Gerald, and I 
think if they’re . . . It’s just representative of more and more 
schools in Saskatchewan where we know there’s a $1.5 billion 
infrastructure deficit that this government is putting off to local 
boards and saying, you deal with it; it’s not our problem. 
 
And I know for example in my own school division, I know 
they like to brag it up, but you know, in Gerald their school was 
right at the top of the list and now they find it down at the 
bottom, no. 100. And I think of a school in my own 
neighbourhood — and if I’m not mistaken the Minister of 
Education may have attended it at one time but grew up close to 
it — Pleasant Hill School who’s dealing with asbestos. I had the 
privilege of being there last fall for their 100th birthday. Still 
it’s great to have a birthday, but they’re dealing with asbestos 
and that’s the issue. 
 
So we talk about students from: 
 

. . . the most connected generation in history with 
remarkable access to information. They are growing up in 
an interconnected world and with a keen awareness of 
global issues including: climate change, poverty and a 
wide variety of political and social issues. 
 
The current generation of students is also characterized by 
the disparity . . . [by] those who have access to financial 
resources, technology and post-secondary education and 
those who [simply] do not. 

 
And this is the situation we have. “Tapscott (2009) described 
this as two generations of the same age, ‘one thriving and one 
failing.’” 
 
And we see this in Saskatchewan where: 
 

. . . this disparity is most visible between the province’s 



6444 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2015 

Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal populations. In both 
Saskatoon and Regina almost half of all Aboriginal people 
are living below the low income cut off as reported by 
Statistics Canada in 2006. 

 
This is our world. We can say somewhere else there’s a 
generation growing up with two worlds, one thriving and one 
failing. It’s the reality unfortunately here in Saskatchewan, and 
we know this government has commissioned many reports on 
this and yet the action is just not there, just not there. We need 
to make sure that we step up to the plate on this. We cannot 
have a situation where we have a generation where one-half . . . 
where there’s one group failing and one group thriving. 
 
Our population is experiencing incredible growth, and we often 
hear this. We’ll talk about the baby boom that’s happening in 
our communities with the new immigrants coming to 
Saskatchewan. This is all a good thing, but this brings new 
challenges. And yet we see a government that’s unprepared to 
really make the investments that are necessary so kids have a 
great start. And that’s all kids. That’s all kids. And so when we 
have a report like this and leading to Bill No. 174, yes, when we 
think about this, we have to think about the context in terms of 
what’s happening in our province here. 
 
This really talks about what we have to do in terms of how we 
move forward. One of the things I want to talk a little bit about, 
and this is one of the things I did that spring is I asked kids, so 
what are their concerns? What are kids worried about? What are 
kids worried about at school? You know, as I said, it’s a great, 
wonderful thing. It’s a wonderful thing . . . And I appreciate 
that the members over there probably don’t want to hear what 
kids want to talk about. They don’t want to hear, especially that 
member from Moose Jaw who probably hasn’t talked to a kid in 
a long, long time. I don’t know if that’s . . . But I’ve got to tell 
you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they get loud when they don’t 
want to hear what kids want to talk about. 
 
You know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Let me read the first line 
of my report: “More and more young people are choosing to 
remain in Saskatchewan.” And yet those guys are ready to shout 
and shout as if . . . We think that’s a good thing. Now he thinks 
that he just wants to yell from his seat, the member from Moose 
Jaw, ready to jump up. He should listen. He should just sit back 
and listen. He should just relax a bit and listen to the speech at 
hand, and watch his heckling. He can heckle afterwards. I 
always enjoy a good heckle, but maybe after the fact because 
I’d like to do my speech. 
 
But here we are. We agree and kids agree that they want to 
remain here in Saskatchewan. That’s a wonderful thing. That’s 
a wonderful thing. But they have some concerns and hopes for 
their future that are important to consider in terms of any 
educational reform. Students are concerned about their choices 
and the accessibility of quality education at both the secondary 
and post-secondary level and the availability of quality 
employment once they leave the education system. So here you 
have . . . They’re very wise. They’re saying yes, we want to 
stay here but we want to make sure we have the best schools, 
the best high schools, the best universities, the post-secondary 
learning situations, and they want to have a good job. They 
want to have good jobs. 
 

Here are some of the concerns that they’ve talked about. Their 
concerns were about the cost of housing. They have a concern 
about that. They are very aware of what the cost of housing is in 
Saskatchewan and what an impact that has on their choice to 
stay here in Saskatchewan. Now this is a challenge because we 
know rents are unaffordable. They are high and high school 
kids know that. They know that, and they want to make sure 
post-secondary schooling is affordable. 
 
But many students have also expressed concerns about social 
equity within their community and identified specific concerns 
about the level of gang activity and crime as a product of social 
inequality and systemic racism. And, Mr. Speaker, no truer 
words. This is exactly their concerns that they see in their 
schools and on their streets, in the malls and main streets. 
They’re worried about gangs. They are worried about systemic 
racism. These are real concerns, and we have to make sure we 
step up to the plate as a government. 
 
The students raised concerns about the infrastructure within 
their community including access to reliable public transit, and 
they also raised concerns regarding the environment and access 
to sport and leisure facilities. It’s great that they’re concerned 
about the environment as well because as a generation, we’re 
not doing a great job of how we’re leaving this world. And I 
think that we should listen to these kids and what they hope for. 
 
You know, I asked them, and this is something I would do, is 
what are your hopes? What are your fears? What are your 
positives? What are your negatives? What are the positive 
things that they felt about their community? They were positive 
about the social fabric of their community. They enjoyed its 
freedoms, opportunities, and cultural diversity, which is a great 
thing when you think about how diverse our communities are 
getting to be here in Saskatchewan. They see that as a positive. 
They don’t see that as a negative. And they worry about the 
systemic racism that may be a hangover from our generation, 
but from their generation they’re willing to embrace cultural 
diversity. So that’s really important. 
 
Several students reference their strong family connections and 
hope they continue to live and eventually work in their 
communities, and how they would like to meet their future 
aspirations and remain in Saskatchewan. And the challenge 
though is for us to, as legislators and policy-makers, to 
capitalize on that positive sentiment. They want to be here, but 
we have to make sure we have the best schools for them. And 
these are the kind of hopes and fears they have. 
 
So what are the trends affecting teachers? We talked about 
teacher qualifications and salary. I talked at length about teacher 
qualifications; that’s a huge issue. This was done in the spring 
of 2013 when they were just about to go into contract 
negotiations. Here we are in March of 2015, when that contract 
is just actually wrapping up. So it’d be interesting to have . . . as 
we look back on the past two years for that. 
 
Now interestingly, this is what was written at the time: 
 

The Ministry of Education must also work with the 
professional organization of teachers in Saskatchewan, the 
STF and the provincial teacher education programs based 
out of both the University of Saskatchewan (U of S) and 



March 4, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6445 

the University of Regina (U of R) to develop high quality 
programs for teacher training that recruit the best possible 
teacher candidates. 

 
And that’s why I’m concerned about this, this piece of 
legislation. And where are the universities in this? We used to 
have them as a key stakeholder, particularly when we came to 
teacher training and teacher recruitment, and we’re kind of 
leaving that out. So now, “A provincial round table on teacher 
training and professionalism may be useful to create a public 
dialogue on this topic.” 
 
[16:15] 
 
Go on to talk . . . another teacher concerned with student 
contact time which talked of retention of new teachers, and of 
course that would have an impact on this bill before us at hand. 
Standardized testing, again we continue to talk at length about 
that. And curricular changes, and again this is the one that we 
come back and we talk about the changes to the curriculum and 
how the rolling out . . . and I just quote: 
 

The rolling out of new curriculum in Saskatchewan has 
been done without the required attention to teacher training 
and professional development. While each subject 
curriculum is unique and exceptions are bound to appear, 
overall the new Saskatchewan curriculum has been well 
developed so far. 

 
But what we need to do is make sure we engage teachers and 
make sure we engage those who have . . . that are professional 
and the academic world in this area as well. 
 
So my report writes: 
 

Saskatchewanians believe that great teachers make for 
great schools. This belief can sometimes be translated into 
the . . . [belief] that if we can just get rid of the “bad 
teachers” we can “fix” the schools. What is more important 
is creating an educational environment that encourages 
collaboration and improved teaching by all teachers. While 
strong teachers are important to the success of any 
educational system, greater equity for their students will 
ultimately have a greater impact on the individual 
outcomes [for] . . . students . . . 

 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could go on, and I don’t mean to 
read the whole report. But the ministers did challenge me when 
I said I was going to do my homework this summer, and I hope 
I demonstrated that I did do some homework that summer. 
 
And so I just want to say that this is an important piece of 
legislation, and I think that when we look at the Act itself and 
we look at the . . . I just want to look at section 6 when we talk 
about the directors and who will be on the board. Section 6: 
 

(2) The board of directors consists of: 
 

(a) the following members appointed or elected in 
accordance with the bylaws: 
 

(i) three members appointed or elected by the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation; 

(ii) one member appointed or elected by the League of 
Educational Administrators, Directors and 
Superintendents; 
 

(b) three members appointed by the minister, only one 
. . . may be a member of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation; and 
 
(c) two members appointed by the Lieutenant Governor 
in Council pursuant to section 7. 

 
So again just to be clear that there’s no reference to the two 
universities, and I feel that’s a big gap, and why have they been 
left out? I think that again as we talk about teacher training, and 
one part of this new piece of legislation which is so important is 
the protection of children and the disciplinary manner. But 
when we talk about teacher certification, teacher recruitment, 
teacher training, clearly the universities will have something to 
say about that. And they are not part of this. 
 
And just to underline the section about how we can, you know, 
the section about bylaws and how bylaws come about, and the 
one that I find very interesting is section 2, section 16(2)(l) 
prescribing the procedures of . . . 
 

(p) setting standards regarding the manner and method of 
practice of teachers; 
 
(q) prescribing procedures . . . 
 
(r) establishing categories of certification and 
registration and prescribing the rights and privileges of 
each category; 
 
(s) respecting the teacher education programs required to 
be successfully completed for the purposes of 
certification pursuant to this Act; 

 
So this is something, and I keep coming back to. This is hugely, 
hugely important. If we’re going to have great schools we have 
to have great teachers, and for that they have to be, their 
programs have to be the very best. And to make sure that 
happens, we have to have full consultation with the appropriate 
groups. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will have a lot of questions 
to the minister on this bill. And I know members will have a lot 
of questions, a lot to say about this Act in the days ahead. We 
are looking forward to it, and it is good to see the STF, the 
school boards on side, and that some sense of collaboration is 
starting to appear. 
 
But we don’t see the whole picture, and as I said, we’ll be 
having a lot of questions for the minister on this — especially in 
terms of the universities and the role of the universities. So with 
that, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to adjourn debates now on Bill No. 
174, An Act respecting the Regulation of Teachers and making 
consequential amendments to other Acts. Thank you very much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 174, The Registered 
Teachers Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 



6446 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2015 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 175 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 175 — The 
Registered Teachers Consequential Amendments Act, 
2014/Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 
intitulée The Registered Teachers Act be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I won’t . . . my 
comments won’t be quite as long because this is just a . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, yes. You know, I feel like I’m 
in a classroom here and it’s June 29th and people are looking at 
the clock and saying, we can get out early if . . . But maybe, but 
you know, this is an important job, and this is something that 
we really feel very, very . . . It is our job, and it’s our job to be 
nitpicky and to go through this and read through this carefully, 
you know, because I do feel . . .  
 
And I was doing some math last night, you know. When we go 
through this and we have 37 pieces of legislation, on this side 
we get to speak to each piece of legislation and we have to read 
each piece of legislation. We have to read the minister’s 
remarks. I’m not sure if three-quarters, maybe half of those 
folks over there have read all the legislation, have read all the 
minister’s comments. I’m not sure. But on this side we have, 
and I’m very proud of that. And if they have, good on them. 
Good on them. 
 
And I do appreciate the fact they do hang in here, and many of 
them seem to, at least through their comments . . . I know some 
of them get a little pre-emptive and start to shout out before I 
have a chance to speak . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I’m not 
used to that. I’m not used to that, Mr. Speaker. In my 18 years 
of teaching, I’ve never seen this happen before. I’ve never seen 
this happen before. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I do think that this is an important piece of 
legislation before us, and of course there’s always the 
companion piece that follows the Act to make consequential 
amendments resulting from the enactment of The Registered 
Teachers Act. And so I don’t have any comments about this. 
Again this will be something that will be brought up in 
committee when it goes to committee. But at that point I would 
move adjournment on Bill No. 175, an Act to make 
consequential amendments. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 175, The Registered Teachers Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 176 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 176 — The 
Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it’s, 
as always, my honour to be able to rise in the Legislative 
Assembly here to speak to the bills that are before the 
Assembly. I think it’s a very important part of our democracy is 
that we have a full and thorough opportunity to debate these 
bills. And it’s certainly one that I feel very honoured to be able 
to participate in, as always. 
 
And so today I’m going to make a few comments about The 
Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2). And I guess that’s 
one of the main comments I want to make is this is yet another 
example of this government not getting it right the first time. 
My colleague just ahead of me indicated some of those 
situations we see over and over where our legislative drafters 
are being asked to come back to the table and get it right the 
second time around. This is one example of that. 
 
And what’s basically happening here is that there was 
significant changes, as the Assembly would remember, last 
spring, made to The Traffic Safety Act as a result of some 
hearings that went around the province and listened to what 
people’s concerns are about traffic safety. 
 
And really this is about distracted driving, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And just before I was preparing today, I watched a video that’s 
online. I think it’s geared towards teens more than anyone, but 
it’s a shocking and graphic video about a horrible accident that 
happens as a result of texting while driving. I know it was 
shown . . . I’ve seen parts of that video before when my son was 
taking driver training. Parents were also asked to come and 
watch this video. And it shocked me at the time and it shocked 
me again today. And I just think the violence of these accidents 
. . . And they showed a number of vehicles that were destroyed 
as a result of texting while driving or being distracted while 
driving. I think the science is there and yet the temptation when 
that phone buzzes, to take a peek, is very hard to resist. And I 
think many people would attest to that. I know I certainly have 
difficulty doing that. 
 
One of the articles I read talked about, there is the technology 
available to jam cellphones or texting when they are in a 
vehicle, and maybe that’s what we need to wean ourselves off 
our addiction to our cellphones. But I think one of the groups 
that’s most vulnerable and I worry about are young people, 
because they don’t have enough experience driving, for one, 
and secondly the compelling part of a text buzz is almost too 
much for them to resist. And I think, you know, I’ve talked to 
counsellors about this, and there’s studies now or new thought 
about cellphone addiction — actually being addicted to 
cellphones. And I think that’s part of what we’re seeing here in 
this phenomenon related to distracted driving. 
 
So yes, it’s important as a society and as a legislature that we 



March 4, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6447 

respond accordingly to the trends that become popular in our 
public life and our social life and even our driving life. We 
spend a lot of time in our cars. 
 
So the two changes that are relevant to this particular bill, Bill 
No. 176, there’s two things that are happening. First of all, in 
the spring session the bill that was passed by this legislature 
allowed for the seizure of a commercial vehicle for up to seven 
days if the person driving, if the employee was caught texting 
while driving or distracted driving. And I think that took a lot of 
people by surprise. When the seizures started happening, a lot 
of the business community expressed a great deal of concern, 
and so this was the oops. I don’t think it was carefully thought 
through at the time. So now the government’s come back with a 
bill in December responding to that oversight once again. 
 
So there’s two things that are going to happen. In addition to the 
seven-day seizure, the government has added another penalty 
for drivers in a commercial vehicle, and they can lose their 
licence for three days. That is similar to if you were caught 
driving with an alcohol blood limit of .04. So the minister has 
indicated that’s an appropriate response or penalty for an 
employee driving a commercial vehicle. 
 
Now one of the concerns I have about the way this particular 
section is worded . . . It’s a new section in The Traffic Safety 
Act, and it’s 280.1 . . . well 280.1 is the new section. But again, 
and you’ve heard me talk about this before, you have to refer to 
the regulations. In this section, prescribed, which means go to 
the regulations and find out what is prescribed, shows up one, 
two, three, four, five, six, seven times. So it’s really hard to 
actually understand what’s in here if you have to go to the 
regulations seven times in one clause, in one new clause. And I 
know The Traffic Safety Act, if you look at the list of 
regulations — and that’s another section that’s being amended 
here, section 287 — I think is something like eight pages long, 
the number of regulations. And yes, I mean this is a matter of 
administrative convenience, but it’s really difficult to comment 
on a bill like this in the legislature when we don’t know what 
the regulations are going to look like. 
 
And that’s the next clause that I’ll talk about is clause 4 of this 
Act talks about amending the regulations section of the highway 
traffic Act regulations, or The Traffic Safety Act regulations. 
And there’s a number of things that they have in there. This is 
what the minister talked about in his comments to the media 
back in December. But he’s telling us what might be in the 
regulations, but we don’t know because they haven’t been 
passed yet. 
 
But this is where the regulatory changes that we’re going to see 
will prescribe the circumstances where the driver’s licence is 
going to be suspended, in the context of what I’m talking about. 
Also prescribes circumstances where they can get a review to 
the traffic safety board, I would think, for their suspension, 
what the form will look like for the review, what the fee will be 
for the review, and the powers of the board on the review and 
prescribing the limit, or limiting the matters the board must 
consider on a review. 
 
[16:30] 
 
So what this is talking about is the change that the minister 

referred to that would alleviate the concerns of the construction 
industry in particular. But people who have drivers driving 
snow removal or other kinds of emergency vehicles are also 
very concerned about the impact of having their vehicle 
impounded for seven days. So what the minister is alluding to, 
we haven’t seen it. It’s not in the bill. We don’t know what it’s 
going to look like, but he is saying to reassure the people that 
have employees driving their trucks or their vehicles, he’s 
saying we will put something in the regs that will allow the 
employer to quickly call somebody and say, I need my vehicle 
unsuspended, or unimpounded, or . . . I don’t know if that’s a 
word, but anyways, not impounded. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Disimpounded. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Disimpounded? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Disenfranchised. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Could be disenfranchised, but I don’t know if 
a vehicle has that. Okay, I’ll move on. 
 
The question is whether or not . . . If it’s 3 in the morning, and 
your driver just got caught texting and is issued a ticket and 
your vehicle’s impounded and you’re removing snow in an 
emergency situation, how are you going to get a review board 
struck by the highway traffic safety, or whatever the board is, to 
release your vehicle? And maybe we’ll see that in the 
regulations, but there’s definitely some concern within the 
community as to whether or not these regulations will do the 
trick. 
 
The other thing I find rather interesting in what the minister was 
saying — because again we don’t really see it in the Act; this all 
just refers us to the regulations — but he’s talking about . . . It 
was actually in his media scrum. It wasn’t even in his 
comments to the Assembly here but it was in his media scrum. 
And I need to find it here. But basically he’s saying that there’s 
some things the companies are going to have to do in order to 
get their vehicle back. So they’re going to have to prove that 
they have a driver’s abstract for that employee. 
 
So this is encouraging, obviously, employers to ensure that they 
have driver’s abstracts. But what if, what if an individual had a 
ticket previously for distracted driving? Does that mean they 
won’t get their vehicle back? Or you know, are you going to be 
forever punished — you never get a job if you had that one 
ticket against you? So these are things that I think will be 
further fallout from the decision of the minister to impose this 
requirement to provide a driver’s abstract. 
 
So I know he was questioning about it and he wasn’t entirely 
certain about what was going to happen. He was asked in the 
scrum about the driver’s abstract: is that something business 
owners actually do right now? And he says, I think it depends 
on the nature of the driving and everything else. Well he 
doesn’t seem to know exactly when abstracts are requested at 
this point in time. He went on to say, I think there are some 
companies that do it and some that don’t. And he’s going to 
look at it as a procedure when he moves forward. Then he went 
on to say, these commercial vehicles are very expensive and 
they want to make sure they know what their driver has been up 
to. So does that mean that, you know, they won’t hire anybody 



6448 Saskatchewan Hansard March 4, 2015 

who’s had a speeding ticket 40 years ago? Or you know, what 
exactly is going to have to be in this abstract for them to get 
their vehicle released from a pound? 
 
So I think these are maybe further questions that we’ll be seeing 
further changes to the Act on, but it just seems like it’s not well 
thought out at this point in time. And I’m kind of concerned 
about how this driver’s abstract is going to impact decisions to 
hire people and also what exactly would need to be in there for 
the vehicle that has been impounded to be released. 
 
So that’s just one thing that jumped out at me. I’m sure other of 
my colleagues are going to have other questions as we go 
through the debate on this particular bill. But at this point, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I would move that we adjourn the debate on 
Bill No. 176, An Act to amend The Traffic Safety Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 176, The Traffic Safety 
Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 177 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 177 — The 
Insurance Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Again a pleasure to rise and speak to a bill. In this case, this is a 
big bill. We are looking at an overhaul of The Insurance Act. As 
the minister pointed out in his comments when he introduced it, 
this really hasn’t had an overhaul since the early 1900s. It’s a 
large Act. 
 
Other of my colleagues have also commented on it. 
Unfortunately I wasn’t able to participate in the technical 
briefing that was held just today. It’s too bad it wasn’t held at a 
different time that we could have participated and informed 
ourselves as to that technical briefing because in this case, it is a 
highly technical bill, obviously, when you’re talking about an 
entire industry that is highly regulated. 
 
There is some comments that are available now from some 
people involved in the industry. The minister indicated that he 
had done extensive consultation from the industry and that the 
industry supports the bill. And if that is indeed the case, then 
that’s a good thing and that’s certainly what we are looking for. 
 
There are some changes that are identified and laid out in an 
article by McKercher LLP, so obviously law firms are going to 
take a very close look at that. And they’ve identified that the 
most obvious changes in the legislation is consumer protection. 
Obviously consumer protection is an important part of 
insurance and ensuring that consumers get basically what they 
asked for. 

And it just reminds me of a situation I have right now with SGI 
[Saskatchewan Government Insurance]. And I’m really not 
being protected by SGI, and I’m very sad about that. I had a 
minor hit and run where I was able to obtain the licence plate of 
the vehicle that ran into me, but they’re from Manitoba. And so 
my insurer, for whom I pay all kinds of money, they say, sorry, 
we can’t help. They refuse to pay and you’re on your own. 
 
So now I have to go to small claims court. On March 13th I’ll 
be in small claims court, but it’s really unfortunate. Like my 
insurance company is not going to bat for me at all in this case. 
They just threw up their hands and said, we can’t do anything. 
So it’s a hassle and it’s annoying, but it’s something that I feel 
is only right and just. It’s that this vehicle backed into me and I 
have $1,500 worth of damage on my car. So it would be nice if 
your insurance company would support you and actually go to 
bat for you and obtain at least the deductible from the person 
who ran into me. 
 
It’s just I think you hear this over and over from people when it 
comes to insurance, and I hope this bill is robust enough to 
make sure that people do get what they pay for. Too many times 
you hear, well the insurance company, you know, wouldn’t pay 
for that because . . . And there’s a long list of reasons why 
people don’t get insurance even though they’ve been dutifully 
paying for their policy for many years in some cases. 
 
And you know things like flooding, we have a lot of situations 
in urban centres these days where we have aging and crumbling 
infrastructure, and unless it’s a sewer backup there’s no 
protection whatsoever for people. And those are the issues that 
you really need the insurance for. And I think, given some of 
the extreme climate events that we’re seeing coming through 
North America for sure, and probably other parts of the world, 
but we think of Calgary and the flooding that happened there, 
premiums now . . . Insurance companies have done very, very 
well for themselves over the years, but now premiums are 
skyrocketing. 
 
I’m hearing it’s the same with crop insurance in Saskatchewan. 
There’s a lot of farmers who I’ve been talking to that are very 
upset about the lack of availability of crop insurance in some 
circumstances, or the lack of any sort of covering of their costs 
on losses that they had when they’ve been flooded out. And this 
I’m sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you’ve heard from farmers as 
well in your area because I know there’s been a lot of rain 
where your riding is, and this is not unique to any particular part 
of the province. We’re hearing this from all different parts of 
the province because of the extreme climate situation that we 
find ourselves in, or maybe the new norm, depending on how 
you want to spin it. 
 
So at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we really need 
some help with the technical understanding of that, and I 
understand that the minister’s staff provided it to some of my 
colleagues and our staff earlier this afternoon. So we look 
forward to being able to benefit from that technical briefing. I 
know we’ve asked for a side-by-side analysis of the previous 
Act vis-à-vis this Act. And I know side by sides are difficult 
when you have rearrangements but certain explanatory notes 
would be appropriate for this, and maybe the minister is 
working on getting that to us. We’re certainly hopeful because 
it’s really difficult to be able to line up where the changes are. 



March 4, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6449 

And I think that’s very important in any kind of a debate is to 
identify for the public where exactly the changes are and why 
they were considered necessary. 
 
So we look forward to having explanatory notes. We look 
forward to being able to review the information that was 
provided in the technical briefing. And I know other of my 
colleagues will be much more articulate on these changes than 
I, because of that. 
 
So at this point I would like to move that we adjourn the debate 
on Bill No. 177, An Act respecting Insurance and Insurers and 
making consequential amendments to other Acts and 
regulations. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 177, The Insurance 
Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 
that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This House now stands adjourned 
until tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:40.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6421 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6421 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6421 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Prince Albert Citizen of the Year 
  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6421 
 How Saskatoon Eats 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6422 
 Annual Bridges Awards in Saskatoon 
  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6422 
 Recognition for Regina Community Leader 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6422 
 Improvement in Joint Replacement Wait Times 
  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6422 
 Regina Pats Qualify for Conference Playoffs 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6423 
 Food Park Facility for Nipawin 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6423 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Ambulance Service Fees 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6423 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6423 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6424 
 Release of Third Quarter Financial Report 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6425 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6425 
 Occupational Health and Safety Inspections  
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6426 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6426 
 Creative Saskatchewan Expenditures and Support for the Film Industry  
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6427 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6427 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 149 — The Health Administration Amendment Act, 2014 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6428 
  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 6428 
 Bill No. 158 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2014 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6428 
  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 6429 
 Bill No. 161 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6429 
  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 6430 
 Bill No. 162 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments Amendment Act, 2014 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6430 
  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 6430 
 Bill No. 163 — The Education Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation  
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6430 
 Bill No. 164 — The Health Information Protection Amendment Act, 2014  
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6431 
 Bill No. 165 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) 
 Loi n° 2 de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hazard  
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6432 
 Bill No. 166 — The Local Government Election Act, 2014  
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6433 
 Bill No. 167 — The Local Government Election Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Local Government Election Act, 2014  
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6434 
 



 

 Bill No. 168 — The Government Relations Administration Act  
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6434 
 Bill No. 170 — The Fire Safety Act  
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6435 
 Bill No. 172 — The Naturopathic Medicine Act 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6437 
 Bill No. 174 — The Registered Teachers Act 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6438 
 Bill No. 175 — The Registered Teachers Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Registered Teachers Act 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6446 
 Bill No. 176 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6446 
 Bill No. 177 — The Insurance Act 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6448 
 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


