






















































Hansard: May 07, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 61A  THURSDAY, MAY 7, 2015, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7145 
 May 7, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 
and through you to members of the House, it’s a pleasure for 
me to introduce our candidate in the coming general election in 
the constituency of Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota, Bronwyn 
Eyre. She is currently a trustee for the Saskatoon Public School 
Board, ward 7, which includes Stonebridge where she lives. 
She’s been a broadcaster — we’ll know her through that work 
— and a daily panellist on CJME and CKOM. Before that she 
was a columnist in the Saskatoon StarPhoenix. Her columns 
appeared I think here in Regina as well in the Leader-Post. 
 
She grew up in Saskatoon, attended Aden Bowman Collegiate. 
She took her post-secondary education at McGill and at the 
University of Saskatchewan where she graduated from the 
College of Law in 1996. From ’95 to 2005 she worked as a 
senior writer and editor for two London, England-based legal 
publications, Commercial Lawyer and European Lawyer in 
London, Milan, and Frankfurt. 
 
Joining Bronwyn is her mother, Sigrid, and her son Max Eyre. 
We want to welcome her to her Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce some very special guests that we have in your gallery 
this morning, adorned beautifully in, I think it’s blue, blue teal, 
for a specific reason, Mr. Speaker. Early this morning, we were 
out in front of the legislature raising a flag recognizing 
tomorrow as world ovarian cancer awareness day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With us today in the Assembly are both survivors, family 
members, and supporters of survivors and forwarders of the 
cause, Mr. Speaker. So to you and through you, we have 
Stephanie Gosselin, regional director of Ovarian Cancer 
Canada; Catherine Mazurkawich, Ovarian Cancer Canada Walk 
of Hope committee Co-Chair. We have Anne Chase, Ovarian 
Cancer Canada board member and volunteer. We also have 
Cheryl Hill, Gord Bonokoski, Barry Young, Marilyn Williams, 
Paul O’Byrne, Coralee Found, and Laureen Gatin. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I ask all members welcome these fine individuals to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
join with the minister in welcoming the ovarian cancer 
survivors or SOCS [Saskatchewan Ovarian Cancer Survivors] 
group here today and the folks from Ovarian Cancer Canada as 

well. It’s an important day tomorrow to acknowledge and 
recognize, and we appreciate having both survivors, family 
members, and supporters here in the gallery with us today: 
Anne Chase who is a Woman of Distinction, we might add. We 
have Stephanie Gosselin with Ovarian Cancer Canada and Mr. 
Bonokoski. Gord Bonokoski happens to be the grandpa of a fine 
legislative staffer we have in our office, Mitch Bonokoski. 
 
And also I would like to give a shout-out to Jennifer Milne 
Bisson who is here today and is a good friend. So thank you for 
all that you do in supporting and advocating, supporting other 
family members and those who have lived with ovarian cancer, 
and for all the advocacy and fundraising you do to make sure 
that people’s lives are better. And I’d like to ask all members to 
also welcome them to their gallery here today. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to 
welcome Krystal Lewis who is my intern with the 
Saskatchewan legislative internship program. Krystal and I 
have only been working together for a couple of weeks, but I’d 
just like to tell you a little bit about her. 
 
She’s lived in Saskatchewan for most of her life and holds a 
BFA [Bachelor in Fine Arts] in media production and studies 
and a certificate in German, both from the U of R [University of 
Regina]. She’s currently pursuing studies in international 
development. But the things that I’d like to say about her, I hear 
from one of my colleagues actually that she’s a heck of a 
volunteer with folk fest here in Regina, with the Folk Festival 
here in Regina. 
 
As well in my short time with her, I have learned that she . . . 
I’ve been very impressed and pleased with the high level of 
work that she’s done for me, and I’m looking forward to having 
her come to Saskatoon Riversdale and see some of the things 
that I do in my office there. But I know she has an interest in 
population and public health, and I’m looking forward to 
introducing her to some of the organizations and individuals 
who support that work in Saskatoon. 
 
So I would ask all members to welcome Krystal Lewis to her 
legislature today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I’d like to introduce a number of people from my 
constituency from the Wadena Elementary School. There are 29 
grade 4 students here today. Welcome. With them are their 
teachers, Ms. Harvey, Ms. Helsted; school principal, Mr. Halyk; 
and the chaperones, Ms. Hiscock and Burghardt and Mrs. 
Haskey. 
 
With them today, I would like to mention that Nevin Halyk, the 
principal of Wadena School, has been named as one of 
Canada’s 40 outstanding principals by The Learning 
Partnership. He was nominated by his peers, the school staff, 
and community members to receive the award, and he’s part of 
a group of over 350 exemplary leaders from every province and 
territory in the country. 
 



7146 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2015 

So congratulations to you, and thank you for bringing this group 
to the legislature. I’m looking forward to meeting later, and 
welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members, I’d like to introduce two individuals seated 
in your gallery, two people from the fine city of Moose Jaw, 
Stacey Landin and her mother, Isobel Landin, who are here 
today. Both long-time observers of politics, and they wanted to 
come to the Assembly to watch the proceedings in person 
today. Stacey is also the president of the Moose Jaw and 
District Labour Council, and so I thank her for her work on that 
front.  
 
And I should also note, Mr. Speaker, that Stacey worked for 
many years as a constituency assistant in Moose Jaw and helped 
many people in the community in problems and issues they 
have. And I know she’s a passionate advocate for a lot of 
people in the city. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to join 
me in welcoming these two fine citizens of the province to the 
legislature today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to introduce several people in your gallery who are 
associated with Mitacs, M-i-t-a-c-s, the national organization 
that supports graduate students and post-doctoral fellows in 
research and development internships with industry. Today I 
announced $270,000 to support this program on behalf of 
taxpayers of this province, Mr. Speaker. Our government is 
very proud to support this program which benefits students and 
industry in Saskatchewan through contributions to research and 
innovation. 
 
Three of the people in the gallery are students at the University 
of Saskatchewan, and all have benefited from the Mitacs 
internships. They are Richard Lomotey, Terrence Huang, and 
Nam Hoang. Seated with them, Mr. Speaker, in your gallery is 
Professor Ralph Deters, a professor of computer science at the 
University of Saskatchewan who is supervising the work of 
these three students. Professor Deters has supervised numerous 
Mitacs accelerate projects and is a champion of the program. 
Also with them, Mr. Speaker, from the Mitacs organization is 
Mr. Matthew Bongiorno. 
 
I want to congratulate these students for their dedication and 
hard work in their studies and on being selected as interns under 
the Mitacs program. And I want to thank Professor Deters and 
Mr. Bongiorno from Mitacs for their commitment to this 
program of excellence. Please join me in welcoming them to the 
Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the minister in welcoming the three students and 
Professor Deters and Mr. Bongiorno from Mitacs here today to 
join us for the proceedings. Certainly graduate studies is a very 
important part of the post-secondary education system, and 

certainly the work that those students do in terms of adding to 
our society’s knowledge and to our economy’s productivity is 
very important. So it’s good to see long supporters of that kind 
of work here, both with the students and with Professor Deters 
and Mr. Bongiorno from Mitacs. So on behalf of the official 
opposition, welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to request leave 
for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce today to you and through you in this Assembly, 
seated in your gallery, some special guests and friends of mine. 
Joining us today is Senator Curt McKenzie, a Republican 
senator from the state senate of Idaho. Curt, if you want to give 
us a wave. Curt was elected in 2002 and has been a senator in 
the state senate there ever since. 
 
I’ve come to know Curt quite well over the last four years 
through our work with PNWER [Pacific NorthWest Economic 
Region], and I gained a lot of respect for his insight into matters 
that are important on both sides of the forty-ninth parallel. And 
we thank him for that and his energy and enthusiasm for the 
work that PNWER does, Mr. Speaker. I know we’re going to 
have a great year. Curt is the incoming president of PNWER, 
and I’m certainly looking forward to his leadership over the 
next year and working with him. Thank you, Curt. 
 
As well with Curt, we have Mr. Matt Morrison. He’s the 
executive director of PNWER out of Seattle. He is the man that 
keeps PNWER running smoothly and does an excellent job. 
Matt has been, I believe, with PNWER for about 20 years now. 
You could say that he is the voice and I think the face of 
PNWER wherever we go. As the old saying goes, I think if you 
looked in the dictionary for the definition of PNWER, you’d 
probably see a picture of Matt Morrison. But he definitely is 
PNWER and brings a lot to the work that PNWER does. 
 
He’s done a lot to advance the interest and the profile of this 
association. And I’m impressed with the work that Matt does 
and the contacts and respect that he has not only in state and 
provincial capitals but both in Ottawa and Washington as well. 
And, Mr. Speaker, if you’re ever looking for somebody, if 
you’re going somewhere, to book you a 12- or a 14-hour day, 
Matt Morrison’s the guy because he books full days for us. We 
definitely get our value when we go. 
 
As well with them, seated up in your gallery is Ms. Shawna 
Argue, our province’s private sector representative to PNWER. 
She is the past president of the Association of Professional 
Engineers and Geoscientists of Saskatchewan, and we thank her 
for the hospitality, the work she’s done in organizing this visit. 
As well, seated in the gallery is Matt Smith. He’s the senior 
international officer for the international relations branch of 



May 7, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7147 

Exec Council. I’d like to thank Matt personally for the work 
that he does. He’s a phenomenal and very valued resource for 
me on the trips that we take, in providing background 
information and things that we need to address. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members know that Saskatchewan has been a 
member of PNWER since 2008, and PNWER is a 
public-private partnership of governments, business, and 
non-government organizations from this area of North America. 
The member states, provinces, and territories that comprise 
PNWER include Saskatchewan, Alberta, British Columbia, 
Yukon, the Northwest Territories, Alaska, Washington, Oregon, 
Idaho, and Montana. We and they are all united in common 
cause to promote greater regional collaboration, improved 
competitiveness, achieve continued economic growth, and 
reduce trade and regulatory barriers. Senator McKenzie and Mr. 
Morrison, who have joined us, joined with Ms. Argue in Regina 
for the biennial capital visit of PNWER leadership. While in 
Regina, Senator McKenzie will have the opportunity to learn 
more about our great province. He and Mr. Morrison will meet 
with you, Mr. Speaker, a number of cabinet ministers, and 
representatives of the Saskatchewan Trade and Export 
Partnership, and as well with APEGS [Association of 
Professional Engineers and Geoscientists of Saskatchewan]. 
They will discuss how PNWER can best help us in advancing 
our shared interests. 
 
Saskatchewan has been an active participant in PNWER 
deliberations and governance. We played host to a highly 
successful PNWER annual summit three years ago, and my 
colleague the Minister of Agriculture served as president of 
PNWER from 2012 to 2013. PNWER is an organization that 
encourages trade, builds relationships, works across borders, 
and provides a forum for discussing economic opportunities and 
issues common to this region. It has been described as the gold 
standard of US [United States]-Canada relations, and is unique 
in that it encompasses governments from both sides of the 
border as well as public sector interests in several different 
aspects, having over 20 working groups involved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to please join with me in 
welcoming these guests to our Legislative Assembly. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the member opposite in welcoming our friends from PNWER, 
and I want to say thank you to them for the work that they’ve 
done over many years. Senator McKenzie, it’s a special 
pleasure to welcome you here as the new incoming president of 
the organization. 
 
We know that you’ll provide leadership that follows in a long 
tradition that, as my friend opposite said, Mr. Matt Morrison 
has been in this leadership for a long time, and part of his 
success I think is making sure he gets good people to continue 
to act as the president. Also, Shawna Argue, it’s good to 
welcome you as well. 
 
[10:15] 
 
I think we should all remember that this organization was 

established by Deputy Premier Jim Horsman of Alberta and one 
of the state senators from Washington, Mr. Bluechel. And they 
had a common interest in seeing how Washington and British 
Columbia, where Mr. Bluechel had grown up, and Alberta and 
Idaho and all of the Pacific Northwest could work together. 
That’s expanded to include us because it’s so much a part of our 
history as well. I know that many of us have family in 
Washington, Idaho, British Columbia, and right across all of the 
different states. 
 
And so I wish you all the best in the future. I know that the 
meeting this summer in Big Sky, Montana will continue the 
work that you have done so well. So welcome to you here in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you and to all members of the legislature, I’d 
like to introduce my cousin who’s sitting in the west gallery. 
Mr. Trevor Langen is a long-time resident of Regina. However 
this is his first time coming to watch the proceedings here 
today. Being an entrepreneur, I had to talk a little extra to take 
some time out of his day to stay and watch the proceedings after 
our meeting this morning. So to you and through you and to all 
members of the legislature, I’d like to introduce Mr. Trevor 
Langen. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like first of 
all to join with the member from Kelvington to welcome Mr. 
Nevin Halyk who I believe has just stepped out of the Assembly 
now, I’ve noticed. But being recognized as one of Canada’s top 
40 principals is a remarkable achievement, and I’d like to 
welcome him here today along with the fine students from 
Wadena here today. 
 
While on my feet, I’m very pleased to have a very special group 
that’s joined us here today. And by a bit of coincidence we have 
the other principal that was recognized here in Saskatchewan of 
the top 40 principals, and that’s my friend Mr. James Wahl 
who’s joined us here today from St. Francis Community School 
here today. And Mr. Wahl is a remarkable educator and a fine 
leader and fully engaged in our community. It’s a pleasure to 
host him here today, and I know he does good work within our 
community. I know he’s . . . Certainly the Regina Catholic 
schools are also very proud of him. And I know at one point, 
I’ve heard that he was quite the point guard, despite that stature, 
for the Sheldon Williams Spartans, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He’s joined today by some student leaders that I’d like to 
introduce: Ms. Asha Dzisah, a grade 7 student — give us a 
wave; Emily Wenarchuk, a grade 6 student; Miguel Cruzat, 
grade 7; and Taiwo Akinwale, grade 8. These are student 
leaders from St. Francis. I ask all members to put their hands 
together to welcome Mr. James Wahl and these students to their 
Assembly. 
 
While still on my feet, there’s a couple of other people I’d like 
to recognize, certainly the PNWER delegation but a few other 
people as well. It was mentioned that Mitch Bonokoski, who 



7148 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2015 

works within our office, has his grandfather here today. And I’d 
like to welcome Mr. Gord Bonokoski, a long-time teacher and 
principal in Lumsden, was once a city councillor, a long-time 
Lions Club member, and I understand one very fine fisherman 
and someone who loves gardening as well. It’s a pleasure to 
welcome Mr. Gord Bonokoski to his Assembly. 
 
I would like to mention a good friend that’s here today, Ms. 
Jennifer Milne Bisson who, along with her husband, Steve, are 
absolutely remarkable people, a fighter and a survivor and 
dealing with adversity that many of us can only imagine, with 
such beautiful grace. Wonderful to have my friend here today. 
 
And I’d also like to recognize Mrs. Laureen Gatin who’s here 
today. I don’t know Laureen very well but I certainly know her 
son quite well, Mr. Brian Gatin, a teacher over at Thom 
Collegiate and a good friend, an incredible cook, but not much 
of a fisherman or hunter, Mr. Speaker. I’ve seen him in the field 
and I’ve been out on the lake with him before, and I don’t think 
I’ve ever seen him catch a fish. He tells me he has, Mr. Speaker. 
But I do know he’s a fine teacher and one exceptional football 
coach, Mr. Speaker. I ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming these fine guests to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take this 
opportunity to introduce to you and through you to the rest of 
the House my SLIP [Saskatchewan legislative internship 
program] intern for this portion of the internship. And it’s 
Shalyn Rousseau up in the gallery, your gallery. And she is an 
enthusiastic intern, just really keen about the work that we’re 
doing, particularly around social justice. She’s here from 
Regina, and she’s working on a double major with political 
studies and religious studies. I’m just so delighted to have her 
with me. This is an important program. So I’d ask all members 
to welcome her to her legislature. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition in support of better schools here in Saskatchewan. We 
know that far too many of our classrooms are overcrowded and 
under-resourced and that the Sask Party government has 
eliminated hundreds of educational assistant positions and that 
students don’t often get the one-on-one attention they need. 
And none of this, Mr. Speaker, is acceptable given the record 
revenues this government has had over the past eight years. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
call on this government to immediately stop ignoring 
schools and start prioritizing students by capping 
classroom sizes and increasing supports for students and 
developing a real, transparent plan to build and repair our 
schools here in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. The people who signed this petition would like the 
Assembly to know that there is a definite need for a long-term 
care facility in the Creighton-Denare Beach area, and that the 
health region is in a code red when it comes to senior care beds. 
And they want the Assembly to know that most seniors in the 
North cannot afford private care homes and that the lack of 
services in Creighton and Denare Beach puts a huge financial 
burden on the elderly and their families. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 
the government to treat northern Saskatchewan senior 
citizens with respect and dignity and immediately invest in 
a new long-term care facility in the Creighton-Denare 
Beach area. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by many good people of 
Creighton. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
rise in my place today to present a petition asking the provincial 
government for greater accountability and transparency on 
some of their P3 [public-private partnership] deals that they 
have concocted, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll present the petition: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately pass The Public-Private Partnership 
Transparency and Accountability Act. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this particular 
page are people from the city here, but the many pages that we 
have presented as it relates to this particular accountability Act 
have been signed from all throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan, and I’m very proud today to present this 
petition. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’m rising to present a petition in 
support of retaining Yarrow Youth Farm. We know that the 
government has closed Yarrow Youth Farm and created an 
open-custody wing in Kilburn Hall to accommodate Yarrow’s 
residents. We also know that the provincial Advocate for 
Children and Youth has declared he can’t endorse such a 
rationalization as low-risk teens could be influenced and 
pressured by close proximity to high-risk youth who may be 
involved in serious crimes or gangs. We also know that Kilburn 
Hall has a more institutional environment that could intimidate 
and alienate teens that have committed minor offences. And so 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the government to keep 
Yarrow Youth Farm open to ensure a caring home 
environment for youth who have committed minor 
offences and provide support to help these young people 
redirect their lives by setting more positive goals. 



May 7, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7149 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of 
Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

World Ovarian Cancer Day 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tomorrow is World 
Ovarian Cancer Day. This is the third year that World Ovarian 
Cancer Day has been recognized, and it’s a time for ovarian 
cancer survivors and supporters to stand in solidarity and raise 
awareness. 
 
In our province, the Saskatchewan Ovarian Cancer Survivors, 
or SOCS, is a network of families and survivors that offer 
support and information to those affected by ovarian cancer. 
When someone receives a cancer diagnosis, it’s one of the most 
difficult experiences of their lives. The important work being 
done by SOCS helps women to cope with this life-changing 
diagnosis and provides a safe space where women and their 
families can share their concerns and fears. 
 
SOCS also spends a great deal of time and energy fundraising 
for research and national awareness campaigns. Every year they 
organize a walk of hope, a fashion show, and a number of other 
events to raise funds to find a cure and to support families. 
 
One of the women who has been working with SOCS for many 
years is Anne Chase. She was recently awarded a YWCA 
[Young Women’s Christian Association] Women of Distinction 
Award for her years of service with SOCS. Congratulations to 
her on that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in marking World 
Ovarian Cancer Day and thanking Anne Chase and everyone 
else with the SOCS team for the work they do in supporting 
those affected by ovarian cancer. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Lloydminster. 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tomorrow, May 8th, 
marks World Ovarian Cancer Day, the day we draw attention to 
a disease that kills about 1,750 Canadian women each year. 
Earlier today the Government of Saskatchewan raised the 
Ovarian Cancer Canada flag at the legislature in recognition of 
the need for wider understanding of this disease. And today all 
members on this side of the House are wearing teal ribbons to 
recognize and honour those in support of ovarian cancer 
disease. 
 
Awareness of this disease is particularly important because 
there is no test to screen for it and few women know the 
symptoms to watch for. Even when symptoms are noticed, they 
often are not acted on or are attributed to other causes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we can increase awareness, we can save lives. 
About 2,600 Canadian women are diagnosed with ovarian 
cancer each year but often only after the disease has progressed. 

Because of this, only about 45 per cent of women are still alive 
five years after being diagnosed. Their survival rate rises to 90 
per cent when ovarian cancer is detected in its early stages. I 
urge anyone interested to get more information from advocacy 
groups like the Canadian Cancer Society and Ovarian Cancer 
Canada. 
 
With the right information, women can be alert to one or more 
of the warning signs and seek medical help sooner. Survival 
rates are on the rise, thanks to increased awareness. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Regina Educator Receives National Recognition 
 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
Assembly to recognize a great teacher and educational leader, 
Mr. James Wahl. As I said earlier, James is in the gallery here 
today and he is principal at St. Francis Community School here 
in Regina. 
 
He was recently named as one of Canada’s top 40 principals by 
The Learning Partnership for his commitment to providing the 
best possible education for his students. This national 
recognition is certainly well deserved and James serves as but 
one fine example of the many exceptional leaders and teachers 
and educators across Saskatchewan. In the citation for his 
award, The Learning Partnership, said: 
 

James considers unique opportunities as ways to 
demonstrate a sense of originality and overall excellence 
of service to the community. He believes that innovation 
must be actionable and demonstratively productive in 
terms of student achievement outcomes. These innovative 
initiatives include his “3-Way Goal Setting Conferences,” 
which began as a school-based project but has now spread 
district-wide. 

 
James is making a real difference in the lives of so many young 
people and we are so lucky to have him as an educational leader 
here in Regina. I’ve witnessed it first hand during my visits to 
St. Francis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating Mr. 
James Wahl as well as Principal Nevin Halyk from Wadena on 
these well-deserved awards and to thank them for their service 
and leadership to students every day all across Saskatchewan. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

Fundraiser for Neural Health Project 
Planned for Saskatoon 

 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On April 
24th the member from Saskatoon Riversdale and I had the 
opportunity to attend an important announcement where 
Olympic and NHL [National Hockey League] coach Mike 
Babcock and Saskatoon doctor, DeeDee Maltman, announced a 
new mental health initiative. 
 
In July 2013, Mr. Babcock and Dr. Maltman lost two of their 



7150 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2015 

friends from Saskatoon, Ian Buckwold and Jordan Chartier, to 
mental illness. Following this tragic loss, the pair decided that 
they wanted to help in a major way. They founded the neural 
health project, which aims to study the outcomes of using 
integrative medicine approaches to treating mental illness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the pair decided that if they wanted to make a 
meaningful difference, they needed to launch a major campaign, 
a fundraising initiative, to raise awareness and funds to support 
their project. This led to the One Voice Fundraiser to be held on 
July 24th in Saskatoon with a goal of raising $1 million. 
 
Saskatoon will be buzzing with celebrities, Olympic athletes, 
NHL greats, who are coming together to support the neural 
health project’s One Voice fundraiser. Tim Gitzel, the CEO 
[chief executive officer] of Cameco, and his wife, Bonnie, 
constituents of Saskatoon Silver Springs, are the title sponsors 
for this incredible event. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking Mr. Mike 
Babcock, Dr. DeeDee Maltman, the Gitzel family, and Cameco 
for their commitment to helping build a better future for people 
with mental health issues. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

Access to Magnetic Resonance Imaging Services 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, our 
government has introduced innovative new legislation in the 
House that paves the way for patients to choose to directly pay 
a private facility for an MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] scan 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
Providing timely and high-quality diagnostic imaging services 
to patients is a priority for our government. While there are 
many jurisdictions across Canada where patients can choose to 
pay for specialized medical imaging services, current legislation 
does not allow for this in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, our 
government wants to remove legislative barriers and add choice 
for the residents. We want to improve patient access and 
satisfaction with health services. 
 
The MRI Facilities Licensing Act will provide the ability to 
make and update regulations that will require private vendors to 
provide a second scan at no cost to a patient on the public list 
every time someone chooses to pay for their own MRI. The 
unique requirement for a private provider to deliver a second 
scan will increase MRI capacity in the health system. It is also 
expected to reduce overall wait times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to putting patients 
first by investing in new facilities like the Moose Jaw Hospital 
which will be home to another MRI unit this fall. However this 
innovative approach is just another way we will provide choice 
for Saskatchewan people and increase access for all individuals 
who require MRI services in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

Mother’s Day and Maternal Mental Health Day 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in case a 
few of us need an extra reminder, this Sunday is Mother’s Day. 
As a time to celebrate and appreciate the moms who brought us 
into this world, it is also a time to thank all of the aunts, close 
friends, and yes, grandmothers, who have done one of the 
hardest jobs in the world. As our province continues to grow, it 
is important for people to remember where they came from and 
remind us to pause and give thanks to the people who are 
responsible for who we are today. 
 
Fittingly, May 7th is also Maternal Mental Health Day. For all 
of the love and care our mothers give us, it is equally important 
to bring awareness to the 20 per cent of women who are 
pregnant or who have given birth that will develop postpartum 
anxiety or depression. These are the women who nurture us, 
wipe our tears, and give us the extra encouragement we need to 
always do better. Yet most importantly, they have dedicated 
years of care to make sure that we were the best children and 
the best adults we can be. 
 
I would ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 
thanking all of the mothers of our province, as well as wishing 
them a very happy Mother’s Day. And on a personal note, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m very fortunate to still have my mother, and I 
would just like to at this moment say thank you, Happy 
Mother’s Day, and I love you, Mom. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 

Comments During Estimates 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday during estimates 
that Leader of the Opposition said that the Health Quality 
Council is “. . . a mouthpiece and a political speech machine 
. . .” Mr. Speaker, that is beyond insulting to the members of the 
Health Quality Council board. 
 
Dr. Susan Shaw was appointed in 2009. She practises critical 
care and anesthesiology with the Saskatoon Health Region and 
is an assistant professor with the College of Medicine. 
 
Dr. Dennis Kendel was appointed in 2002 under the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] and is the CEO of Saskdocs and previously 
served 25 years as a registrar for the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons. 
 
Dr. Ross Baker was appointed in 2005 under the NDP and is a 
professor, the director of the master’s degree program at the 
Institute of Health Policy. 
 
Dr. Charlyn Black was appointed in 2002, again under the 
NDP, and serves as CEO of the health region, Five Hills Health 
Region, since 2009. 
 
That’s just a few people that he smeared, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition needs to stand up and 
apologize for calling these incredibly accomplished leaders 
mouthpieces of the government. Whether it is the Health 
Quality Council, government officials doing international work 
on behalf of the province, or even Saskatchewan businesses, 



May 7, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7151 

anyone can fit under the Leader of the Opposition’s bus. A 
drive-by political smear is no substitute for good policy, Mr. 
Speaker, but . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Oral questions. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Release of Information Concerning Worker 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Premier said that he 
has no regrets, no regrets whatsoever about directing his chief 
of communications and operations to leak confidential 
information about a private citizen. Is that actually true? Does 
the Premier have no regrets about this incredible mess that he 
has created? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve stood in my place on a number of occasions this 
week to answer the questions that the Leader of the Opposition 
has put to us. And I’m not sure if he’s expecting a different 
answer, but I’m going to disappoint him again today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a process here. The Information and 
Privacy Commissioner has a number of investigations that are 
under way. We are going to await the results of those 
investigations, and that will inform the next steps that we need 
to take, Mr. Speaker. So at this particular point in time, we’ll 
wait for the Information and Privacy Commissioner to complete 
his work, Mr. Speaker, and that will inform what we need to do. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if the Premier is unwilling to 
stand up and say that he has no regrets about this, perhaps he’s 
starting to realize the severity of the mess that he created when 
he directed the leak of confidential information on a citizen. 
The Premier, he personally directed the leak of this confidential 
information. He’s confessed to that. He did it to get himself and 
his government out of a conundrum. That’s what he said. 
 
The Premier and his chief of communications and operations 
are being investigated for breaking the law. He says he didn’t 
say this, Mr. Speaker. Well I challenge him to stand up and say 
that he has no regrets about this. Yet he has no regrets 
whatsoever about what he has done. Talk about the height of 
arrogance we see. Does he at least recognize and does he at 
least have regrets that he didn’t pull off his chief of operations 
and communications sooner on this file? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Premier answered 
that question yesterday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have complete confidence in the Information 

and Privacy Commissioner to do his work. I wish the Leader of 
the Opposition would express some confidence in the 
Information and Privacy Commissioner, an independent officer 
of this House, Mr. Speaker. We will await the work that he is 
doing. That’s going to inform our decision, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
exactly what the Leader of the Opposition said earlier this 
week, Mr. Speaker: he’s anxious to see the Information and 
Privacy Commissioner complete that work. So let’s let him do 
his work. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, what I don’t have confidence in is 
the tale that this Premier is telling about what he knew and 
when he knew it. Without a question, Mr. Speaker, the story 
doesn’t add up one single bit. 
 
On April 23rd, the Premier was told there were specific details 
in the leak. On the 27th, the Premier was told again very 
specific details were leaked, and the Premier was told about a 
second email sent out by his chief of communications and 
operations. On the 28th, Mr. Speaker, there were media reports 
about very specific details, and the Deputy Leader asked 
questions to the Premier about this issue. Yet the Premier 
claims somehow, strangely, bizarrely, unbelievably, that he 
didn’t know about this until the end of last week. 
 
It is not in the least bit credible, Mr. Speaker. How is it 
remotely believable that the Premier was presented with facts 
by reporters, by the opposition, and he never even bothered to 
ask his chief of operations and communications about it? How 
is that believable in the least bit? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. These questions 
were asked and answered in estimates yesterday, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have confidence in the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner, Mr. Speaker. We’ll wait for him to do his work. 
We’ll not speculate on the results of that work, Mr. Speaker, 
nor speculate on anything that may come out as a result of that 
work. I’m glad the Leader of the Opposition has expressed 
confidence in the Information and Privacy Commissioner. We 
certainly have confidence in him to do his work, Mr. Speaker. 
So again my answer is, we will wait for the Information and 
Privacy Commissioner to do his work, and that will inform us, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the commissioner will do his 
work and, in the meantime, the Premier has some explaining to 
do as to how this bizarre story that he is telling makes any sense 
because it’s not backed up by the facts in any way. The Premier 
is actually expecting us to believe that he does not listen in 
media scrums, that he doesn’t listen to what is asked here in the 
House, that he doesn’t read the newspapers, and that he doesn’t 
have conversations with his chief of communications and 
operations because that is the only way that his story is 
believable in even a little bit, Mr. Speaker. 
 



7152 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2015 

Well I don’t buy it for one second. The Premier’s fingerprints 
are all over this, and his story is not adding up. Every time he 
was told that there were specific details, he said he was 
comfortable with what he shared, and he insisted that the 
information was “general enough.” He’s been asking questions 
about it, Mr. Speaker, but he’s not telling what he knew and 
when he knew it. 
 
The Premier’s story doesn’t add up. It’s not credible, Mr. 
Speaker, and it is astonishing that this Premier would say that 
he has no regrets whatsoever. My question to the Premier: why 
can’t he just stand today and admit that he made a mistake? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, Mr. 
Speaker, in answer to the question, these questions were asked 
and answered yesterday in committee, and I’m not sure why the 
Leader of the Opposition continues to insist on not allowing the 
Information and Privacy Commissioner to simply do his work. 
That work will be done, Mr. Speaker, and that will inform us. I 
have great confidence, as does this side of the House, in the 
independence of that commissioner, Mr. Speaker, and in the 
independence of the work that’s going to be done in his office. 
So again, these questions were asked and answered yesterday in 
committee. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, nice try. This Premier needs to 
explain why this story that he is telling is believable because it’s 
not backed up by the facts. 
 
This is the Premier, Mr. Speaker, who yesterday, when he was 
willing to stand up in the House, said that he had no regrets 
about leaking this confidential information, no regrets about 
breaching privacy for a private citizen. This is the Premier, Mr. 
Speaker, that laughs off the fact that he has travel scouts going 
around the world with a personal rider to have his favourite pop 
in the fridge. That’s a big joke, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The sense of entitlement, the sense of entitlement, the level of 
arrogance that we see building in this government, Mr. Speaker, 
is growing and growing. And it’s concerning because that 
entitlement and that arrogance leads to bad choices being made, 
and it leads to misplaced priorities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Here’s a question for the Premier: will he at least admit they 
seem to be concerned about the Privacy Commissioner’s 
investigation? The Premier needs to explain his story as well. 
The findings of the investigation absolutely need to be sent out 
of province, Mr. Speaker, to be reviewed by an out-of-province 
prosecutor. My question to the Premier: will he stand today, go 
on the public record, and will he confirm that any findings from 
the investigation will be sent out of province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the Leader of the Opposition has asked this question before in 
the House. We will not speculate on the work that’s being done 

by the Information and Privacy Commissioner, nor will we 
speculate on the results of that work that’s being done, Mr. 
Speaker. As I’ve said before, the work of the Information and 
Privacy Commissioner will inform us, Mr. Speaker. Decisions 
will be made based on that, but we will not speculate on the 
work that’s being done, nor will we speculate on the results. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Provision of Magnetic Resonance Imaging Services 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier once promised that he 
would never allow someone “to use a bulging wallet to jump 
the queue.” Why is he now breaking that promise? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
[10:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 
sure welcome this question from the Leader of the Opposition. 
Not long ago, I spoke in the media about the potential for us to 
review the policy whereby there was no option for private MRI 
availability in the province of Saskatchewan. I want to thank the 
Minister of Health and the Minister of Rural and Remote Health 
for undertaking a consultation and a review of the options. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday he announced another Saskatchewan 
innovation. This is a province of health care innovation. And so 
what will happen in about a year from now, Mr. Speaker, is that 
private MRIs will be available to people. 
 
They’ll purchase an MRI. It’s going to be their choice to do 
that. But the condition is this: the company that provides that 
private MRI must also provide a free MRI on the public system. 
So we’ll be reducing the wait times because the person opting 
to pay will come off the wait time, and the clinic providing the 
MRI will supply yet another, yet another scan on the public 
system, lowering the wait-list, Mr. Speaker. This system is 
inspired by an operation, by an example that’s currently in place 
in the province, and I can’t wait to talk more about that in the 
next answer. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, what this Premier is really 
facilitating is queue jumping, Mr. Speaker, and not ensuring 
that patients get the right kind of care when they need it. 
 
Alberta, Alberta has user-pay MRIs. In Alberta the typical wait 
time for an MRI is 80 days. Meanwhile here in Saskatchewan, 
the typical wait time for an MRI is 28 days. That’s 52 days 
sooner than Alberta. Ninety per cent of Albertans that need an 
MRI receive one within 247 days. Meanwhile here in 
Saskatchewan, 90 per cent of people that need an MRI receive 
one in 88 days. That’s 159 days sooner than Alberta. My 
question to the Premier: so why is the Premier following the 
failed example of the Alberta PCs [Progressive Conservative]? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this isn’t a model based on 
Alberta. In Alberta you simply buy the private MRI. Under this 



May 7, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7153 

model, this pilot project, this pilot project model, the person 
will be able to purchase their own MRI, and the clinic providing 
the MRI will provide another free public scan, thereby reducing 
the public system. 
 
Now this system existed in the province prior to yesterday’s 
announcement and introduction of the bill by the minister 
because, Mr. Speaker, Workers’ Compensation in the province 
of Saskatchewan, the WCB [Workers’ Compensation Board] 
uses this exact model, the two-for-one model. Now when did 
that two-for-one model come into existence in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 2003 under the New Democratic Party. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if the Premier would look at the 
evidence, if he’ll look at the experience in Alberta, he would 
see that this approach, this approach of the two-tier system, it 
will not bring the best result for Saskatchewan patients. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I prefer policy that is based on evidence, not 
ideology, and all the evidence is very clear. Private MRI 
facilities draw resources away from the public system, and 
private MRI facilities, they do not result in shorter waits. So 
here’s an idea. Why not improve the MRI system for everyone 
in the province, not simply those who have the deepest pockets? 
My question to the Premier: how, how does his plan not allow 
those with lots of money to access surgery more quickly? 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask both sides of the House to tone 
down the noise while the questions are being asked and while 
the answers are being provided. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Here 
are some facts. Since our government took over, scans in the 
public system, MRIs in the public system are up 115 per cent, 
Mr. Speaker, and they’re scheduled to increase again. Capacity 
increased by 5 per cent. Once again it’s a good example of the 
NDP talking about the importance of public MRIs but not 
actually providing enough when they were in office. We’re 
going to shorten the wait-list, Mr. Speaker, through this policy 
by allowing the private MRI to be purchased and the clinic that 
provides it providing a free scan to the public system. 
 
Now this will then actually provide for all of the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan what the NDP provided for Workers’ 
Comp clients and one other organization because, under the 
NDP, they pioneered a two-for-one MRI system, just as we’re 
advocating, to the Saskatchewan Roughriders. That’s their 
government. When they were in power, that’s exactly the 
system they offered. My question to the hon. member and the 
NDP is this: why would that system be good enough for the 
Riders and not good enough for the rest of the province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if we look at the evidence, if we 
look at the fact that resources will be pulled from the public 
system, if we look at the experience in Alberta where they have 
this two-tier approach but there are actually longer waits for 
MRIs, we will see that it is not the best approach based on the 
evidence. 
 

My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: how is it, how is it 
that he can claim that bringing in this reality where those with 
the deepest pockets can access MRIs faster . . . How will this 
not allow those individuals to jump the queue and get surgeries 
faster? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — This is a debate. Now this is an important 
debate and one we welcome. This is the same argument that 
member’s made against private clinics working on our surgical 
wait-time initiative. He’s opposed to it. He said if he ever 
formed the government, he would eliminate the private clinics 
from the system whereby we’re using them to reduce surgical 
wait-lists in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s the actual results, the evidence with respect 
to that particular choice that was provided, private clinics in the 
public system. Surgical wait times are down. They used to be 
the longest in the country when those folks over there were 
providing the government in the province of Saskatchewan, and 
now Saskatchewan has the shortest wait times in the country. 
 
May 16, 2007 under the NDP government, here’s a letter. 
Here’s a letter from the Ministry of Health related to the health 
care region regarding the Saskatchewan Roughriders football 
club. It lays it all out. The NDP said, we kind of like this 
two-for-one system in Workers’ Comp. We now want to extend 
this two-for-one MRI system — you pay for two and get one — 
to the Saskatchewan Roughriders. 
 
Again to the hon. member: why the double standard? Why is it 
okay for Workers’ Comp and it’s okay for the Saskatchewan 
Roughriders and not good enough for the rest of the province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, no answer to the question. How 
can the Premier claim that user-pay MRIs will not allow 
individuals to jump the queue and get surgeries faster? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the fact that people could 
access private MRIs in Alberta while the NDP were in office 
means that under their term of government, people may have 
been “jumping the queue.” They allowed Saskatchewan patients 
to go to Alberta, get an MRI. Those patients presented that MRI 
to their doctor. Their doctor didn’t ask for the providence about 
the MRI. The member for Lakeview knows it. The member for 
Lakeview was the minister of Health and he knows . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I can start pointing out a few names on both 
sides. If you want to continue the debate, you have the 
opportunity later to do that in private members’ motions, so I 
invite you to take it up then and not now. I recognize the 
Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
bottom line is this: the so-called queue jumping was pioneered, 
started under the NDP when they allowed folks to go to Alberta 



7154 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2015 

and get a private MRI and bring it back. That’s the fact. 
 
This will allow Saskatchewan people to stay here. And by 
accessing this choice, those clinics, instead of simply just doing 
that scan in Alberta and that was the end of it, will do it here 
and then provide a free scan to the public system, shortening the 
wait-list. That is a way better plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the status quo is not satisfactory 
at all. We need better care for patients in the province. We need 
better care, but the answer is not this government’s approach to 
expand and to allow queue jumping to take place, Mr. Speaker. 
The answer is to improve the system for everyone, improve the 
system for everyone so it’s not simply those with the deepest 
pockets that can have access to surgery faster. We want to see 
improvement, but we want to see it for everyone, not simply 
those who can afford it. 
 
Alberta has tried user-pay MRIs, and they do not, they do not 
result in better wait times. The typical wait time is 52 days 
longer in Alberta. Ninety per cent of people in Saskatchewan 
who need an MRI receive one 159 days sooner than in Alberta. 
My question to the Premier: why will he not just look at the 
evidence? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we are improving the system for everybody in this 
province, first and foremost by ensuring that we are doing more 
publicly funded scans within the system, a 115 per cent increase 
from when the members opposite were the government to 
today. And in fact, despite a difficult budget year, the number 
of scans is going to go up another 5 per cent this year. So we 
are increasing capacity. We’re also adding an additional 
machine in the city of Moose Jaw later this fiscal year, so we’re 
adding on the public side. 
 
But we do know that people today in Saskatchewan go out of 
province. They’ve always been allowed to do so, Mr. Speaker, 
and that continues today. What we are going to provide for is an 
option for people to do that closer to home. But it will have this, 
Mr. Speaker: it will have the benefit of removing them from the 
public list. What isn’t provided in other provinces, what the 
members discount: it will provide for us to remove somebody 
from the public list, essentially having two people provided off 
of the wait-list for MRIs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the record of this government is clear. We are not 
happy with the status quo. We have never been happy with the 
status quo, but what we’re doing is looking outside of the box 
for different answers . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 

Reduction of Greenhouse Gas Emissions 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 2008 the former 
minister of Environment, now Minister of Highways, 
announced that this government would reduce greenhouse gas 

emissions by 32 per cent in the year 2020. A year later, she 
watered that down to a target of 20 per cent, but she insisted 
that the time for talk was over and she introduced The 
Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases Act. 
 
That’s now six years ago, Mr. Speaker, and the promised 
Technology Fund is still out there in the promised land. The Go 
Green Fund has essentially been wiped out. And when this 
government released its new environment code it didn’t even 
include a chapter on greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
This government’s lack of leadership is unacceptable. And so to 
the Environment minister: why has this government dragged its 
feet so badly on this vital issue? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
member opposite for the question. I was expecting maybe a 
question to this effect yesterday during the three hours of 
Premier’s estimates, Mr. Speaker. I heard two answers on it, but 
I didn’t hear her question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is this government will 
always balance the economic and population growth that we 
have in the province of Saskatchewan with the environmental 
protection in this province of Saskatchewan, on behalf of these 
people. Mr. Speaker, that is showing results now with public 
and private investment and low carbon technologies in excess 
of $5 billion. Mr. Speaker, that’s showing real results in 
SaskPower with 25 per cent of their power allocation now 
coming from renewable sources including, Mr. Speaker, the 
Boundary dam carbon capture project, which is quite likely the 
largest single reduction in greenhouse gas emissions in this 
province’s history. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, for this minister to suggest that 
this government’s approach is balanced is ridiculous. This 
government’s track record is abysmal. At every step of the way, 
the Sask Party government has failed miserably when it comes 
to showing any real leadership on the environment. 
 
This week I introduced a private member’s bill entitled The 
Green Energy, Green Jobs and Diversified, Sustainable 
Economy Act. The opposition New Democrats would love to 
work with the government to achieve some real, meaningful 
results on this crucial issue. So to the Environment minister: is 
he open to working with us to boost green energy, create more 
good-paying jobs, and diversify our economy? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, what’s ridiculous is a question 
coming from . . . When they had an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, 
they made policy decisions that caused the economy in this 
province to stagnate. People were leaving the province by 
truckloads. All the time, greenhouse gas emissions . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 



May 7, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7155 

The Speaker: — I would like to point out to the member for 
Saskatoon Centre, the member for Athabasca, the member for 
Saskatoon Riversdale, the member for Arm River-Watrous, the 
member for Regina Douglas Park, and a number of other 
government members . . . And I ask that you quit interrupting. 
The next time I’m on my feet, you will be getting an early day 
off. I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know there’s 
been questions around what is quite likely the single largest 
reduction in greenhouse gas emissions in this province’s 
history, and that’s the carbon capture and storage project at 
Boundary dam 3 in Estevan, Mr. Speaker. We’ve talked to the 
merits of that, of reducing carbon, greenhouse gas emissions 
equivalent to removing 250,000 vehicles off the roads in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a number of quotes and support for the 
importance of that project, and I’d like to read one into the 
record here. It goes like this, and I quote, Mr. Speaker, “The 
possibility of coal generation with near zero emissions, along 
with enhanced oil recovery and permanent sequestration of 
carbon dioxide, has tremendous potential for both the provincial 
economy and the environment.” Mr. Speaker, that was the 
minister of SaskPower at the time, the current member for 
Lakeview, on September 10th of 2006. 
 
[11:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, he talks about that project. It’s 
less than 2 per cent of this government’s emissions in 
greenhouse gases. We had that minister, the previous minister 
promising 32 per cent. They’ve got a long, long way to go. It’s 
so frustrating to have this government dragging its feet on this 
important issue, and it’s so frustrating that this government 
doesn’t even seem to recognize that there would be major 
benefits to our province if we boosted green energy and 
invested in green innovation. 
 
To the minister: when can we expect the GHG [greenhouse gas] 
chapter of the Environmental Code to be completed? When can 
we expect the Technology Fund to be established, and when can 
we expect the Climate Change Foundation to finally be created? 
What timeline is going to be acceptable to this minister? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. This government is proud, proud of our record when it 
comes to balancing the economic growth that we have in the 
province of Saskatchewan with the reduction of greenhouse gas 
emissions, Mr. Speaker, in this province. The fact of the matter 
is that we’ve stabilized greenhouse gas emissions over the last 
number of years in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 
there’s been investment, public and private investment in excess 
of $5 billion, Mr. Speaker, which is showing real results in 
decoupling the increase in greenhouse gas emissions from the 
increase in the positive economic growth that we have in the 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 

What we will not do is make policy decisions, Mr. Speaker, that 
drive people out of this province, that decrease economic 
investment in the province, and allow greenhouse gas emissions 
to increase by 70 per cent. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Student Rights and Safer Schools 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 
pleasure today to enter into this debate, and it’s an important 
debate that we have. Too many of our youth are facing 
challenges in our communities that we can do something about, 
we can do something about. And we are here as legislators, it’s 
the work that we do, and we should use the tools that we have 
to make sure our kids are safer in their communities. 
 
And so today I’m very interested, and I’ll read that motion now 
but I’ll also read it at the end. But I want to make sure people at 
home know what we’re talking about, Mr. Speaker. So I move 
today: 
 

That the Assembly call on the government to enshrine in 
legislation the right of students throughout Saskatchewan 
to establish and lead groups that promote respect for 
people of all sexual orientations and gender identities and 
expressions, including with the name, gay-straight alliance 
or gender sexual alliance or any other name which is 
consistent with the promotion of a positive school 
environment that is inclusive and accepting of all students. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, that’s my motion. And we’re going to have a 
good debate; I’m very proud that we’re going to be talking 
about this today. We’ve been raising this issue for several years 
now, and yet we have not seen the government move to 
concrete actions that kids can count on in our schools. And 
that’s what we’re talking about today, concrete actions that 
everyone knows that when we say that our schools will be safe, 
they will be safe. And when we mean that, we mean that. And 
too often with this government, they like to have their 
platitudes, but when we try to find out what does that really 
translate into, it’s just, just not there. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we know that Saskatchewan Ministry of 
Education, they have a program, schools are caring 
communities. And they talk about this comprehensive school 
community health approach that states, and I quote, “Each child 
in each school in each of our communities deserves to be 
healthy, safe, engaged, and supported.” 
 
Very lofty and very important, but when it comes to making 
this goal meaningful and equitable for all students, 
Saskatchewan unfortunately sadly lags behind other provinces 
here in Canada. And that’s particularly true, ensuring that our 
gender and sexually diverse students — and often we refer to 
gender sexually diverse students as GSD students — that they 
are not treated in the same way and they are not reaching their 
full potential and not gaining equitable access to all aspects of 
school life, whether it be academic, social, or extracurricular. 



7156 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2015 

So we know, we know — and the research is out there, and it’s 
solid research — that school-based groups, the GSAs, gender 
and sexual alliances or gay-straight alliances, GSAs can help 
accomplish this goal. They’re an integral part of our political, 
social, and educational landscape with respect to upholding 
human rights law, supporting anti-oppressive and pro-respect 
educational frameworks, and providing an inclusive, healthy 
environment which improves student learning, responds to 
students’ needs and creates a supportive social climate, honours 
child and youth safety and strengthens proactive bullying 
prevention and, as well, it incorporates family realities into the 
learning communities in our schools. 
 
Now provinces across Canada have recognized the vital role 
that GSAs play in meeting these goals, and they support 
educational outcomes and improve overall school-community 
health. And in some provinces the importance of GSAs are now 
protected by law. We’ve seen that in Ontario with Bill 13 and 
Manitoba with Bill 18 and just recently in March with Bill 10, 
which legally requires a school to meet the request of a student 
for a formation of a GSA. But here in Saskatchewan, 
unfortunately the situation is that students are permitted to form 
GSAs on the basis of administration discretion, and this is the 
crux of the problem. This is the crux of the problem because we 
have a minister who says that he’ll leave it up to the 
administration. 
 
We know that while there has been good gains made, that it’s 
not protected in law. And that’s what we need to have. So while 
school boards across the country maintain specific 
anti-homophobia, biphobia, and transphobia policies that 
bolster the effectiveness of GSAs in an integrated and holistic 
school-community approach, not a single school board in 
Saskatchewan has explicit protection for GSD students. And 
fortunately while there has been some progress within the 
Saskatchewan context . . . And I just want to talk a little bit 
about this. 
 
We had a member’s statement around Camp fYrefly. That was 
a really worthwhile initiative in terms of having a healthy 
supportive summer camp for students who are GSD, and this 
government now is providing $25,000. Clearly that’s a very 
good step. We appreciate that, and we all applauded the 
member’s statement to that effect. But it’s not complete; it’s not 
finished. And we know unfortunately in Saskatchewan . . . And 
I’ll be talking about some of the situations that cause real 
concern for families here in Saskatchewan. 
 
But there’s an intensifying need for tangible results in creating 
safer schools. You know, an expanding youth voice is asserting 
and they’re really, they’re stressing this. And I’ve met with 
students across Saskatchewan, met with students, talked with 
students at Breaking the Silence Conference, met with students 
this past spring from Vancouver, that they’re saying their lives 
matter. Their lives matter. And parents are demanding that their 
children be treated with dignity and respect. And so a growing 
community is asking and really demanding that Saskatchewan 
schools support the implementation of GSAs to help meet 
educational and social and bullying prevention needs. 
 
And I just think about the march that happened in Saskatoon 
last October where over 60 people met and walked across a 
bridge in Saskatoon, demanding action. And it wasn’t a very 

nice day, in fact it was a rainy miserable day, but they still met 
and said this is an important issue. This is an important issue. 
So if we do this, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan can move closer to 
schools being caring communities for all students and for all 
family realities in a much more meaningful way. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to just talk a little bit, and I know the 
time is going quickly, but we need to just step back and 
understand that GSAs, and the term GSAs, it’s from 
gay-straight alliance but has, like I said, has evolved into gender 
sexual alliance. It’s said to have originated in the early 1980s 
and refers to school-based, student-run groups that provide a 
safe space for youth to discuss issues related to diversity and 
sexual and romantic orientation. 
 
But today GSAs in our schools are welcoming spaces for all 
students that provide a niche for social interaction and 
education. They provide like-minded camaraderie and 
connection, much like other school-based that are commonly 
found in our schools, such as drama groups and astronomy 
group clubs. But GSAs are inclusive right across the spectrum 
of diversity — gender, attraction, expression, family and friend 
realities. And there is no need for students to self-identify or 
articulate their orientation in order to join the GSA group unless 
they wish to do so. Respect and acceptance of diversity are the 
only requirements for membership. GSAs are recognized as 
anti-oppressive spaces within the school community, and many 
students who feel they are on the outside of the larger, 
normative majority seek anti-bullying refuge, safety, and 
friendship, and shared expressions within the GSA groups. 
 
In some schools, GSAs act simply as a crucial space where 
students are able to eat lunch safely and find necessary reprieve 
from bullying and assault. And I just want to stress this, this is 
especially relevant with statistical reality that GSD students are 
four times more likely to attempt suicide than their heterosexual 
peers, and over half of GSD students have seriously considered 
suicide. Additionally, studies have shown that Canadian schools 
with GSAs may reduce the odds of suicidal thoughts and 
attempts among GSD and straight students. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
just want to highlight that because that’s a huge issue here in 
Saskatchewan and I’m quoting from a report: Suicides, Health 
Provincial Ranking: How Canada Performs. 
 
And here in Saskatchewan the question is, how has the suicide 
rate changed in the provinces and territories over the past 
decade? Over the past decades suicide rates in Canada have 
actually been in decline. But what is concerning is the suicide 
rates have risen in half the provinces. Newfoundland and 
Labrador, Nova Scotia, Ontario, Manitoba, and Saskatchewan 
all had higher suicide rates in 2011 than in 2000. And so here 
we have a real issue, Mr. Speaker. And I think that when we are 
talking about providing safer schools, we just can’t be saying 
that with lip service. This is a real issue and has life and death 
consequences when you have students who are having suicidal 
ideas, that we really need to do something. And when the stats 
are in about Saskatchewan, the fact that we’re one of the 
provinces where suicide rates have gone up, this is a problem. 
 
And I want to just refer to a news story on March 13th, 2015. 
And the headline is, “Morgan says no GSA legislation planned 
for Saskatchewan.” He refers to, and it says here: 
“Saskatchewan’s Education Minister Don Morgan said 



May 7, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7157 

Wednesday that introducing similar legislation would be 
unnecessary because it’s already an expectation and a part of 
education policy.” And we have not yet seen this policy. And 
we heard that this would be coming through with the bullying 
report that was done. That’s fair enough, but that’s been now 
some time. We have not actually seen this policy that was 
referred to by the Premier yesterday or the minister. He keeps 
referring to this policy but we have not, we have not seen the 
actual policy. 
 
So we hope by the end of this debate that the other side would 
table the policy. I know that they might be quoting from it 
today, and I hope they do. And if they do, that they will actually 
table the documents so that we can actually see the policy that 
the minister keeps referring to and the Premier keeps referring 
to. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I believe every student in Saskatchewan, 
regardless of factors like where they live and what their school 
community looks like, should be guaranteed fundamental rights. 
We should be entrenching best practices for preventing 
discrimination and bullying and promising that those best 
practices will be followed for every student in every school. 
 
[11:15] 
 
Just as culture shifts and society evolves, so must our learning 
communities. Governments and school boards across the 
country are working to protect the rights of GSD children and 
youth through a commitment to resources and supports which 
assist in ensuring all students are reaching their full potential 
and gaining equitable access to all aspects of school life. 
 
This is being done through legislating that a student’s request 
for life-saving support of a GSA cannot be denied, by creating 
policies that uphold human rights, and by supporting diversity 
includes the professional learning and capacity building 
amongst school staff. And, Mr. Speaker, this is the gist of the 
bill that I introduced just a week or so ago, 612, the respect for 
diversity and student bill of rights. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s lots of people that are watching this today 
and have done an awful lot of work. And I want to thank the 
folks at Avenue Community Centre, Amanda Guthrie and 
Rachel Loewen Walker. Those folks are strong advocates in 
saying this is the kind of work that needs to be done. And also 
Chandra McIvor from Egale Canada, who’s worked tirelessly 
on this for many years. I want to really also give a shout out to 
people, Breaking the Silence folks. 
 
Every year they put together a conference in Saskatoon about 
creating a safe space for GSD students to be able to talk about 
their challenges. And this is one that’s important to them. So 
Don Cochrane, Margie Corbett, Fran Forsberg, so many; the 
Vancouver kids that I met with today and the Saskatoon kids; 
and Halla Scott here in Regina, who had the courage to come 
forward and raise the concern about not having a GSA in her 
school. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the motion I’d be putting forward, 
and this is: 
 

That this Assembly call on the government to enshrine in 

legislation the right of students throughout Saskatchewan 
to establish and lead groups that promote respect for 
people of all sexual orientations and gender identities and 
expressions, including with the name “gay-straight 
alliance” or “gender sexuality alliance” or any other name 
which is consistent with the promotion of a positive school 
environment that is inclusive and accepting of all students. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is a very important motion. I’m glad we have 
the opportunity here to talk about this. Kids are watching this, 
and we’re listening very closely to what the government will 
say about this today. I would like to table my motion right now. 
I move my motion right now. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion by the member for Saskatoon 
Centre is: 
 

That this Assembly call on the government to enshrine in 
legislation the right of students throughout Saskatchewan 
to establish and lead groups that promote respect for 
people of all sexual orientations and gender identities and 
expressions, including with the name “gay-straight 
alliance” or “gender sexuality alliance” or any other name 
which is consistent with the promotion of a positive school 
environment that is inclusive and accepting of all students. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to stand in my place and participate today in this debate 
regarding the opposition’s motion which I will read: 
 

That this Assembly call on the government to enshrine in 
legislation the right of students throughout Saskatchewan 
to establish and lead groups that promote respect for 
people of all sexual orientations and gender identities and 
expressions, including with the name “gay-straight 
alliance” or “gender sexuality alliance” or any other name 
which is consistent with the promotion of a positive school 
environment that is inclusive and accepting of all students. 

 
Mr. Speaker, our students in Saskatchewan are getting services 
and support that they require, so therefore we don’t need 
legislation, and I will discuss why. Do we need legislation to be 
kind to each other, to listen, to give respect? We as society, as a 
whole, collectively can do our part. As leaders, as parents, we 
can teach our children to be respectful and kind. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Education is committed to 
ensuring schools are safe, and they will work with school 
divisions to establish supports and policy developments for all 
students. We, as a government, as society as a whole, want 
people to come to their own consciousness of identity, to arrive 
at their own sense of self, to have families and loved ones that 
they can mentor and enjoy a high quality of life here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Saskatchewan school divisions, all 28, are 
trusted to take care of the regional and different demographics 
that reside in our province. They have the best interests of 
Saskatchewan students, and the policy of this government is to 
work with students, teachers, and other school divisions to 



7158 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2015 

implement recommendations in the province and the provincial 
action plan. 
 
I have a letter here, April 28th, 2015, addressed to Minister 
Morgan. It says, “Best regards from the Saskatchewan School 
Boards Association,” and I’ll read you a paragraph: 
 

I write this letter to advocate for continued endorsement 
and respect for the autonomy of locally elected school 
boards in our province. The Saskatchewan School Boards 
Association firmly believes that our 28 member boards are 
in the best position to make decisions at the local level, 
including the establishment of gay-straight alliances. 
Introducing legislation to make such decisions mandatory 
limits boards’ autonomy and we feel it is unnecessary as 
school divisions are responding to diverse and changing 
student needs every day and will continue to do so. 

 
Thus, Mr. Speaker, our government is also providing $25,000 to 
the fYrefly Saskatchewan to support gender and sexually 
diverse youth throughout the province. The annual Camp 
fYrefly in Saskatchewan is a camp for gay, lesbian, bisexual, 
transgender, two-spirited, intersexed youth and their allies 
between the ages of 14 and 24. The camp’s co-founder, Kris 
Wells, developed the camp as he believed caring adults could 
mentor youth to live fully in a world that embraces diversity. It 
is called in Canada the largest gender minority youth leadership 
retreat. 
 
Supporting diversity, Mr. Speaker, is nothing new to me. It’s 
nothing new to our government. The spirit is here in 
Saskatchewan with the way we live our lives of acceptance and 
tolerance of each person’s uniqueness. Working together, we 
can make Saskatchewan a great place to live, to raise your 
family, to work. This government is a team that is committed to 
positive growth and change, and we value Saskatchewan 
people’s strengths and all that they bring to the diversity of our 
great province. All aspects of Saskatchewan should be 
embraced and celebrated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, released on March 16th, 2015 is a Saskatchewan 
report, “Government Continues to Respond to Bullying 
Report.” I will read you a part of it. 
 

“Our goal is to ensure schools and communities are safe, 
welcoming and inclusive for our students,” Education 
Minister Don Morgan said. “This investment also supports 
our government’s commitment to working with 
community organizations to help respond to the 
recommendations in Saskatchewan’s Plan to Address 
Bullying and Cyberbullying.” 

 
It also goes on to say: 
 

“FYrefly in schools is a welcomed educational initiative in 
Saskatchewan,” Camp fYrefly Saskatchewan Co-Chair 
Reverend Carla Blakley said. “The Y in fYrefly is 
capitalized because youth are important. FYrefly in 
schools aims to reduce discrimination and bullying, 
especially against sexually and gender minority youth, so 
that a safe, caring school environment can be provided for 
all Saskatchewan youth.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP calls for rights that already exist. They 
are calling for the right to freedom of conscience, opinion, and 
belief; freedom of expression; and freedom of assembly in 
association. However, Mr. Speaker, this already exists. In 
section 2 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, it 
states: 
 

2. Everyone has the following fundamental freedoms: 
(a) freedom of conscience and religion; 
(b) freedom of thought, belief, opinion and expression, 
including freedom of the press and other media of 
communication; 
(c) freedom of peaceful assembly; and 
(d) freedom of association. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I have a quote here from Dan Shier of Queen City 
Pride, Global News Regina, dated March 12th, 2015, when 
asked if Saskatchewan needs legislation for GSAs: “. . . I don’t 
see it [currently] as being a huge necessity [just] because 
students are getting the services and the spaces that they 
require.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed 2015-16 budget allocation will 
support the continued implementation of Saskatchewan’s action 
plan to address bullying and cyberbullying. Our government has 
a policy in place and we don’t react to everything with 
legislation. 
 
The Ministry of Education has taken steps in 2014-15 to 
implement the provincial action plan, including training and 
learning opportunities that are being provided to school 
divisions. Twenty-eight school divisions have completed or 
committed to training to access and respond to violence or 
threats in their schools. The Canadian Red Cross is training 
adults and youths to prevent and address bullying and promote 
positive relationships, using respected programming. The 
Saskatoon restorative action program models school-based 
restorative action programs for others in the province. 
 
In spring of 2014, over 900 participants engaged in a massive 
open online course intended to support students in learning 
appropriate and responsible behaviour online. There’s a policy 
guide for schools to further support appropriate and responsible 
behaviour online which will be available in spring of 2015, and 
our government has also taken steps, including an online 
professional resource to assist school divisions to provide safe, 
equitable, and inclusive learning environment for all students 
including gender and sexual minorities . . . are being finalized. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, our government is addressing this without 
legislation. Action has been taken to support students in having 
an anonymous, safe place to seek help through Kids Help 
Phone, and 40 classrooms-to-counsellor sessions have increased 
awareness of mental health issues to reduce stigma and promote 
help-seeking behaviours in children and youth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is more action. We’re influencing positive 
social change in their schools, communities, and online through 
the I Am Stronger community grant program. This program 
provides small grants of up to 1,000 each for youth-led 
initiatives to address bullying and promote healthy 
relationships. 
 



May 7, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7159 

Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Education is committed to 
ensuring that schools are safe and inclusive environments for 
students and that student success is appropriate, a priority, and 
that everyone feels safe and included. Research and practice 
indicate that when students do not feel safe and supported, their 
learning and well-being are undermined. So I hope if the 
opposition feel that someone . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. Why is the member on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — To ask for leave for introductions. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave for 
introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 
my colleagues in the Legislative Assembly for granting leave to 
introduce 22 grade 7 and 8 students from the great community 
of Blaine Lake and from the Blaine Lake School. Mr. Speaker, 
my colleague from Silver Springs explains to me that all good 
things come from Blaine Lake. But I would ask everyone to 
welcome them. 
 
With them, Mr. Speaker, they have their teachers, Mr. Rob 
Jardine, Ms. Megan Crittenden, and Mr. David Guenther, as 
well as educational assistant, Mrs. Leanne Donohue. I would 
just for a moment . . . Do we have Abby Radics up there who is 
a daughter of a cousin of mine, just to single her out and 
welcome her to her Legislative Assembly? 
 
But I ask all members to join me in welcoming this fine group 
of grade 7 and 8 students from the community of Blaine Lake to 
their Legislative Assembly, and we do have a Dilly Bar or two 
for you in a minute. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, to 
introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’d like to join with the Minister of Environment, the member 
for Rosthern-Shellbrook, to introduce the group from Blaine 
Lake. I had an opportunity to spend 12 great years in Blaine 
Lake Composite School. It’s a wonderful community, a 
wonderful school. I had the opportunity to make many friends, 
to have the benefit of wonderful teachers, many of whom I 
consider friends today. So I’ll give you a big, “Go Comets” and 

welcome you to the Legislative Assembly. And enjoy your day 
here today. 
 
[11:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Student Rights and Safer Schools 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to enter into debate here this afternoon as it relates to 
the rights of students and the rights to the freedoms and safety 
that all students and people deserve. And I do so . . . It’s nice to 
actually have the group from Blaine Lake, the grade 7 and 8 
students here today along with their teachers here today, to be a 
part of this discussion, and certainly I’d be interested in hearing 
their specific perspective on this matter as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, we see an opportunity to 
provide the leadership that Saskatchewan students deserve, that 
Saskatchewan people deserve, by enshrining rights that are 
theirs, Mr. Speaker, but rights that far too often are 
compromised, Mr. Speaker. And when we think of the 
pressures that so many gay and lesbian or bisexual and 
transgendered students are facing across Saskatchewan, or 
adults and those within communities, Mr. Speaker, we owe it to 
them to provide them a law of the land that enshrines their right 
to freedom, to respect, and to make sure that there’s the ability 
to have a GSA, a gay-straight alliance be able to be formed 
within their school. 
 
And I know there’s been many leaders on this front in 
Saskatchewan, and to each and every one of them I say, thank 
you. And I think of so many individual leaders, even within the 
gay rights movement itself in Saskatchewan, that have worked 
to advance the rights of many, Mr. Speaker. And I say, thank 
you. 
 
I hear stories, Mr. Speaker, of a different time that wasn’t so 
long ago, that when it was the annual time to come together, to 
put together a gay parade, Mr. Speaker, that those individuals 
were very few that would get out and march. And many, Mr. 
Speaker, felt they had to cover their faces with bags because 
they felt that there’d be repercussions and vindictive actions 
within the community, Mr. Speaker. This is not long ago in 
Saskatchewan. Those brave leaders have helped advance the 
rights of all in this province, Mr. Speaker, and to all of those 
leaders that have been a part of that movement — the 
movement, Mr. Speaker, for the advancement of human rights 
— I say, thank you. 
 
I know now the difference, Mr. Speaker. We have significant 
progress at all levels of society, but we have a lot further still to 
go. But I know soon we’ll be coming around to the Queen City 
Pride activities, and I look forward to being engaged. I look 
forward to marching proudly in support with allies in that 
parade once again, Mr. Speaker, as I always do. I look forward 
to joining the flag raising, along with other members as well, 
Mr. Speaker, and with confidence, showing our respect for one 
another. 



7160 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2015 

And I also think of so many within our community who have 
shown leadership on this front. And I think of Camp fYrefly 
and the leaders there, whether it’s James McNinch or whether 
it’s Carla Blakely, and so many others that have come together 
to provide this program and these supports that are so critical to 
those that are able to connect with it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ve been out to Camp fYrefly, Mr. Speaker. I’ve listened to 
some of the stories being shared about some of the isolation and 
exclusion that occurs with kids from all across our province 
despite, I suspect, very good efforts of many within schools and 
communities, Mr. Speaker. And I hear of the feelings, Mr. 
Speaker, and the pressures around self-harm, and we know the 
tragic and ugly circumstances around things like suicide, Mr. 
Speaker. We know about too many young people not being able 
to grow and be all that they can be, Mr. Speaker. We know too 
many that are limited, Mr. Speaker. So I think of those like 
Camp fYrefly. 
 
I think of the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] Pride Centre, 
and I think of the leadership here to establish the University of 
Regina Pride Centre. These are important centres that connect 
and change a culture of a campus and provide supports and 
confidence and safety to all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think of Dan Shier and the Queen City Pride here in Regina 
and so many other members with Queen City Pride. I know so 
many of them well, and I thank them for their leadership. 
 
I’ve noticed that Mr. Shier’s been quoted often by government 
opposite trying to suggest that he doesn’t support legislation for 
GSAs, Mr. Speaker. Well that isn’t the case, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re not sharing the entire quote. So I’ll provide the rest of 
Mr. Shier’s quote from March 12th, 2015, the story. The quote 
from Mr. Shier is, “Having legislation I think would be a good 
thing . . .” Then his quote continues, Mr. Speaker. So I would 
urge members opposite not to play fast and loose with leaders’ 
quotes within our community and to recognize the voice that 
they’re providing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think of leaders within the Avenue Community Centre, Mr. 
Speaker. I think of Amanda Guthrie. I think of those that have 
been involved there before and still providing leadership in 
other capacities, like Chandra McIvor, Mr. Speaker, pushing 
forward to make sure that society is finally providing and 
ensuring that promise, the way we should be to all 
Saskatchewan people, whether gay, whether lesbian, whether 
bisexual or transgendered, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think of those founders of Breaking the Silence and those that 
come together every single year up in the University of 
Saskatchewan, working with educators, working with 
academics, working with everyday people in the community, 
Mr. Speaker. And I think of people like Don Cochrane and Fran 
Forsberg who have been pioneers and leaders on this front in 
pushing for progress.  
 
I think of TransSask Saskatchewan and people like Mikayla 
Schultz who’s provided me a greater perspective and 
understanding on this front, Mr. Speaker. I think of that 
important leadership. And to recognize something that we’ve 
worked with government on as an accomplishment would be 
the changes to the Human Rights Code. Something that we 

should now be looking at directly is enshrining the rights of 
students to form GSAs within their schools, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think of the United Church, Mr. Speaker, and other faith 
leaders and organizations, Mr. Speaker. But the United Church 
for which I grew up in, Mr. Speaker, I think of Reverend Ken 
Powers, Mr. Speaker, and the debates that weren’t so long ago 
about having a gay minister, for example, Mr. Speaker, or about 
gay marriage. And I remember those pressures and discussions 
within a church and the tensions at times that were present in 
those discussions. And I remember people like my dad, Mr. 
Speaker, who was an educator as well and affirming as well and 
taking on that debate within the church in resolving ourselves 
together as a group to make sure we were affirming to the rights 
of many, Mr. Speaker. And you know, these are many people, 
Mr. Speaker, stepping out, speaking out at times where rights 
often weren’t protected, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what I’m trying to get at, Mr. Speaker, is the leadership in 
this province has come, but from the work of many. I’m proud 
of the record as New Democrats to advance agendas around 
human rights and gay rights, Mr. Speaker, and human rights. 
I’m proud to continue to provide that advocacy, and I’m 
thankful to the school boards across Saskatchewan and to the 
historical schools and the roles of the associate schools to work 
towards making sure this happens. 
 
But it’s not good enough, Mr. Speaker, to simply allow this, 
you know, to sort of be the unwritten rule of the land. It’s 
important, Mr. Speaker, to enshrine these rights by law, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s what we’re calling for. Mr. Speaker, the 
realities for too many kids across Saskatchewan is that they’re 
isolated. They’re left in a spot of hurt. They’re left in a spot of 
harm, Mr. Speaker, and we shouldn’t accept that. We should let 
them know that they’re not alone. 
 
We shouldn’t leave it for a grade 7 student or a grade 5 student 
or a grade 11 student who’s figuring out who they are, Mr. 
Speaker, and realizing that they might be different from their 
friends, to be the one that has to provide the leadership, Mr. 
Speaker. We, with the strength of this Legislative Assembly, 
and us as members of this Assembly should be providing that 
leadership. And we should have the confidence, Mr. Speaker, to 
do that here in this Assembly. They deserve nothing less. 
 
I also think of the teachers, Mr. Speaker, that this is an 
important, affirming, enshrinement of a law, Mr. Speaker. 
Certainly I’ve, as a teacher before entering into elected office, I 
have friends, Mr. Speaker. And I think of one friend who is a 
teacher and a lesbian, Mr. Speaker, who lived that in isolation 
from her school community, Mr. Speaker, lived that in isolation 
from many of her staff members, lived that in isolation from the 
community at large. And these are the kind . . . And this is not 
very long ago, Mr. Speaker, in fact just a few years ago. I know 
how difficult it was for her to come out to that school 
community and the very pressures. 
 
So I think we owe it to future generations, we certainly owe it 
to current generations to stand up, Mr. Speaker, as an Assembly 
and to enshrine these rights and to make sure that gay-straight 
alliances are able to be formed all across Saskatchewan. So I’m 
thankful for our school board partners. I’m thankful for the 
teachers that are working across Saskatchewan. I’m thankful for 



May 7, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7161 

those pioneers and leaders, Mr. Speaker, that have pushed and 
worked for progress, recognizing we have a long ways still to 
go, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ve been appreciative of government to work on aspects with 
transgendered rights with the Human Rights Code. Now it’s 
time that we take the important step and enshrine the right of 
gay-straight alliances all across Saskatchewan. It’s my honour 
to enter debate here today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, indeed a pleasure 
to rise to be able to speak to this motion today, and I want to 
approach it from a little bit different perspective I think than 
what we’ve heard so far. You know, Mr. Speaker, as adults, as 
parents, as community leaders, as teachers, I believe that we 
have a slightly higher purpose in life. You know, Mr. Speaker, 
we realize and agree that there are bad people out there and that 
sometimes we need laws to protect the public, but I believe that 
our goal is somewhat higher. We need to be able to create a 
more civilized society, and in that sense our goal is somewhat 
greater. 
 
It’s important that we advance humankind in general, to teach 
our children to be creative, critical thinkers, and problem 
solvers. To be kind and judicious, I think that’s what our role is, 
to respect and treat all others with respect like they treat 
themselves, to do unto others as they would have done unto 
them. I have to ask the question, Mr. Speaker, do we need to 
legislate that? Or do we teach that through modelling it through 
the values that we live by on a daily basis? 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, there’s a saying that we have: you can 
do things right or you can do things the right way. By doing 
things right, in my mind, there’s a hint that there is some 
process, some regulation, some laws that we must follow. By 
doing the right thing, I believe that there’s a morality to that, an 
approach that is just and right and that all people should live by. 
And as parents we need to model those values for our children. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, a while back my wife and I we’re 
playing, we decided to go and play a few holes of golf after 
supper out at the Wascana golf course. And at that time the 
green of the second hole bordered the grid road called Fleet 
Street and what we in Regina kind of know as Rainbow bridge. 
Some will be familiar with Rainbow bridge. 
 
We were just finishing putting and walking off the green and in 
the distance I could see this motocross bike just screaming 
down the grid road. And I said to my wife, geez look at those 
people, they’re going to kill themselves. As soon as that bike 
hits that grid road, it’s going to go all over the place. As it 
approached, it got a little bit closer I said, you know Karen, I 
think that’s our daughter. And as the bike screamed past us, I 
said to Karen, that is our daughter. And like the dutiful father I 
decided that we would put an end to that. So I hopped the fence 
and took a nick out of my thigh on the barbed wire fence, which 
made the blood flow a little bit stronger, and jumped out onto 
the road with the golf club hanging out and the other arm 
hanging out, standing right in the middle of the road. I was 
going to stop that bike on the way back, and we were going to 

deal with this. 
 
And sure enough that bike came screaming back. And they saw 
this guy standing out in the middle of the road, golf club out 
there, and I thought they thought they met their Waterloo, Mr. 
Speaker. The motorbike stopped. Our daughter looked at me 
and got off the motorbike. And it was really quite cute to see 
her walking down that bike path on her way home because she 
knew that’s where she was going. And the young man, nice 
fellow that he was, got off his bike and started pushing it down 
the highway back to his home. 
 
Now if I’d have done things right, I’d have reported that to the 
police; I’d have followed. He was driving without a licence, da 
da, da da, da da. But instead, at the urging of my wife, we did 
things right and kind of took things into our own hands and got 
our daughter home safely. And I knew that she thought she was 
going to be grounded for, well probably grounded for life, but 
that really didn’t take place. And in her case, we had a 
conversation with her and talked about, you know, decision 
making, and as you grow older you’re going to have to make 
other important decisions in your life. 
 
[11:45] 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, because of that particular instance 
— and I know in the young fellow’s case as well — I know that 
our daughter is much the stronger mother for having had that 
situation dealt with in the right way, as opposed to doing things 
right and following some piece of legislation. So my point here 
is that some things require legislation and rules and regulations 
to guide us. Other things don’t where we can model them and 
help grow our children. 
 
I think of another situation that happened to me in one of the 
high schools that I was at, Mr. Speaker. And we had a Friday 
night dance, and I think you can all appreciate that on Friday 
night dances in a high school, sometimes things take place that 
we don’t want to take place. And you’ve got a whole number of 
staff out there that are helping to supervise. They’re giving up 
their Friday nights or whatever to supervise a high school 
dance, but invariably some things don’t go quite the way 
they’re supposed to. At the end of this particular function, we 
had about a 200-person melee out in the parking lot. There were 
visitors from other collegiates, etc. And it wasn’t a lot of fun for 
me, as the principal, and for our staff as supervisors and for the 
parents that were there as chaperones, etc., etc. 
 
Well Monday morning comes along and you have to deal with 
this. You’ve got a 600-student-body facility that is looking to 
leadership and their teachers for some sort of guidance. Now we 
could have done things right and ended all high school dances 
for the rest of the year, because that’s what parents might have 
expected. That’s what people around may have thought was a 
good and right thing to do. But if we had done that we would 
have taught our children nothing. And as a result of that, that 
particular instance, the staff got together and said, we’re not 
going to punish the entire student body for the actions of a few. 
And in most of the cases it wasn’t even our students, so why 
would we, why would we do that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
So we did the right thing and we were able to have a 
conversation with our students about how we go forward and 



7162 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2015 

the kind of decisions that we make. And I believe that as a 
result of that, the good work and professionalism of the teachers 
at that school taught those children how to become better 
citizens and behave in that society. So I make that point because 
there are times when you have to make a law. I don’t believe 
that this is one of them. 
 
You know, our . . . the member from Regina Rosemont is 
quoted in Hansard as saying, “What this side of the Assembly 
. . .” and I quote, “What this side of the Assembly is simply 
advocating is that government start listening to the school 
boards across this province.” And as my colleague from Prince 
Albert noted earlier, that’s exactly what this government is 
trying to do. We had a request from our school divisions, all 28 
of them, to allow them to be autonomous, which is what we 
charge them to be. We’ve got 28 different school districts 
representing 28 different geographic and culturally diverse 
areas of our province, Mr. Speaker. They are the ones that are in 
the best position to make decisions around what’s best for their 
communities, and it’s our intent to allow them to do that. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, for me and in my mind, it should be for 
all of us. I believe that we fail our children, Mr. Speaker, and 
we fail society in general when we need a law to enforce what 
is morally right . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Holy smoke, one 
minute. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from a journal article that I 
discovered while looking at this: 
 

A civilized society’s first line of defence is not the law, 
police and courts but customs, traditions, and moral 
values. Behavioral norms, mostly transmitted by example, 
word of mouth and religious teachings, represent a body of 
wisdom distilled over the ages through experience and 
trial and error. They include important thou-shalt-nots 
such as shalt not murder, shalt not steal, shalt not lie and 
cheat, but they also include all those courtesies one might 
call ladylike and gentlemanly conduct. The failure to fully 
transmit values and traditions to subsequent generations 
represents one of the failings of the so-called greatest 
generation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, and I continue the quote: 
 

Policemen and laws can never replace customs, traditions 
and moral values as a means for regulating human 
behavior. At best, the police and criminal justice system 
are the last desperate line of defense for a civilized society. 
Our increased reliance on laws to regulate behavior is a 
measure of how uncivilized we’ve become. 

 
Mr. Speaker, our school divisions, our schools, and our parents 
and our children are attaining that higher purpose, are making 
our society more civilized on their own. They are doing so 
without a law. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to enter 
the debate on this motion: 
 

To enshrine in legislation the right of students throughout 
Saskatchewan to establish and lead groups that promote 
respect for people of all sexual orientations and gender 
identities and expressions, including with the name 
gay-straight alliances or gender sexuality alliance, or any 
other name which is consistent with the promotion of a 
positive school environment that is inclusive and accepting 
of all students.  

 
We’ve got three jurisdictions leading the way here, Mr. Speaker 
— Ontario, Manitoba, and Alberta — who have enshrined this 
ability of students to start GSAs in legislation. It’s interesting. I 
listened yesterday to the Premier when he defended not 
entrenching the right of students to establish gay-straight 
alliances in legislation. He argued that it’s not the Ministry of 
. . . he argued that it’s policy, that it’s the Ministry of 
Education’s policy to support these when students ask and 
argued that they’re happening without legislation. 
 
Firstly I’d tell the Premier and the minister that they’re 
mistaken when they say students haven’t been prevented from 
starting GSAs. I know my colleague from Saskatoon Centre has 
some examples. And just yesterday I was chatting with a gay 
teacher, a constituent of mine, who was telling me about one 
school, two years ago, where she worked, and she said the kids 
were literally begging to start a GSA. The principal flatly 
refused because he said it wasn’t the right image the school 
wanted to portray. Although this was two years ago, the teacher 
said that she’s heard very recently from these students that this 
particular principal has not budged and there is no GSA in the 
school despite the students’ desire and the real need for one. 
She talked about one of the students at this particular school, a 
gay student who was cutting herself, Mr. Speaker, and really 
could have benefitted from a GSA and knowing that she has 
allies in the school, and there were allies wanting to start that 
process. 
 
Secondly there is a huge difference between legislation and 
policy. When this government’s own Law Reform Commission 
talks about legislation versus policy, it points out that 
legislation has official status that emphasizes its importance and 
encourages compliance. As per the anecdote I just mentioned 
about the school and the principal being unwilling to allow the 
establishment of a GSA, this policy obviously isn’t always 
being followed. Maybe not every principal is aware of it, or 
perhaps they realize how easy it is to ignore a policy as opposed 
to legislation. When you ignore legislation, Mr. Speaker, you 
are breaking the law. 
 
We want the ability of students and teachers to be able to 
establish GSAs to be codifed in law to ensure that these GSAs 
can exist. Having something in law isn’t just about making sure 
schools are following the law. Ultimately that is what we want 
as a society, but it’s also a great opportunity to educate citizens, 
teachers, young people, parents about why supporting all 
students regardless of their sexual orientation or gender identity 
or expression is important. 
 
This law would be an opportunity to have a sustained dialogue 
about diversity and about human rights. It also makes it far 
easier for students to start a GSA when they know the 
legislation is on their side. It’s a pretty scary thing being a 
teenager at the best of times, Mr. Speaker, speaking from 



May 7, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7163 

experience, having been one myself, and now having a 
teenager. Life isn’t particularly smooth and easy, and imagine 
being a LGBT [lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender] student and 
being fearful and feeling judged already and having to go and 
ask a teacher or a principal, but not being sure that this is 
something that can happen. 
 
Amanda Guthrie of the Avenue Community Centre in 
Saskatoon says the current method of having a student or group 
of students request a GSA potentially puts them in an 
uncomfortable position with their principal or a teacher. She 
says, “If that student knows there’s provincial legislation 
backing that request, there isn’t going to be as much fear when 
they ask their principal or teacher for a GSA.” 
 
It is also important to point out that this is a matter of life and 
death for some of our children. In Saskatchewan our suicide 
rates continue to grow. In fact, we have a higher suicide rate in 
2011 than we did in 2000. We’re going in the wrong direction, 
Mr. Speaker. Just to provide some context to those numbers and 
how they relate to the issue of creating safe and supportive 
schools for our children and foster better mental health, 
according to statistics from PFLAG Canada, 43 per cent of 
trans-identified students attempt suicide; 30 per cent of suicides 
are LGBT; gay teens are 8.4 times more likely to report having 
attempted suicide and are 5.9 times more likely to report high 
levels of depression compared with peers from families that 
report no or low levels of family rejection. 
 
These are some other stats that are shocking that I’ll give you 
now, and that supporting GSAs in schools could improve. 
LGBT students hear anti-gay slurs an average of 26 times a day. 
Twenty-six per cent of LGBT students are told to leave home. 
Nearly a fifth of students are physically assaulted because of 
their sexual orientation, and over a tenth because of their gender 
expression. 
 
This government’s own mental health and addictions action 
plan — currently an action plan with no action, I might add — 
supports gay-straight alliances. Under recommendation 12.2 
around improving service responsiveness to diversities 
including gender, sexual orientation, and disabilities, it says, 
“Gay-Straight Alliances in schools can help build social support 
networks and reduce isolation and stigma, which are risk factors 
for mental illness.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can cite statistics and tell you what I think, but 
sometimes it’s best to hear from those who are impacted by the 
laws or lack of laws. As I mentioned earlier, I was talking to a 
gay constituent of mine yesterday who, when I told her of the 
debate here today, she said, “That is a debate I want in on.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to give her that opportunity. This is 
what she wrote to me: 
 

To say that you are allowed to be gay and technically no 
one can do anything to you based on that fact, does not 
make up for the strong undertow of our heteronormative 
narrative and the homophobia that still plagues us as a 
society. For youth to thrive in their schools and 
communities, they need to feel socially, emotionally, and 
physically safe and supported.  

 

She went on to write to me of her own experiences. I’d like to 
outline them here because I think she says it better than me: 
 

As a gay teacher who was once a gay youth, I feel for the 
students who do not feel safe and who do not have the 
support at home. In the short years I have been a teacher, 
I’ve had numerous students come out to me, telling me 
they haven’t told anyone else. In this country, in this day 
and age, that is not acceptable. To have to hide an 
unchangeable part of who you are every day takes a 
terrible toll on both your physical and mental health. I 
know from experience. 
 
I went through years of trying to change myself and hide 
myself. As a youth myself, it was never an option to talk 
about my sexuality. I want for the youth of today to not 
have to experience that, to be able to find acceptance of 
themselves and live up to their true potential. I know what 
it feels like to question yourself and to think there is 
something wrong with you. We can prevent this for 
today’s students by having open dialogues in an 
environment where staff and students share a clear 
understanding that discrimination will not be tolerated. 
 
Even the discussion of “should we allow GSAs in schools” 
is embarrassing and pitiful. To other people, such as 
myself, to hold meetings and press conferences to decide 
if we deserve the right to congregate and celebrate and lift 
up who we are, puts us in the category of “less than.” 
Think about it — the lack of humanity LGBT people are 
given just through having to decide if we should allow 
GSAs in school. 
 
But what if someone who doesn’t support gay marriage or 
gay people in general becomes offended by their children 
hearing that gay people exist? [She asks that rhetorical 
question.] Then perhaps public education is not for them. 
 
In the end, I am happy these conversations are happening, 
as insulting as I find them, in pure hope that there will be a 
positive outcome. People are gay. You don’t have to be 
gay, and you don’t have to believe in gay marriage. It 
exists. It is not dependent upon your beliefs. We exist. 
 
As a gay teacher, I feel safe when I enter a new school and 
see that a GSA exists. I feel safe and I feel like I can relax 
and no one will hurt me. I feel when the administration 
and the staff have GSAs in a school, that I can exist as 
myself. 
 
I’m 31 years old and still sweat and shake when 
introducing my wife to people. This does not come from 
an imaginary fear I’ve conjured up about how some people 
may react to me. This has come from real experiences: 
when I was told I could not teach a health class because of 
my sexuality; when I was told to lie about my spouse or 
else parents would be pulling kids from my class; when a 
student ran away literally screaming “get her away from 
me” when the class saw a picture of my beautiful albeit 
gay family; when on the playground kids yell “eww” when 
my daughter proudly introduces us as her two moms. This 
list hurts and, sadly, goes on. And so yes, the importance 
of GSAs in schools is very real for me. 



7164 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2015 

I’m 31 years old and I’m still working through the same of 
my existence, because I live in society who on a grand 
scale accepts me, but on the day-to-day scale still has a 
long way to go. 
 
Clearly I feel GSAs protect not only the students, but also 
myself against parents who may not agree with my 
gayness, against staff who morally object to who I am, and 
against students who have never received proper education 
on sexuality and so lump me in with pedophiles and 
believe me to be a threat. 
 

[12:00] 
 

I worry about my daughters having gay parents and being 
taunted or bullied on those grounds. A GSA in their school 
would put my mind at ease as a parent. The lack of GSAs 
in our schools causes harm to students of gay parents, to 
gay and trans students, and to gay and trans staff. 
 
Having a GSA in a school causes no harm to anyone. It 
seems like a no-brainer to me. What we are looking at is 
the difference of possibly offending a population of people 
by having them, versus actual life and death of LGBT 
students and staff. Which one should take precedence? 
Offending those who have decided to take offence? Or 
disregarding the importance of the life and well-being of 
those who did not decide to be gay, bisexual, lesbian, or 
trans? Take it out of the hands of individual schools where 
the administration may not be supportive or staff may not 
be educated on the importance of the matter . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Time has elapsed. I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you for the two claps, my colleagues. 
 
I very much appreciate being asked to enter into this debate 
because I think it’s an important debate and I think it’s 
something that isn’t certainly new to the province of 
Saskatchewan and it’s not new to Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Centre had mentioned that during 
Premier’s estimates, and I think the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale had mentioned that there was no policy that the 
government had formed, and I just wanted to give them an 
update. And again I think they have a little bit of trouble with 
this, Mr. Speaker, but uncle Google was able to help me out in 
about eight seconds and it was able to find the Minister of 
Education policy statement, Student alliances for gender and 
sexual diversity in Saskatchewan schools. So if they want this, 
Mr. Speaker . . . I know the member from Saskatoon Centre 
wanted it tabled, but it is on the Internet, and we can certainly 
help him out if they need something to be able to help one of 
their researchers be able to find this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I guess one of the things I want to talk about first of all, Mr. 
Speaker, is, again this is nothing new. Bullying, sexual diversity 
is not something new that just happened with this government. 
And I guess my concern is, Mr. Speaker, on what the opposition 
did when they were 16 years in government, why they didn’t 
introduce some anti-bullying legislation, why they didn’t step 

up to the plate. As the member from Regina Rosemont said that 
a lot of the people unfortunately had to put masks over when 
they went to the pride . . . And I guess I don’t understand why 
they weren’t more supportive now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of the 
people out there. Why weren’t they introducing some 
legislation then? 
 
And I also want to allude to a couple of things that my 
colleagues were able to say, and I think the MLA [Member of 
the Legislative Assembly] from Saskatoon rivers put it very 
eloquently, Mr. Speaker, is we need to be respectful to each 
other. And this is not something that the government is in 
charge of, is being respectful to each other. And as the MLA 
from Douglas Park, the very vocal person during question 
period, Mr. Speaker, was saying, is this is something that we 
have to teach our children. 
 
Now there’s a difference between teaching your child and 
sitting down and having a conversation with him about 
everything, about bullying, about GSAs, about life, about them 
going through difficult times in their life. This is not something 
that the government needs to be able to step in between a 
relationship between a parent and a child, or the child and the 
school, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The reason that the legislation I 
think is coming from, the request for legislation is coming from 
the opposition is they don’t understand and they don’t see the 
perspective of the . . . You know what? The school boards, the 
autonomy of the school boards and the conversations between 
school boards, parents, and students is critical. This is not 
something that the government needs to be jumping in the 
middle of and telling everybody what to do. 
 
On the bullying side of things, and again this isn’t something 
that is brand new, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that anybody can 
stand up in this legislature, or at any point in time, and say that 
they weren’t bullied or intimidated by somebody or that they 
weren’t somehow feeling inferior or less than worthy with the 
rest of their peers, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But I guess it’s how we 
teach our kids to deal with that. 
 
The Minister of Central Services worked for months doing our 
anti-bullying, cyberbullying report, Mr. Speaker, and it was 
something that was very, very timely, Mr. Speaker, because we 
needed to make sure that students felt safe. And now talking 
specifically about the GSAs, anecdotally we’ve heard from 
them a couple of . . . while that there was some school boards 
. . . We heard something from the member of Riversdale, the 
MLA from Riversdale, that happened two years ago. Well I 
think things have changed in the last couple of years, Mr. 
Speaker, that the GSAs are in schools. 
 
We do have something. We have policy in place to be able to 
say to the school boards, you must provide this if it is required. 
Now why would the opposition think that we have to tell them 
that they must do this? That goes everything against the school 
boards’ autonomy, Mr. Speaker. They are in there for a specific 
reason, to be able to look out for their local needs. They’re 
voted into their positions just like we are, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
to be able to make decisions for their area. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s very concerning again why the 
NDP seem to think that they know better than everybody else, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. They need to be able to tell the school 



May 7, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7165 

boards what to do because obviously they think that the school 
boards don’t know enough, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And then even 
yesterday they went on a little further and they went again today 
in question period, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is they went on to say 
that the Privacy Commissioner wasn’t capable of doing their 
jobs, that we had to have a person to check the checker on what 
was going on certainly. 
 
And I don’t understand again, again yesterday, and today I did 
it in a member’s statement, Mr. Deputy Speaker, why the NDP 
think that they know better than everybody, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. They know better than the public servants that are out 
there working on our behalf. They’ve thrown many public 
servants under the bus. The Privacy Commissioner, they 
obviously don’t have very much confidence in that because we 
haven’t even let the Privacy Commissioner do their report yet 
and they’re already questioning their report. Again, public . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . and thank you, the Health Quality 
Council. Again in my member’s statement the Leader of the 
Opposition just absolutely slammed them. They want 
everybody in Saskatchewan to believe that they know better 
than everybody else in Saskatchewan. They know better than 
business. They know better than school boards, public health 
commissioners, and certainly, especially on the gay-straight 
alliance, they know better than everybody else. They’ve heard 
some anecdotally. 
 
The minister has stood up here and said he has not received any 
complaints from any school board saying that there was a 
refusal to set up a GSA, so why do we have to force them? Why 
is it the NDP’s position that government always knows best? 
Sometimes government needs to get involved, as the member 
from Douglas Park said. Sometimes we need laws; we need 
laws to protect people. But sometimes we just need to be able to 
make sure that everything is in place for them on the policy side 
of things, and we don’t need to ram some legislation down their 
throat, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s very, very disappointing. I think it’s overall arching of the 
NDP policy is they want to control everything, Mr. Speaker. 
They want to control the school boards. They want to control 
the health boards. They want to control everything they possible 
can and absolutely eliminate any type of free thought amongst 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The school boards are there for a very specific reason. They’re 
there to look out for the best needs of their students, primary. 
Secondly, they’re looking out for their staff and they’re looking 
out for their community. And I think the school boards in 
Saskatchewan are doing a great job at that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And I think as a government, we need to step out, let them be 
able to run their school boards. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that this motion that is brought 
forward is certainly not relevant because it’s one of those 
motions that the NDP are just trying to be able to bring things 
forward to create some stir within the community. We have 
policy in place. We’ve heard from the school boards. We’ve 
heard from the gentleman from Regina Pride on that there’s no 
need for legislation. 
 
So I guess the question would be is, who are they consulting, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker? Because they don’t seem to be consulting 

the School Boards Association. They seem to be supportive of 
this government’s line. But they seem to think that they know 
better than everybody else. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it just goes to speak that the 
arrogance of the NDP, that they always know better than 
anybody. The leader stands up and he certainly knows better 
than all of us. He always seems to think he’s the smartest 
person in the room, but I guess the Saskatchewan people will 
decide that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: — The time for debate has expired. 
Questions. I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. After listening 
to my fellow colleagues and members from Saskatchewan 
Rivers and Regina Douglas Park and Saskatoon Sutherland, I 
know and I believe that we have across this province dedicated 
and caring school board trustees who are committed to ensuring 
that the staff they hire and the governance they provide reflects 
the respectful, moral, and caring environment to support all the 
students they serve. 
 
And on April the 28th, 2015, the SSBA [Saskatchewan School 
Boards Association] sent a letter, as you heard earlier, to the 
Minister of Education, stating: 
 

The Saskatchewan School Boards Association firmly 
believes that our 28 member boards are in the best position 
to make decisions at the local level, including the 
establishment of gay-straight alliances. Introducing 
legislation to make such decisions mandatory limits 
boards’ autonomy and we feel it is unnecessary as school 
divisions are responding to diverse and changing student 
needs every day. 

 
Mr. Speaker, does the member from Regina Rosemont oppose 
the SSBA’s request to maintain the autonomy of locally elected 
school boards? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty rich coming 
from that government that has actively run roughshod over the 
autonomy of school boards on front after front after front, Mr. 
Speaker, to now try to deny human rights of students on those 
grounds, Mr. Speaker. School boards have been leaders on this 
front. Teachers have been leaders on this front, Mr. Speaker. 
Now it’s time for this government to stand up and provide the 
rights to students that they deserve. 
 
I quote Amanda Guthrie of the Avenue Community Centre on 
this front. “If that student knows there’s provincial legislation 
backing that request, there isn’t going to be as much fear when 
they ask their principal or teacher for a GSA.” Well I think it’s 
our responsibility, Mr. Speaker, to create the culture of care and 
support, yes, but to enshrine in law the right to GSAs across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 



7166 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2015 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
You know, right across this country, Ontario, Manitoba, even 
Alberta under the former premier, Jim Prentice, legislated the 
opportunity to have GSAs in our schools. That’s a reality in 
Canada. 
 
And we also know the reality for too many teenagers in our 
schools. They are thinking about suicide because of bullying, 
particularly homophobic bullying, and that’s a reality. And 
when we have in Saskatchewan . . . We’re one of the worst 
provinces in Canada when it comes to suicide rates. That’s a 
reality. I want to know from the member from Saskatoon 
Sutherland, what will it take to make GSAs legislation relevant? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I 
thank the member for the question. I guess what I would have to 
answer, the quick question is, we have made it relevant. We 
have made it very relevant. We have policy in place. We have 
approval from the school boards to make sure that they are in 
line with what we’re doing. We’re doing our consultation on 
what is happening within the school systems, and I hear what 
you’re saying is anecdotal about what you’re hearing from 
different people. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just don’t understand why they think that 
this is a new issue. Mr. Deputy Speaker, are they over there 
saying that there was no homophobic slurs before this 
government, before the Saskatchewan Party formed 
government? They did absolutely nothing on this, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. They didn’t do anything on the bullying. There’s been 
bullying going around forever, and there’s been GSA requests 
for a long time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I think that they need 
to step up to the plate and admit that they failed the people of 
Saskatchewan back when they were in government. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — The member from Regina Rosemont thinks he 
knows what school boards want. On November 13th, 2013, the 
member said, “What this side of the Assembly is simply 
advocating is that government start listening to the school 
boards across this province . . .” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this side of the Assembly has listened. Will 
the member from Regina Rosemont finally acknowledge that 
the Saskatchewan School Boards Association does not want 
legislation? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Again, Mr. Speaker, pretty rich from 
that government that has basically had an agenda that hasn’t 
listened to school boards on so many fronts, that’s left school 
boards with massive shortfalls right now that they’re having to 
deal with, making cuts across our very school divisions here in 
Regina and Saskatoon, across the province: they better start 
listening to the school boards on those fronts, Mr. Speaker. 
School boards in Saskatchewan have been leaders on the front 
around GSAs. So have teachers. So have students. 

Now it’s time for that government to show some leadership and 
enshrine GSAs for all students all across Saskatchewan. And 
for the member in the back there from Saskatoon Sutherland to 
suggest that action hasn’t been taken on this side, it just shows 
he has no history or understanding of the leadership in 
Saskatchewan when it comes to gay marriage, when it comes to 
the Human Rights Code. And it’s just such a dismissive 
approach, Mr. Speaker, to a very important issue. And to speak 
about issues as being anecdotal as far as suicide statistics and 
tragic losses is absolutely unacceptable. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 
terms of the protestations on the part of this government around 
there’s no need for legislation, it brings to mind the 
protestations we had heard earlier on in the life of this 
government around there being no need to enshrine the rights of 
the transgendered community in the Human Rights Code. 
Thankfully they came around on that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I guess when it comes to enshrining the human rights of 
students to form gay-straight alliances in their schools, again we 
hear the same kind of protestations we heard around that. But I 
guess my question is to the member from Saskatoon Sutherland. 
How long is it going to take for them to come around and do the 
right thing and enshrine this right in legislation? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
again a very similar question that I got last time. We do have 
some policy in place. And more importantly, and I think this 
letter has been read a couple of times, but I want to take a direct 
quote out of it: 
 

The Saskatchewan School Boards Association firmly 
believes that our 28 member boards are in the best position 
to make decisions at the local level, including the 
establishment of gay-straight alliance, GSAs. Introducing 
legislation to make such decisions mandatory limits 
boards’ autonomy and we feel it is unnecessary. 

 
I’m not quite sure what part of that they’re not understanding. 
We’ve had three members read that from this side. We’re more 
than happy to provide the letter for them so they can read it and 
see that this is something that the Saskatchewan school boards 
are looking for, and what they got from our government. Thank 
you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 
Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to understand the 
question that’s coming from that side. We know that currently 
boards of education respect diversity and are committed to 
providing students with opportunities to connect within their 
schools. We also know that school divisions in Saskatchewan 
are ensuring students have a place that are supportive and safe 
to secure club meetings. That is their policy, and this 
government stands behind it. 



May 7, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7167 

Mr. Speaker, to the member from Saskatoon Centre: do you 
know of any students that have made a request for a GSA in 
their school and have been denied? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of course. We all do 
in this legislature because we had Halla Scott come here, and I 
introduced her to everyone in this House. There’s her and 
several others, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I find this really incredible coming from that member. Last 
week on April 28th, when we were talking about the Day of 
Mourning, he was talking about, you know, Saskatchewan has 
the second-highest injury rate in the country. And he said in the 
Times-Herald, we need stronger occupational health and safety 
regulations and laws. 
 
The same with this: when we have a situation in our province 
where we’re seeing suicide rates like we have, and there are 
people out there, kids saying we need strong legislation that 
allows them to call for GSAs, that should be in place. I find it 
very odd that he would even have the nerve to get up and talk 
about it today. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 
from Douglas Park gave some examples of certainly good 
parenting and certainly good judgment as well, and I appreciate 
that, but it’s not an either/or on this front. I mean to compare 
cancelling a school dance to not providing and enshrining the 
right to establish a GSA is a very different thing. The fact is, the 
marginalized and the vulnerable grade 7 or grade 5 or grade 11 
or grade 10 students that could be helped by this deserve us, in 
our positions of strength, to stand up and enshrine the right to a 
GSA. Why won’t the member from Douglas Park support this? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You know, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m going to take this whole line of 
questioning from the members opposite really as an affront on 
several groups. First of all, it’s certainly an affront on the 
autonomy and the integrity of our school divisions. Having 
been a school board member, Mr. Speaker, I know and 
understand and appreciate the dedication and commitment that 
goes into decision making, and I believe that school . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Members, the time for the 75-minute 
debate has expired. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from The 
Battlefords. 
 

Motion No. 3 — Aquatic Invasive Species Awareness 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my pleasure 

today to rise to make some remarks about this motion. I would 
just like to read the motion in now, and then I will move it at 
the conclusion of my remarks: 
 

That this Assembly supports the actions taken by the 
government to prevent the spread of zebra and quagga 
mussels into our province, including recognizing May 
10th to 16th, 2015 as Aquatic Invasive Species Awareness 
Week in Saskatchewan. 

 
And I’ll move that motion at the conclusion of my remarks. 
 
This is a subject, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is very front and 
centre in my mind and I think should be front and centre in the 
minds of all people in Saskatchewan. What I’d like to do today 
is make remarks kind of on five different aspects. Firstly, I’d 
like to talk a little about how I found out about quagga and 
zebra mussels, and then I’d like to talk a little bit about species 
information and then the history of these two aquatic invasive 
species here in North America, the economic impact of the 
invasion of these aquatic invasives, and also what steps we need 
to take to prevent any future spread of these very dangerous 
aquatic species. 
 
Mr. Speaker, about three or four years ago, it was through our 
association in Saskatchewan here with our affiliation with 
PNWER that I first became aware of quagga and zebra mussels, 
and I’m sure there was probably a lot of people, likely in this 
Assembly and in this province, that knew about them before I 
did. But anyway, I heard about them first . . . And it’s very 
appropriate that we have a member here from Idaho today 
because Eric Anderson was a man who was very passionate 
about containing these species, and he was the first one that I 
talked to about it. 
 
Initially I thought, you know, here in Saskatchewan, that isn’t 
going to be a great problem, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because it 
seems like it’s 40 below for half of the year and our lakes are 
frozen over, and what damage can these things do? So I’ve 
since certainly changed my attitude about that, and I’ll talk 
more about how these things are spread and are very close to us, 
being over one province to the east right now. 
 
I talked very briefly earlier today about PNWER and our 
affiliation with PNWER, so I’m not going to go into a lot of 
details about that. But one of the working groups in PNWER of 
course is an aquatic invasive species working group, and I’m 
very pleased to have been able to sit in on some of their 
meetings. At each of our summits, summer and winter, we have 
an invasive species working group that keeps us updated on 
what’s happening in the jurisdictions in the PNWER group. 
 
I’d just like to talk a little bit about the history of how these 
aquatic invasive species came to be here in North America. 
They originated in the Dnieper and Volga river systems and the 
Black Sea area of Russia and Ukraine. In that environment, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, they aren’t a huge problem. The waterways, 
the water bodies in that area is not high in calcium content. 
These mussels need calcium to build shells and maintain their 
shells. That’s what they’re looking for in the water. They’re not 
a huge problem there, but of course when they came to North 
America, to the Great Lakes first of all, our lakes are high in 
calcium so they thrive and multiply exponentially. 



7168 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2015 

They were first discovered here in North America in 1987 and 
1988 in Lake St. Clair and Lake Erie in the Great Lakes system, 
and they rapidly, rapidly spread. They’ve now been found in all 
of the Great Lakes, in the St. Lawrence River, in the Rideau 
Canal, in the Trent-Severn Waterway, and throughout all of the 
other minor lakes around in the Great Lakes system in southern 
Ontario. 
 
How they got here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was basically on the 
hulls, the anchors, the chains of ocean-bearing ships coming 
from the Ukraine and Russia areas. Ships take on the ballast, as 
you know, when they come over here empty. They dumped 
their ballast in the Great Lakes and took on their cargo to go 
back to Europe. The veligers, which are the microscopic larva 
of these mussels, were in the water in their ballast tanks and got 
dumped into our lakes and spread from there. From there they 
spread from the Great Lakes down to the Lake Mead area. 
 
In January of 2007 they were discovered in Lake Mead, and of 
course there was a lot of conjecture and speculation about how 
did they travel 2,500 miles in that period of time, get from our 
Great Lakes in basically the northeast corner of our continent to 
the southwest corner of the continent. But it was discovered 
and, since, in research they found out that these things can live 
certainly three to five days out of water, and if conditions are 
right, they can live longer. And I’ll talk a little bit more about 
that when I talk about the species particularly. 
 
As I said, they were found in January of 2007 in Lake Mead. 
Two weeks later — how quickly they’re spreading — they were 
found in Lake Mohave and Lake Havasu, and then they were 
discovered in the Colorado River system by the summer of 
2007. So that’s how rapidly they were spreading in that area. Of 
course that’s a very populated area of the United States in that 
area. They since were discovered in the Colorado River 
aqueduct system and since that time were discovered in San 
Diego County, in the San Vicente reservoir, Lake Murray 
reservoir, Lower Otay reservoir, Lake Dixon, and in the 
Miramar reservoir; and in Riverside County in Lake Skinner 
and Lake Mathews. 
 
The zebras, one year later, just one year later were discovered in 
the San Justo reservoir in the San Benito County. Of course that 
is a very populated area. There’s lots of boat traffic from one 
lake to the next, from one river system, so we’re believing 
that’s how they got spread. 
 
Talk a little bit about more closely to home here, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. In 2010 they were discovered in the Red River system 
in North Dakota, which of course is very close to here. And 
then most recently in 2013, they were discovered in the fall, I 
think in October, in Lake Winnipeg in Manitoba. As probably 
everyone knows here, that is the 10th largest freshwater lake in 
the world, a huge water body. It would be literally impossible to 
eradicate these things from Lake Winnipeg. 
 
What they tried to do in Manitoba, at a cost of about $500,000, 
was they injected a slurry of potash because potash is 
something that does kill these mussels. They injected it into 
four different harbours in Lake Winnipeg, and they were 
effective. They were effective in killing the mussels in those 
areas. However, they did escape out of those harbours either on 
boats and motors, or through the dams that they’d put up, and 

they’ve now been discovered in the main body of Lake 
Winnipeg. So we know that the problem is ongoing and we 
must, we must contain them in Lake Winnipeg. 
 
As I mentioned earlier, between January ’07 and January ’08, 
the border protection stations in the area of southwestern United 
States, in the area of the greatest infestation, they set up their 
protection station and inspections, and they stopped 
approximately 83,000 boats in that period of time. Of those 
boats they checked, 8,700 of them had not been cleaned or 
drained. And of that number, 104 boats were contaminated. So 
you can see that 104 boats, if they go to 104 different lakes, you 
can see the magnitude of how quickly these things can spread, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Again closer to home, in Alberta last year they have purchased 
some portable wash units, similar to the ones I’m going to talk 
about here in a moment that we have here in Saskatchewan. 
They stopped about 3,700 boats in Alberta last year, and it was 
a voluntary thing that the people had their boats inspected. Of 
those boats they inspected, they found 10 that were 
contaminated. Seven of those had come up from the United 
States, and three came through Saskatchewan. Three came 
through our province, so we were that close to having quagga or 
zebra mussels in our province. Had those boats stopped in our 
province in one of our waterways, we would have had them 
here. 
 
If I can just share anecdotally a situation that highlights how 
close we were to having these mussels sometime ago, and I 
don’t think I’m talking out of school here because the fellow 
who owns this boat actually spoke at a workshop I attended in 
Saskatoon. I think we all know the paddlewheeler that plies the 
river in Saskatoon where you can host parties and weddings and 
receptions, etc. He purchased that boat down in Las Vegas. It 
had been on Lake Mead prior to that. He thought he’d had it 
checked. He had somebody look at it, thought it was clean. 
However when he hired the trucker to haul it back to 
Saskatchewan, they noticed, coming through Utah, I believe, 
one of the inspection stations there found them. They did 
impound the boat for 30 days, cleaned it up, and forwarded it 
on. Had they not done that, we would have had quagga mussels, 
zebra mussels in the Saskatchewan River. 
 
The problem with some of the jurisdictions, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, especially in that southwest corner around Lake 
Powell, Lake Matthews is that inspections are not mandatory. 
They have no regulations to force somebody to have their boat 
inspected; it’s strictly a voluntary inspection. So that’s one of 
the things that we need to address, and I’ll talk about that later 
this morning. 
 
[12:30] 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the third thing I’d like to talk about is a 
little bit of species information about these two species. And I 
don’t claim to be a marine biologist or a scientist or anything 
like that, but the generic names of these things are quagga 
mussels and zebra mussels because they do have little stripes on 
their shells. The zebra mussel has stripes. The quagga mussel 
. . . By the way, quagga is an extinct subspecies of African 
zebras, so they’re also a zebra-striped thing and that’s where 
they got the name. The quagga species name is Dreissena 



May 7, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7169 

rostriformis bugensis and the zebra’s species name is Dreissena 
polymorpha. So as I said, I’m not a biologist so I’m not going to 
go any deeper into that. 
 
An Hon. Member: — You know your Latin. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Yes, I think that was Greek. I’m not sure. They’re 
very small-sized mussels. They are about the size of a fingernail 
normally, but they can grow larger, and we’ll talk a bit more 
about that later. Their larvae, their young, are called veligers. 
They’re microscopic in size and certainly can’t be detected, and 
that of course is one of the problems. If they’re in the livewells, 
the ballasts of our boats, or in the legs of our motors, we can’t 
detect them. 
 
These mussels are what’s known as filter feeders. They 
basically take everything out of the water that they need and of 
course, as I mentioned already, they’re looking for calcium for 
shell building and maintenance. One mussel can filter in excess 
of one litre of water per day. So when you have millions of 
these things in a body of water, you can see how much filtering 
activity can go on. 
 
Basically what they do is they strip all life-supporting algae 
from the water, and the algae is the basis of the food chain in an 
aquatic ecosystem. okay? At high concentrations of quagga and 
zebra mussels, the algae just simply cannot reproduce fast 
enough to replace the algae that’s being eaten by these mussels. 
They remove the phytoplankton, the zooplankton, the algae, and 
they even eat their own veligers when they’re in the 
microscopic stage. And that is kind of one of the only plusses of 
this whole situation, that at that stage of their life cycle, they 
actually have about a 99 per cent mortality rate. Ninety-nine per 
cent of the veligers get eaten. 
 
But I’ll talk a little bit about how rapidly they multiply. These 
mussels are what’s known as bivalve molluscs, meaning that 
they can excrete back out through their incurrent siphon any 
undesirable particulate that they can’t use. And there are some 
that they don’t. When they spit this back out — it’s called a 
pseudofeces — it’s wrapped in their own mucus when they 
excrete it back out. And the mucus in these tiny mussels . . . 
Their toxins bioaccumulate so that these pseudofeces that they 
spit back out is approximately 300,000 times more toxic than 
what the water that they took in. So that’s the danger that they 
do, what they cause to other species in the water. Any 
particulate that they can use is discharged out their excurrent 
siphon, and of course doesn’t cause any harm. 
 
Since we’ve been researching these quagga and zebra mussels, 
it’s been discovered that the quaggas are far more adaptable 
than the zebra mussels, but both of these species are what’s 
called polymorphic, which means that they can readily adapt to 
new surroundings, to an extreme environment, which of course 
they are doing here in Saskatchewan in colder water and deeper 
water than where they came from. 
 
As I mentioned, the quagga is actually more adaptable to colder 
water. They’ve been found in deeper water, not uncommon to 
find them at 450 feet, but in some cases they’re as deep as 540 
feet. Whereas the zebras have been found up to 180 feet deep, 
but normally they’re only found between 6 to 12 feet below the 
surface of the water. The quaggas can also reproduce in colder 

water. Initially it was thought about only 12 degrees they could 
reproduce. Quaggas have now been known to reproduce in 
9-degree water, and the zebras at 12 degrees. 
 
As I mentioned, they’re typically fingernail size, but they can 
be up to 2 inches in size. The quaggas, again, are a little more 
adaptable. They can colonize on either soft or hard surfaces like 
rocks, boats, docks, dams, anything that’s there. And what they 
do is they attach by their byssal threads. Once they reach the 
adult stage, they glom on to whatever’s in their surroundings, 
whereas the zebra mussels prefer hard surfaces only They attach 
only to rocks. They don’t attach to mud in the bottom of the 
ocean or to the sand beaches, whatever, like the quaggas do. 
 
Their larva is microscopic. It’s called veligers. Reproduction is 
exponential. One female mussel can produce as many as 40,000 
eggs in each reproductive cycle, and up to a million eggs in a 
spawning season. One female can produce a million eggs in a 
year. 
 
As I mentioned earlier, they can survive normally up to three to 
five days out of water — so that’s how they get transported — 
depending on the temperature and the humidity. But if it’s 
cooler and damper, they can survive up to 30 days out of water 
in the right conditions. 
 
The quagga mussels are taking over from the zebra mussels 
here in North America. In 2000 in Lake Michigan, the zebras 
accounted for about 98.3 per cent of the mussel population. By 
2005 the quaggas accounted for 97.7 per cent. Zebras are found 
in a density of about 899 per square meter. And later on the 
quaggas are now almost 7,800 per square meter, so you can see 
the size of the colonies of these things. 
 
Again, because of their filter-feeding activity, thus reducing the 
food available for fish and other aquatic species — the 
phytoplankton and zooplankton — the food chain has been 
disrupted in our waterways. They do avoid certain types of 
plankton, so that causes more toxic algae to build up in our 
lakes, which also is very dangerous. 
 
I mentioned the pseudofeces earlier on. What happens is that 
settles on the bottom of the lake. It decomposes, creates an 
environment where botulism type E thrives. And in recent years 
that botulism type E has been blamed on the outbreaks that’s 
killed thousands of fish and has resulted in avian botulism that’s 
also killed thousands of birds in the Great Lakes. They’ve also 
been responsible for a dramatic decline in the native clam 
populations in Lake Erie and Lake St. Clair because they attach 
. . . And I know one of our members is very fond of clams, and 
that would be an issue for him as well. 
 
Large colonies of the zebras also affect the spawning schools of 
some of the fish, and thereby affecting the survival of their fish 
eggs. 
 
Sadly, Mr. Speaker, there are no known predators for these 
things. It has been experimented with yellow perch and redear 
sunfish that will eat them to a certain point, but of course we 
don’t know the danger of having them ingest the toxins that are 
in these molluscs because toxins do tend to biomagnify as they 
go up the food chain. 
 



7170 Saskatchewan Hansard May 7, 2015 

I’d like to talk a little bit now just about the economic impact of 
these mussels that are in North America. We don’t fully 
understand the total amount but, at this point, we’re estimating 
the cost in the United States is between 3 billion to $5 billion. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan, we’re blessed with some beautiful lakes, 
beautiful waterways. Water is important for recreation, for 
commercial fishing, for our irrigation for our agriculture sector, 
our hydro power dams, and of course water for our potash 
industry. 
 
In the Great Lakes alone, some 70 to $90 million a year is being 
spent to alleviate the problems caused by these. Alberta 
estimates that it will cost $75 million a year if quaggas or 
zebras get into Alberta. Because of the damage to the 
freshwater clams, again we don’t know what the cost will be to 
that. 
 
In the Colorado River system for example, the reservoirs in the 
southwest of the USA [United States of America] I talked 
about, divers are going down, scraping these mussels off the 
Hoover dam. And of course at this time we don’t know the 
extent of the damage, because they do take the calcium, if 
there’s going to be any damage to the concrete because of 
depleted calcium in that concrete. 
 
The value of our cottages around our lakes is going to go down, 
the demand for our campgrounds. Our tourism industry is going 
to be affected. There’s going to be so many ramifications if we 
allow these mussels into our province. 
 
And again, anecdotally I talk about . . . Last year in Ottawa, 
when we took this issue to Ottawa and talked to the 
Environment minister there, one of the staff members related 
the story that their family has a cottage on one of the lakes 
nearby, and they literally can’t walk on their beach or go out of 
their cottage without putting on shoes. These things are sharp 
on their feet, they cut them. So this is one of the things that’s 
going to deteriorate the value of our recreational properties. 
They cause a lot of damage to our boat motors, to the props on 
the boats, get in the ballast, in the live wells. So this is a very 
dangerous thing. 
 
So I’ll just conclude, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by talking a little bit 
about what we can do. These mussels have no known predators, 
so it has to be a man-made, a known man-made way to 
eradicate them. So the reason for this motion today and the 
announcement that we’re going to make later on this afternoon 
is to raise awareness. We absolutely must raise awareness. The 
only way to prevent these is containing them at the source, 
which our closest source of course is Lake Winnipeg. The ones 
in the States, they’re working in the southern states to do what 
they can there. 
 
We need to update regulations in some jurisdictions. 
Fortunately here in Saskatchewan we have made some changes 
to our regulations, and we do have the authority to search some 
boats here. But we need to do it on a federal level, both here 
and in the United States. 
 
Again I’d just like to read a couple of things that we’re doing 
here. Our program is going to include new signage, web-based 
content, educational materials, and two new portable 

boat-decontamination units for the province which we’re going 
to be unveiling later today. And we’ll be moving around the 
province to try to catch any boats that may be contaminated. 
 
In closing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would just like to say that we 
need to increase education. We need to have people aware of 
this problem. We need to have people want to have their 
inspections done because we’re not ever going to be able, in a 
province this size with as many roadways as we have, we’re 
never going to be able to catch every boat that comes and goes 
out of our province, to and from the province, whether it’s local 
people, snowbirds coming back from the States, people buying 
boats in the States. We don’t stop all the speeders. We don’t 
stop all the impaired drivers. We’re never going to stop all the 
boats. We need to impress on people that they have to have 
their boat inspected, and that’s the only way to protect our 
waterways. So having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would 
like to move the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly supports the actions taken by the 
government to prevent the spread of zebra and quagga 
mussels into our province, including recognizing May the 
10th to 16th, 2015 as Aquatic Invasive Species Awareness 
Week in Saskatchewan. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member 
from The Battlefords: 
 

That this Assembly supports the actions taken by the 
government to prevent the spread of zebra and quagga 
mussels into our province, including recognizing May 
10th to the 16th, 2015 as Aquatic Invasive Species 
Awareness Week in Saskatchewan. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Regina Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And first off, I want to thank the member from North Battleford 
for doing so much work on this file and bringing the attention 
that is needed to this issue of aquatic invasive species resulting 
from the quagga and the zebra mussel. I know that these have a 
large impact on our economy and a large impact on our 
waterways, and I look forward to talking more about this in 
future debate. And I would like to adjourn debate right now. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Walsh 
Acres has moved to adjourn debate on the motion. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that the House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 



May 7, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7171 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:44.] 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7145 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7145 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7145 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7145 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7146 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7146 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7146 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7146 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7147 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7147 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7147 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7148 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7159 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7159 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7148 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7148 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7148 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7148 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 World Ovarian Cancer Day 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7149 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7149 
 Regina Educator Receives National Recognition 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7149 
 Fundraiser for Neural Health Project Planned for Saskatoon 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7149 
 Access to Magnetic Resonance Imaging Services 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7150 
 Mother’s Day and Maternal Mental Health Day 
  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7150 
 Comments During Estimates 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7150 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Release of Information Concerning Worker 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7151 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7151 
 Provision of Magnetic Resonance Imaging Services 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7152 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7152 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7154 
 Reduction of Greenhouse Gas Emissions 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7154 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7154 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Student Rights and Safer Schools 
  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7155, 7166 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7157 
  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 7159, 7165 
  Marchuk ........................................................................................................................................................................ 7161, 7167 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7162 
  Merriman ...................................................................................................................................................................... 7164, 7166 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7165 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7166 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7166 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7166 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 3 — Aquatic Invasive Species Awareness 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7167 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7170 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


