




















































Hansard: March 03, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 27B  TUESDAY, MARCH 3, 2015, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6409 

 March 3, 2015 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, debate will resume. 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 168 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 168 — The 

Government Relations Administration Act be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

enter the discussion tonight on Bill No. 168, the government 

relations amendment Act, 2014. I’d like to start just a little bit 

about laying out what the Act is about and have a few 

comments just flagging a couple concerns, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the minister’s second reading speech, he talks about the four 

changes that this bill will make. And one of the things the bill is 

doing is proposing to consolidate authority from and repeal, the 

minister says, four outdated Acts. These particular Acts are The 

Urban Affairs Act, The Rural Affairs Act, The Rural 

Development Act, and The Northern Affairs Act. 

 

The minister argues that the Act will be more consistent with 

the ministry’s mandate and functions, which now include public 

safety, First Nations and Métis relations, northern affairs, and 

municipal affairs. 

 

The second thing that this bill does, Mr. Speaker, and again the 

minister lays this out in his second reading speech, he says it 

will address “. . . standardizing the general authorities of the 

minister.” And he goes on to say that: 

 

Provisions relating to current ministerial powers and 

ministry programs and services such as providing 

financial, administrative and technical support services 

will be retained in the new Act. Other provisions that 

either no longer reflect or are no longer part of the 

ministry’s mandate will be removed. 

 

The third piece that this Act does, Mr. Speaker, the minister 

outlines it. He says it supports “. . . the ministry’s role in setting 

the education property tax mill rate and then monitoring and 

ensuring compliance in the reporting, collection, and remittance 

of education property taxes by municipalities to school 

divisions.” He goes on to talk about, with respect to 

compliance, that most municipalities are completely compliant 

with education property tax collection, remittance and 

reporting, but there are rare instances that the ministry knows of 

where municipalities have not collected or remitted education 

property taxes owing to the school division. 

 

He says that this money — obviously this is the money; this is I 

think common sense — this is money the school division relies 

on to help fund day-to-day operations. But right now the 

ministry, the minister arguments, “. . . has few tools available to 

compel municipalities that do not remit the education property 

tax they collect to the school division beyond withholding 

grants for an indefinite period of time.” So this gives the 

ministry some tools, the minister is arguing, to help with that. 

 

The last point, Mr. Speaker, or the last area that this Act deals 

with is it enables “. . . the minister to appoint a person to 

review, make recommendations, or assist in resolving 

intermunicipal disputes where no dispute resolution mechanism 

exists.” He points out that: 

 

. . . the three municipal Acts provide for voluntary dispute 

resolution by consent of the municipalities involved in a 

dispute. The Acts also provide for dispute resolution by 

the Saskatchewan Municipal Board in certain 

circumstances where municipalities are required to seek 

mediation and dispute resolution to resolve a matter. 

 

But he points out there are: 

 

. . . other instances where the minister may need to 

become involved — a voluntary dispute resolution is not 

attempted and municipalities are unwilling to resolve a 

matter, or there is no dispute mechanism provided in 

legislation. 

 

And we see that issue actually, where the Conflict of Interest 

Commissioner, Justice Barclay, was called in to issue a review 

and a report on Sherwood Park, Mr. Speaker. So there are 

occasions where there needs to be a mechanism in place. The 

minister argues that: 

 

The consequential amendments [that are being made] to 

the three municipal Acts will provide clear authority for 

the minister to appoint a person to make recommendations 

or assist municipalities in mediating or resolving an 

intermunicipal dispute. This will replace the ability to 

appoint a municipal administration adviser in The Rural 

Affairs Act and The Urban Affairs Act and will address the 

lack of ability in the three municipal Acts to act if 

municipalities cannot voluntarily bring themselves to 

resolve the dispute. 

 

That is what the minister outlined in his second reading speech, 

Mr. Speaker, about the changes to the bill or to . . . pardon me, 

the consolidation of basically four bills into one, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think one of the problems that stands out, Mr. Speaker, if you 

look at one of the bills that this Act proposes to replace, one of 

the bills is The Northern Affairs Act, Mr. Speaker. And I just 

want to read a little bit of The Northern Affairs Act into the 

record so people . . . It’s a relatively short bill, Mr. Speaker, but 

I think that there’s a very important piece in this bill. This is the 

bill, Mr. Speaker, that this new bill will repeal and replace, and 

it talks about the duties and powers of the minister: “The 

minister is responsible for matters related to northern affairs in 

Saskatchewan and may . . .” 

 



6410 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2015 

There are several things laid out here, but one of the points 

here, the minister may: 

 

(f) take any . . . measures that the minister considers 

appropriate; 

 

to ensure that the Government of Saskatchewan is advised 

as to the views of residents of northern Saskatchewan 

respecting the delivery of programs and the provision of 

services in northern Saskatchewan by the ministries and 

agencies of the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, that piece is gone and hasn’t found its way 

into the new Act. I think recognizing that, well, all parts of 

Saskatchewan need and deserve to have a voice, but perhaps the 

North has some special challenges, Mr. Speaker, and that is not 

addressed in the new Act. There is some language that is similar 

now for all three. I actually would just like to read this language 

into the record here. 

 

So in fact “The minister is responsible . . .” And this is section 

(2) of the new Act. 

 

The minister is responsible for all matters not assigned by 

law to any other minister, ministry or agency of the 

Government of Saskatchewan relating to affairs in 

northern Saskatchewan, including: 

 

It talks about: 

 

coordinating, developing, implementing, evaluating and 

promoting measures that foster and advance the 

development of northern Saskatchewan; 

 

participating in planning, issue identification and analysis, 

policy formulation and review and development of the 

strategy of the Government of Saskatchewan respecting 

issues affecting northern Saskatchewan; 

 

coordinating and carrying out plans, programs, services 

and projects that involve one or more other ministries of 

the Government of Saskatchewan or one or more 

jurisdictions other than Saskatchewan; 

 

cooperating with other public and private organizations or 

agencies to achieve measures that respond to and improve 

growth and development in northern Saskatchewan; and 

 

conducting research and collecting, organizing and 

disseminating information and statistics. 

 

And that is all well and good, Mr. Speaker, but it seems to be 

missing sort of the general spirit of the bill, again ensuring that 

the views of the residents of northern Saskatchewan, the views 

of the original bill which was An Act respecting Northern 

Affairs . . . The voice of northern Saskatchewan I think 

sometimes, Mr. Speaker, I think many people don’t feel like 

that voice is heard. So when we take many bills and consolidate 

them into one, it’s not that finding efficiencies or thinking about 

how pulling things together and having consistency can be a 

good thing, that is, not that that’s not a positive thing, but 

sometimes when we look at the context of why original bills 

were drafted in the first place, when you consolidate, you 

maybe lose the spirit of that original bill, Mr. Speaker. And I 

think that that’s what’s happening here. 

 

And I know when we talk about northern Saskatchewan, some 

of the needs in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, there are 

many challenges. I hear from my colleagues from the North 

who represent actually geographically half the province of 

Saskatchewan that geographically half the province of 

Saskatchewan, where the population is even more sparse than 

the rest of Saskatchewan, have huge challenges. We can talk 

about the high suicide rate in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker. We can talk about transportation, the lack of good 

roads, the difficulty getting from place to place because the 

roads are in such disrepair, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I have had an opportunity, in my time as an MLA and in my 

capacity as a critic and sitting on a committee, to travel to the 

North on two occasions, to Pelican Narrows and to Stony 

Rapids. And the roads, Mr. Speaker . . . I think everybody in the 

other half of the province, Mr. Speaker, needs to spend a little 

bit of time in the North and the Far North to see the reality that 

people are struggling with, Mr. Speaker. 

 

On occasion to visit the Stony Rapids health facility there, Mr. 

Speaker, I was surprised to learn that women who are giving 

birth are sent south, Mr. Speaker, a few weeks prior to their due 

date because they don’t have the ability to give birth in or the 

support services to give birth in their own communities. 

 

I’ve had the opportunity to . . . I’ve had two children, Mr. 

Speaker, and I couldn’t even imagine being sent away from my 

home, my support network, to give birth, to wait, to wait for an 

indefinite period of time because we never know when babies 

are going to show up. It could be anywhere usually from 38 to 

42 weeks, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So that waiting period where you don’t know what’s happening, 

you’re away from your home, perhaps your other children, your 

partner, is absolutely unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. I think one of 

the challenges there too, Mr. Speaker, is you think that it would 

be a prudent thing perhaps to try to ensure that the woman 

going south to give birth would have some support in place or 

we would make sure that she would have her partner or 

someone there with her. But she doesn’t. We don’t provide . . . 

We’re not providing the services in the North, Mr. Speaker, and 

we’re inadequately supporting women who come south to 

deliver babies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

As a proponent of midwifery and a big believer in midwifery, I 

think this is something that we could better support in northern 

Saskatchewan and could provide women with some better 

access to maternity care when they have normal, healthy 

pregnancies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

TB, tuberculosis. It was interesting to me in Stony Rapids — 

and again maybe I’m naive, Mr. Speaker, and I know TB is a 

reality — but having some interesting conversations with 

people at the health facility. It’s a lovely health facility in Stony 

Rapids. But when you step outside of that health facility, Mr. 

Speaker, you have to remember the conditions in which people 

are living where you’ve got abject poverty. You’ve got lack of 

quality housing. You have families living in, multiple families 

living in single family dwellings, Mr. Speaker, huge challenges. 



March 3, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6411 

And so when you think about quality of life and health, all those 

other things, those social determinants of health all impact the 

care that people have, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bandwidth in the North, some of the challenges around 

bandwidth, whether it’s for education or for health care for that 

matter, Mr. Speaker, again thinking about the Stony Rapids 

health centre there, the reality . . . or the hospital, the facility 

there, Mr. Speaker. When they do have diagnostics, to send 

them to the people who need them, Mr. Speaker, takes 

bandwidth. And they say that bandwidth is a huge challenge. 

 

I think the one thing that . . . I read an article a couple years ago 

that I saved that really spoke to me, Mr. Speaker, and it was 

written by Greg Poelzer, called “Saskatchewan Vikings,” and 

it’s from Options Politiques in March of 2013. It’s comparing 

Saskatchewan to Norway. As we know, Norway has a 

sovereign wealth fund of $1 trillion, Mr. Speaker, that they 

didn’t start that long ago. And in this article, Mr. Poelzer makes 

the comparison between Saskatchewan and Norway and said 

that our province and Norway “. . . have key factors in 

common: world-class resources, high resource revenues, a 

broad social consensus and an expectation of a government role 

in economic planning.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, so you look at a country like Norway and they 

priorized their northern . . . The whole country, Mr. Speaker, is 

priorized. There’s not the poor cousin and the rich cousin; they 

try to make sure that there is an equal distribution of services. 

And Mr. Poelzer writes that: 

 

Saskatchewan is a tale of two provinces: north and south. 

Norway took a deliberate strategy of equalizing 

transportation, communication, education and social 

infrastructure. Most Canadian visitors to northern Norway 

are surprised by its relative prosperity and the high levels 

of infrastructure and government services, especially 

hospitals, sporting facilities, and schools and universities. 

 

Mr. Poelzer goes on to point out that our province, and I think I 

know the member from Cumberland and Athabasca know this 

and anybody who has visited, spent any time in northern 

Saskatchewan and particularly the remote North knows that 

Saskatchewan stands in stark comparison to Norway, Mr. 

Speaker. And he points out that “Northern Saskatchewan 

competes with northern Manitoba for the unwelcome 

designation as the poorest region in Canada,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

The roads in the North can take . . . Well he points out, Mr. 

Poelzer points out that: 

 

The . . . road between Points North and Stony Rapids, 

[which is] just under 200 km, can take 10 hours to travel 

by vehicle. In the Athabasca Basin, in the northern 

extremity of the province, there is no training centre for 

either trades or university courses. 

 

[19:15] 

 

So Mr. Poelzer is just arguing that we had a key opportunity 

here, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that all people in Saskatchewan 

benefited from the resource wealth that we have, much of it that 

comes out of the North, Mr. Speaker, and there is huge 

disparity. 

 

So with respect to this particular bill, Bill No. 168, The 

Government Relations Administration Act, 2014 I think the 

unfortunate piece, one of the unfortunate pieces again is not 

ensuring that the views of residents of northern Saskatchewan, 

respecting the delivery of programs and the provision of 

services in northern Saskatchewan by the ministries and 

agencies of the Government of Saskatchewan, will be heard, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we think about consultation, and the minister in his 

second reading speech talked about consultation and does 

mention consulting with all the bodies, stakeholders impacted 

by the bills. I just need to point out that the minister outlines 

what seems like a fulsome consultation. And he talks about the 

New North, which is a body of 35 mayors, Mr. Speaker, and 

says that they were consulted and the New North is in support 

of this. 

 

But my question when I hear this government talk about 

consultation, and even when they get up and talk about who has 

been consulted, we know that the member, just a few years ago 

on a particular bill, I can remember the member from 

Martensville telling us about consulting with First Nations 

people on an environmental bill which turned out not to be the 

case at all. So sometimes these comments require further 

digging and committee is always an opportunity to do that, Mr. 

Speaker. But this is . . . I still have many colleagues who have 

many comments to make on this particular bill. This is just the 

start of the debate with respect to Bill No. 168, The Government 

Relations Administration Act, and as we continue to do our due 

diligence and talk to stakeholders and get their feedback, I 

know that my colleagues will have further comments and we 

will have much to say when this bill eventually makes it 

committee. 

 

But with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to adjourn my remarks 

on Bill No. 168, The Government Relations Administration Act, 

2014. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 168, The Government Relations 

Administration Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 170 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 170 — The Fire 

Safety Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, to join in on Bill 170, The Fire 

Safety Act, and I just want to start out with a few of the 

comments. And I think the minister’s comments when he refers 

to the Act, he talks three areas he wants to go in. And in some 

of his comments, his opening comments, when he did his 



6412 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2015 

second reading, I observed there’s an area where he’s taking an 

Act and actually repealing it and coming up with a new Act. 

 

And he talks about modernizing it for today’s, I guess, the 

firefighters that serve our province, the job they do and what 

they’re asked to do. He talks about the changes and why they 

have to modernize it. And some areas he talks about, whether 

it’s training, whether it’s going out on industry fires, they’re 

responding to motor vehicle accidents where they have to be the 

first responders or, at the end of the day, they have to go with 

the jaws of life and someone’s in an accident and they’re in that 

vehicle and they’re trapped, then of course not only will 

emergency response teams come but your firefighters. 

 

So he’s talking about doing some of the changes in there and he 

refers to some of those changes to modernize it within the 

wording and giving certain powers. But he also, you know, 

talks about giving certain powers, and I know we’re going to 

have to go through finding out exactly how we’ve come to this 

type of an Act and what’s the reasoning behind it. And there 

must be a reason, whether somebody’s requested it, whether a 

study’s been done. Like, I have no way to find out right now. 

It’s not in the package. It’s not in the information. It doesn’t 

refer to it. But I know through committee when there’s officials 

there, we have that opportunity again, whether it’s the members 

on this side, members of the committee, or it’s the critic. They 

have the opportunity to question the minister and his officials 

and try to find out exactly why they’re proposing some of the 

change. And sometimes again they make sense. There’s good 

reasons why. 

 

But sometimes we wonder, like who has been consulted and for 

what reason. And when I think about that, I know we had just 

recently the firefighters of Saskatchewan, 17th annual lobbying. 

They come here and I know they meet with the government, 

they meet with the opposition, and they come forward with 

lobbying and things that they would like to bring to the 

government’s attention, and the opposition, and hopefully . . . 

And I don’t know if the lobbying package that they provide and 

the lobbying that they do, and I guess their concerns that they 

raise with government and the opposition, I don’t know if any 

of those suggestions, recommendations will be implemented in 

this new Act. Will it be, when the minister hands over the 

powers to whoever it’s to be, whether it’s the fire 

commissioner, whoever will carry out the role and the duties 

and the powers, that will come a little later I guess, and they’ll 

outline how the regulations and how that will all come. 

 

We want to make sure, and we hope we get it right that it’s 

taking care of some of the issues that are out there that are 

facing Saskatchewan residents. They want a service when you 

dial 911 because it’s an emergency; you have a fire. You want 

to make sure that those individuals are responding, they have 

the resources. It’s about safety, not only for our seniors, for our 

children, for our residents whether it’s, you know, an industry 

relies on the expertise, the training of our fire services and fire 

protection that are going on in our province. They do a great 

work, you know. They put themselves in danger, and we know 

that and we thank them for that. There’s many of them, whether 

they’re volunteers or they belong to the Saskatoon city fire 

department, Regina. We have many different fire departments 

and organizations, volunteers that do a great job and do this 

province a great service. And you know, I want to acknowledge 

that. 

 

So at the end of the day, you know, when you think about it, 

when you have those individuals coming forward as they bring 

their concerns forward, we hope that the government is hearing 

their concerns and will act on that. Here you have the front-line 

workers and individuals who are going out and we’re expecting 

them to do certain things and to provide a service to our 

residents and our province for fire protection. I want to make 

sure that they have all that they need with services. And we 

have to make sure government is held responsible to make sure 

that they have the resources that they need, whether it’s 

training, whether it’s education they’re doing at schools, in the 

homes. And I mean, you’ll see them, many of the fire services, 

they try to do a great job of educating the public on a safe plan 

to get out of the house, for children, in case of a fire, you know. 

God forbid that happens, but they have a plan. 

 

And again they work with young students. They work with 

families to explain that. They work with seniors to make sure of 

the plans that are put in place give the individuals an 

opportunity, to make sure that when they’re educating them that 

they have smoke detectors, that they’re working, that not to take 

the batteries out. Are they, you know, wired in and they’re there 

forever where they’re a wired-in system rather than a battery if 

you take it out, and the fire extinguisher. 

 

So there’s all those things, whether you’re going to do 

inspections and all of that. There’s so many questions, like 

you’re changing things and you’re bringing in a whole new . . . 

So I’m not sure exactly how that’s going to come out in 

regulations. Who will have the power? Will they have the 

resources that they’re going to need to provide the service that 

we’re asking them to do? It’s fine to make a new Act and give 

certain duties and say this is the way we want things to be done. 

And yes, if it’s to protect Saskatchewan residents, we want to 

make sure that happens. 

 

But we want to make sure that those, those individuals, whether 

they’re inspectors, whether they’re the volunteer fire 

department, have the provisions and have the provisions, the 

resources and whatever they need to make sure they can do 

their job safely, that they can educate, and do what they’re 

asked to do by the ministry and by this Act that it’s giving some 

duties. So when we come together we want to make sure that 

that happens. 

 

And there’s partnerships. We know that some municipalities 

have different partnerships. There’s many partnerships go on 

when it comes to fire safety. I think of some of the ones back 

home. There’s a regional fire department where they come 

together and you might have two municipalities, you have a 

First Nations who utilize a regional fire department of these 

great volunteers. And they do great work; they do a lot of 

training. And they do . . . We ask that they do so much for us. 

And you know, some of them put their lives on the line for us. 

And we are grateful and I talked about that before. And I know 

back home in northern Saskatchewan there are individuals who 

do do that and they try their best. And I give them credit. 

 

But I guess sometimes we look at, you know, the loss of life. 

And I have to talk about that. And we’ve seen that in the recent 

years here where we’ve lost too many young people, too many 



March 3, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6413 

people, to a house fire where you have someone lose a life. And 

we have to look at that. 

 

And not only is it that the federal government has an obligation 

when we look at First Nations funding, what they’re doing and 

what needs to be done to make sure there’s adequate fighting so 

you can do the education, the training on those communities. 

But there is also an opportunity and an obligation on behalf of 

the province I believe, I believe to partner and help with that 

education, to make sure the resources are there so that First 

Nations and all municipalities have the same opportunity — 

children, family, elders have the same opportunity to education 

from the firefighters. It’s so important, you know, to lose one 

life because you don’t have the resources to do the education; 

you don’t have what’s needed. And I think that’s so important. 

 

And yes, I think the federal government has a role to play, and 

it has to play. I think the province can play a partnership role. It 

can do great partnerships if the willingness is there by 

government to say, we have to work together. We have to make 

sure that we never lose another young person, we never lose a 

resident, whether they’re living in our province in a 

municipality, a rural, an urban, a reserve, whether it’s a large 

Métis community. It doesn’t matter and it shouldn’t matter. 

Whether you’re in the South, the North, urban, rural, it 

shouldn’t matter. The resources should be there. 

 

And our governments should work together partnering to make 

sure the resources are there to do the education, to make sure 

that there is fire protection, when someone dials 911 that 

somebody responds. And I mean I’ve said that they, you know, 

to any family member out there that has lost a loved one, our 

hearts and our prayers go out to them. 

 

And I know we have to do better as citizens of our province. 

We have to make sure. As mankind, we have to do the right 

thing. Sometimes, Mr. Speaker, it is just the right thing to do, to 

work together. We don’t have to blame anybody. We don’t 

have to point fingers. We just have to say, look, this is a 

province that has so much wealth and opportunity. We will 

make sure this never happens again. 

 

We’ve had other partnerships where we’ve dealt with issues. I 

know under health, we’ve seen partnerships work where they 

say no more. It’s jurisdiction and all that stuff. It comes down 

about the safety, and it comes down to a commitment, saying 

this will never happen. We’ll not lose a life. We will not do 

certain things. So if we can do that in the health and partnership 

that way, I think we could do that in other areas. And the fire 

protection is one area we could do that. 

 

There’s other areas we could do it. I think it’s important that we 

do that. We owe our residents of this province, whether they 

live on reserve, off reserve, whether they live in the 

municipality, I’ve said that the urban, rural, we have to work 

together to make sure. We all have an obligation to work 

together so that we don’t lose, we don’t ever lose, and we hope 

we don’t lose a life because no one responded for whatever 

reasons — the education wasn’t there, the resources, the 

equipment wasn’t there. 

 

We have to do a better job to make sure Saskatchewan residents 

are 100 per cent protected as best we can. We all have an 

obligation and a conscience at the end of the day to say, did we 

do all we can? And if we can say that as a province, as a 

country, that we did all we can, whether it’s funding, whether 

it’s partnerships, whether it’s education commitment, whether 

it’s just coming together as citizens saying we have to do better. 

You know, it’s a shame when we lose a life to a fire when 

nobody responds. We have to make sure we do all we can to 

work together. 

 

And I’m hoping that there is an opportunity, you know, we talk 

about amendment. Maybe there’s a provision here, we reach out 

and we find out what is the best way to make recommendations. 

Whether it’s committee, we’re going to find out. We’ll do our 

work, and I know individuals out there will ask us. 

 

And I know our leader has sent a letter to Ottawa quite some 

time ago, probably a year ago, maybe a little less than that, but 

asking the Prime Minister to deal with issues facing some of the 

First Nations when it comes to inadequate funding, to make 

sure that they had the provisions for education, to provide 

equipment, to provide the resources that they need to make sure 

that we never lose another young person’s life. And after that 

we’ve seen still more deaths when it comes to fires and not 

having a response, a fire team in a community that responds and 

makes sure that those community members are safe whether 

they’re on reserve, off reserve. I’ve said that before, it doesn’t 

matter and it shouldn’t matter. We have to do a better job. 

 

[19:30] 

 

So I want to say again to our Leader of the Official Opposition, 

you know, thank you for your letter, raising it with the Prime 

Minister and the minister responsible for First Nations, saying 

we have to do more funding to make sure the education is there 

for First Nations, the resources are there, training for 

firefighters so they have volunteers that can respond when 

they’re called upon, and make sure the equipment’s there. 

 

There’s a lot of work to be done and we have to do a better job. 

And I hope at the end of day, when all the comments come out 

and people, you know, I’ve said this, enough finger pointing 

doesn’t have to happen. We have to do better. We owe those 

young people and any family member who’s lost a life to say, 

we will do all we can to work together as a province, as a 

country to make sure as human beings, to make sure we don’t 

lose a life in the way that we have lost some now with, you 

don’t have the training, the adequate response, the fire 

department, the training, like I said, and the resources that you 

need to provide the training and the education for so many 

homes. 

 

So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I know that in committee we’re 

going to have more questions and try to find the answers. And 

you know, I hope through that process we can make sure that 

some of the concerns that have been raised by First Nations 

leaders — again, I commend them — and for other municipal 

leaders and individuals who are saying we have to do better of 

our province, to work together in partnership. I know we’re 

going to have an opportunity in committee to do that. At this 

time I have no further comments and I adjourn debate on this 

bill. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 



6414 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2015 

debate on Bill No. 170, The Fire Safety Act. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 172 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 172 — The 

Naturopathic Medicine Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise to speak to Bill No. 172, An Act respecting the Practice of 

Naturopathic Medicine and the College of Naturopathic 

Doctors of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this is an updating, or 

revision, or substantial expansion actually of the legislation in 

Saskatchewan relating to naturopathic medicine. It effectively 

takes the professional legislation that has been used in many 

other professions and sets out how this can apply to the 

naturopathic physicians. It provides title protection for 

naturopathic doctors and it sets up a regulatory body. 

 

I don’t think the legislation has any great difficulties. It will be 

quite interesting though to find out how this legislation is going 

to be implemented. It’s my understanding that there are about 

25 naturopathic doctors in Saskatchewan and that the cost of 

this whole regulatory organization may be a fairly substantial 

one unless there is some method whereby it can be managed 

jointly across provincial boundaries. 

 

Now it may be that there is some discussion about that, given 

that the minister specifically refers to this whole agreement on 

internal trade and the New West Partnership Trade Agreement 

in his second reading speech on December 3, 2014. Otherwise I 

think there are substantial concerns for the naturopathic doctors 

of Saskatchewan in that they will have a whole regulatory 

regime to fund and pay for out of the system that they have 

now. It’s not entirely clear whether Saskatchewan Health will 

be providing payment of the fees to the various doctors. Clearly 

some insurance policies that people have do make payments to 

naturopathic doctors who are officially registered. So this may 

be of assistance to them in that particular operation. 

 

Now practically, the area of naturopathic physicians has been a 

relatively stable group I think for many years. We have a few 

more in both Saskatoon and Regina than we have had in past 

years. I think there are a number of people who rely on their 

services, and this will provide a fair bit of detail for the group to 

become part of the operation. 

 

Now it’s not entirely clear from the second reading speech of 

the minister how much consultation there has been with the 

doctors involved. I think that kind of information will be 

presented to us as we move forward to dealing with this in 

committee. But I know that it’s a similar issue around the whole 

area of the professional designation around midwifery, that 

there are substantial costs involved when the group is not that 

large. And in fact it can create some major difficulties for the 

group that wants the regulation. 

So I don’t necessarily have any great problem with using the 

model form of professional regulation in this legislation here, 

but I do have concerns that there may not be sufficient funds 

available to actually do all of the things that are set out in the 

legislation. 

 

Now one of the challenges always is dealing with discipline 

questions and dealing with people who are providing 

unauthorized services. And any time one of those cases arises, 

then there’s a whole mechanism that is brought into play, and 

usually it . . . well it is paid for by the profession itself. We 

know that from the medical profession, from the legal 

profession, from nursing, other places, that this can end up 

being a substantial cost to the profession itself. 

 

I don’t think there’s any sense in this legislation that the cost of 

all this will be paid for by the provincial government, and in 

fact if that was the case I think there’d be quite a few questions 

from a number of other professional organizations. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have any great number of questions 

about the legislation itself, but I know some of my colleagues 

who have had more experience dealing with naturopathic 

doctors may have something to say. But at this point I would 

move adjournment of debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 172, the naturopathy Act. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 174 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 174 — The 

Registered Teachers Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure as 

always to enter the debate here tonight, this time on Bill No. 

174, The Registered Teachers Act. I’d like to outline a little bit 

about what the bill does, Mr. Speaker. It basically is 

consolidating responsibilities for teacher certification and 

discipline under one legislative roof, Mr. Speaker, or one 

legislative framework, by which the new Saskatchewan 

professional teachers’ regulatory body will be governed. 

 

This came out of some concerns, Mr. Speaker, that right now 

we have multiple bodies that are responsible for certifying and 

disciplining teachers. We’ve got the minister responsible for 

certifying all of Saskatchewan’s teachers, and then disciplinary 

matters fall under three separate entities, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation holds the 

responsibility for disciplinary processes of teacher misconduct 

at publicly funded schools. We’ve got disciplinary processes 

concerning administrators such as directors of education or 

superintendents, and these are held by the League of 



March 3, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6415 

Educational Administrators, Directors and Superintendents. 

 

Meanwhile we’ve also got teachers at independent schools, 

custody care facilities, and post-secondary institutions, and they 

fall under the disciplinary responsibility of the ministry. So this 

bill will be consolidating, as I said, certification and disciplinary 

issues under one body. 

 

What this bill outlines, and the minister in his second reading 

speech talks about several steps here or several pieces here. 

 

Firstly it establishes the Saskatchewan Professional Teachers 

Regulatory Board. Secondly, it establishes the nine-person 

board of directors which will consist of seven registered 

teachers and two members of the public. The minister has made 

the point of saying this is a teacher-driven model, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Third, it prescribes the duty of the Saskatchewan professional 

teachers regulatory body “. . . to serve and protect the public 

and to exercise its powers and discharge its responsibility in the 

public interest.” 

 

Fourthly, it prescribes the objectives of the SPTRB 

[Saskatchewan Professional Teachers Regulatory Board]. The 

minister goes on to say, “. . . which are to establish and 

administer the professional certification and standards of 

professional conduct and competence of teachers for the 

purpose of serving and protecting the public.” 

 

Fifth, the fifth point, Mr. Speaker, it grants the Saskatchewan 

professional teachers regulatory body authority to issue 

teachers’ certificates. Sixth, it grants the regulatory body “. . . 

responsibility for intake, investigation, hearing, and ruling on 

allegations of professional misconduct and incompetence.” 

 

Seventh, it establishes a public register in which the status 

of a registered teacher’s certificate will be found. Eighth, it 

establishes a five-person professional conduct committee 

for the purpose of investigating allegations of professional 

misconduct or incompetence. Ninth, it establishes a 

five-person disciplinary committee for the purpose of 

hearing allegations of professional misconduct or 

incompetence that call into question the suitability of a 

teacher to hold a teaching certificate. 

 

So those are the things that this bill does, Mr. Speaker, and the 

minister talked about those in his second reading speech. 

 

As someone who has belonged to a self-regulating profession 

— I can’t call myself a social worker today, Mr. Speaker, 

because my designation has lapsed; I didn’t maintain it and I 

will look at doing that — but I think that there is definitely 

merit in self-regulating bodies and ensuring that whole model of 

professionalism, code of ethics, certification, all those things. 

 

So just speaking about my own profession, Mr. Speaker, which 

I can’t call myself a social worker, Mr. Speaker, but just having 

a Bachelor of Social Work or a Master of Social Work does not 

unto itself make you a social worker. You have to meet certain 

standards set out by the Saskatchewan Association of Social 

Workers and you apply and you go through a process. This is 

not dissimilar from that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Teachers are professionals and they should be treated as 

professionals, and having a self-governing body and making 

sure that teachers are certified and have the opportunity, have a 

clear and transparent disciplinary process is very important, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The minister has talked about the professionalism of teachers, 

but I think sometimes we can talk the talk, but we don’t always 

walk the walk, Mr. Speaker. I haven’t met a single teacher, Mr. 

Speaker, in recent years who believes that they are treated as 

professionals by this government, Mr. Speaker, and in fact it’s 

quite the opposite. They feel like they have been minimalized 

and marginalized and that this government doesn’t recognize 

the contribution that teachers make, the multiple roles that 

teachers play in the classroom in this particular day and age. 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I can think about Saskatoon Riversdale where I have a high 

number of First Nations and Métis students, but there are many 

kids from around the world, Mr. Speaker, not just kids who’ve 

come through immigration but also there are many families who 

have refugee status, Mr. Speaker. So we have teachers who are 

dealing with some children, working with some children who 

have spent the better part of their lives in refugee camps, Mr. 

Speaker. They can’t hold a pencil. They have huge challenges. 

 

And not only I think has this government not ensured that the 

resources are in place for our classrooms and for teachers, for 

students to thrive, we can talk about English as an additional 

language supports. We can talk about supports or the lack 

thereof or the lack of supports for children who have cognitive 

disabilities, mental health challenges, all kinds of things. 

 

[19:45] 

 

But when it comes to teachers, they’re dealing with this on a 

regular basis. Again thinking about my own constituency, kids 

who don’t get to bed sometimes, Mr. Speaker, because their 

parents are living the legacy of residential schools so they don’t 

have, as parents, the skills and the experience, the legacy of 

parenting themselves, so they have some challenges in 

parenting. 

 

So we have teachers who are dealing with extreme stresses in 

the classroom, Mr. Speaker, from poverty to all kinds of other 

issues. So I think it’s important to not just pay lip service to 

teachers and tell them that they’re professionals but ensure that 

they have the ability and the . . . not just the ability, pardon me, 

that they have the resources to be able to perform as 

professionals, Mr. Speaker. I think that that is what I’ve heard 

loud and clear from teachers across the province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I also have children in school myself right now, Mr. Speaker. I 

have a child in grade 11 and a child in grade 1. So that big 

cross-section of people that I run into who go to school with my 

kids, Mr. Speaker . . . And so I have kids in the school age 

cohort, both in high school and elementary school, and talking 

to many families. We’ve talked about teachers, but families 

point out that kids with huge . . . in classrooms where there are 

25 or 30 kids. Kindergartners — I think about my own daughter 

who is seven and is lovely, but I couldn’t imagine 25 of her. 

She is a fairly high-energy kid, and we don’t provide teachers 

the supports they need to be able to support our kids to get the 



6416 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2015 

best learning experience at school, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Again I think that there is a great deal of lip service paid to 

teachers, but where the rubber hits the road, this government is 

not supporting classrooms or the professionals who work in 

those classrooms the way they should be, Mr. Speaker. And this 

government needs to think about its priorities, think about down 

the road. The investment in education today will reap huge 

benefits 20 years down the road, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This government and this minister has gotten up and talked 

about how this government has increased spending both in 

capital and in operating, but the reality, Mr. Speaker, is they 

sure as heck better have. This government has more money than 

any government has had in the history of Saskatchewan. So yes 

spending has gone up, but they certainly haven’t met the needs 

or dealt with the challenges that classrooms of today are facing, 

Mr. Speaker. That is the cold, hard reality that there are things 

that happen today in our classrooms that maybe didn’t happen 

20 years ago, but our teachers, our professionals deserve to be 

supported in providing the education and support of our kids 

from pre-K to 12 [pre-kindergarten to grade 12]. 

 

I do know I’ve got colleagues who would also like to weigh 

into the debate on Bill No. 174, The Registered Teachers Act, 

and I know when this bill makes its way into committee that my 

colleague from Rosemont will have many questions and my 

colleague from Saskatoon Centre will have many questions for 

the minister. But with that, I think that concludes my remarks 

for the evening, and I’d like to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 174, The Registered Teachers Act. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 175 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 175 — The 

Registered Teachers Consequential Amendments Act, 

2014/Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 

intitulée The Registered Teachers Act be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

enter the discussion about Bill No. 175, An Act to make 

consequential amendments resulting from the enactment of The 

Registered Teachers Act. This is a companion bill for Bill No. 

174 to which I just spoke. 

 

It for example makes, well it makes consequential amendments 

to The Education Act. It amends section 2 of The Education 

Act: 

 

by striking out the definition of “teacher” and 

substituting the following: 

“‘teacher’ means a person who holds a valid teacher’s 

certificate; and 

 

by adding the following definition in alphabetical 

order: 

 

“‘teacher’s certificate’ means teacher’s certificate as 

defined in The Registered Teachers Act;” 

 

Clause 3(2)(g) is repealed and the following 

substituted: 

 

“(g) make regulations respecting the salary 

classification of teachers”. 

 

Clause 4(1)(d) is repealed. 

 

The heading “QUALIFICATION AND EMPLOYMENT 

OF TEACHERS” before section 198 is struck out and 

the following substituted: 

 

“EMPLOYMENT OF TEACHERS”. 

 

So it’s a pretty straightforward bill, Mr. Speaker, again simply 

consequential amendments in order to make its companion bill, 

No. 174, work, Mr. Speaker. And so with that, I would like to 

move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 175, The Registered Teachers Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 176 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 176 — The 

Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise to speak to Bill No. 176, An Act to amend The Traffic 

Safety Act, which can be cited according to the first section of 

the legislation, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2). 

That clearly designates the fact that this is an addition to the 

major traffic safety Act amendment bill that has been in the 

legislature already. 

 

This particular piece of legislation appears to have arisen in 

response to a number of very public comments from business 

owners whose vehicles are seized when an employee is charged 

with an offence. And the minister says that . . . I think there 

were quite a number of offences that took place as it related to 

seizures under this particular piece of legislation. 

 

The specific problem identified by a number of people but very 

publically by a Mr. Boychuk in Saskatoon was that one of his 



March 3, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6417 

employees was charged for a second time with texting in his 

vehicle while driving. And that meant that the vehicle he was 

driving was seized but there wasn’t necessarily . . . The vehicle 

was seized, and then the person was let go. What happened then 

was there was really no penalty for the driver, but the business 

owner lost the use of his truck for seven days. 

 

What we have in this particular legislation is a solution I guess, 

if we can put it that way, or another try at getting this right 

around how you deal with vehicles that are owned by a business 

where an offence takes place. And so effectively what we have 

now is the fact that the driver of the vehicle will get a penalty, 

whether it’s . . . I think it’s a three-day suspension and 

obviously other continuing penalties if this happens again. The 

seven-day suspension of the vehicle continues, but there’s an 

appeal process, a very quick appeal process so that the business 

owner can get their vehicle out of impoundment as early as 

possible. 

 

Now all these types of legislation create some fairly severe 

penalties, and the ultimate goal of the legislation is clearly 

protection of the public and basically making sure that there’s 

as little injury to people and also, you know, less damage to 

vehicles for various offences. 

 

I think that practically this legislation seems to have been 

discussed quite extensively with the various organizations 

involved so that there is mostly a solution as to how this can be 

sorted out. And we know that the minister involved had a long 

career before politics with the Safety Council, and so this is 

kind of an area where he knows all of the players that are 

involved. I know that obviously the Highway Traffic Board, 

which enforces the legislation, the trucking companies, the 

Safety Council, Saskatchewan Trucking Association were all 

part of some of the discussions. 

 

It may be that this isn’t a final solution in that there’s still a fair 

bit of damage to businesses where their vehicles are 

impounded. And it may be that there needs to be further 

examination of exactly why a business would be penalized if 

one of their drivers was basically breaking the rules of the 

business as well as breaking the law. 

 

So I think that we should recognize that this a first, very good 

attempt at dealing with this particular problem, but I wouldn’t 

be surprised if there are some other further adjustments as this 

bill moves forward or as this issue is being dealt with in the 

years to come because I think the point is that we want to have 

as safe of roads as possible. We know we have many more 

deaths on our highways than we should. And how do we end up 

making sure that the rules are applied fairly to the businesses 

but also applied in a very direct manner to the operators who 

many times are the main cause of the difficulty? 

 

I know that most of or almost all of the professional drivers that 

we have in our province and in Western Canada are very, very 

good drivers, and this is meant to deal with those who are not in 

that professional category or maybe make a mistake. And I 

think we need to recognize that’s what the role of this 

legislation is. 

 

Now some of the issues relate to the whole cost of the process, 

and we know that the Highway Traffic Board fees can be fairly 

expensive when you get caught up in appeals and other matters 

related to that. And it may be that there should be some further 

consultation with the trucking association and with the various 

trucking companies around how some of these matters can be 

dealt with in an expeditious fashion, and also a fashion that 

doesn’t cost them a huge amount of money. Because as this one 

owner, Mr. Boychuk, who really raised this issue publicly said, 

he’s lost a lot of money already just by having the truck off the 

road. To then further add on extra costs ends up being a penalty 

that maybe is beyond what should be here. 

 

So some of the questions around communication in vehicles I 

think are being dealt with by some of the new forms of 

voice-controlled instruments and mobile phones, and things that 

are in most of the commercial vehicles, but it’ll be a few years 

obviously before that is totally part of the whole trucking 

business. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, this Act is an attempt to deal with a very 

specific problem. It appears that it has addressed many of the 

issues, but there are still some practical issues around how it 

will be implemented. I don’t have any further comments to 

make at this time, Mr. Speaker, so I would move to adjourn the 

debate. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 176, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 

2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

[20:00] 

 

Bill No. 177 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 177 — The 

Insurance Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 

pleasure to enter into debate here this evening of Bill No. 177, 

The Insurance Act, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now this bill is in fact just short of 300 pages. So I thought 

what I’d maybe do first here this evening for my colleagues is 

just read the bill in its entirety here tonight, and then weigh in 

on each paragraph after that and each parcel. The fact is that 

this bill is immense, and The Insurance Act in Saskatchewan 

was built in the early 1900s, I believe, 1913 was when the bill 

was initially brought to bear . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Just 

about the time that the Minister of Finance at that point would 

have just got his first insurance licence out there selling 

insurance, I’m hearing from across the floor. 

 

But no, the bill certainly . . . This Act is an Act that when you 

look at 1913, insurance is an important part of the financial 

landscape and environment in our province and within our 

world. It’s often quite complex as well. And certainly when we 

look into a bill like this, it’s going to be paramount for us to 



6418 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2015 

make sure that there’s adequate consumer protection built in. 

That has to be in fact your first priority when entering into 

revisions to this Act. 

 

I don’t dismiss for a moment that there’s all sorts of meaningful 

modernization that is likely required within insurance 

regulations and insurance law, and certainly I’m sure some of 

those are contained within this bill. The minister did provide a 

breadth of comments when he introduced this bill which I 

appreciate but, to be honest, even with the longer statement 

from the minister, that’s insufficient for the kind of analysis that 

we’re going to need throughout this process. What will be 

important, something that certainly we would request again of 

government is a legislative side-by-side analysis on this piece of 

legislation because otherwise you’re left with a massive volume 

of legislative changes but not an understanding of the direct 

piece of what was in place, what change has occurred, and what 

the reason, what the motivation for that is, what it is that 

government’s intending to address. 

 

It’s going to be critically important that government becomes 

clear on all who have contributed to this process. It’s paramount 

that when you’re looking at something as far-reaching and as 

financially complex as the insurance industry that government 

has consulted far and widely and has had, as I say, a lens of 

consumer protection, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I know I’ve referenced that, or I’ve noticed that there’s different 

bodies and different law offices and different third parties that 

are weighing in on this bill. We’ll be looking for a lot more of 

that. In fact this might be the kind of bill that may need 

significant time through legislative process and through a 

committee process. It may be very well served to make sure that 

we have expert witnesses, stakeholders in the field coming 

forward to share their perspectives on these changes. And many 

of these changes are likely very well intended, but the critical 

piece is that government gets it right and doesn’t create through 

its good intentions unintended consequences that will have 

ramifications for Saskatchewan people. 

 

So this needs to be in a very well-regulated environment when 

we’re looking at the insurance industry. We need to make sure 

that the companies that are operating are operating in an 

environment that’s regulated, that ensures them being fiscally 

sound and fiscally responsible. I know we have many, many 

strong and exceptional insurance companies and providers. We 

need to make sure that they’re understanding all of the risk and 

that they’re ensuring that they have adequate liquidity and 

adequate provisions in place to make sure that ultimately the 

people who engage with the insurance companies are protected. 

 

One of the law offices that’s weighed is the International Law 

Office, and they’ve noted that the legislation basically is 

comprised of 11 parts: preliminary matters; licensing of 

insurers; provincial companies; fraternal societies, and if I think 

of those, those would be sort of, likely the teachers’ federation 

or the Knights of Columbus; insurance intermediaries and 

insurance councils; unsolicited insurance, reinsurance, and 

special brokers; market conduct; contracts of insurance; 

inspections, investigations, enforcement, and, administration; 

general provisions; and repeal, consequential amendments, 

transitional, and entry into force. So those are the sort of the 11 

areas for which this 300-page bill addresses. And in fact this 

submission is worth noting as well. Its author is Carol Lyons, 

and it’s the International Law Office. 

 

Now I’ve recognized as well that there’s been some people 

come forward with some concerns around this legislation. And 

we want to make sure that there’s adequate and appropriate 

consideration of their perspectives through this legislative 

process and that in fact that there’s a broader consultation to 

ensure that other impacted stakeholders are able to share their 

perspective on the changes to The Insurance Act and whether or 

not they support the changes and why, whether or not there’s 

certain aspects that they have concern with. 

 

But it would important to note that Dominion-West Finance 

Inc. out of Saskatoon has stated a few concerns and been very 

direct to the minister on what those concerns are and how it 

impacts his existing business. And certainly, you know, that 

submission is important for government to understand, 

important for all of us as legislators to understand, and it’s 

something that we’ll certainly be seeking clarification and an 

understanding from the minister of the impacts shared by 

Dominion-West Finance. 

 

Also recognizing that there is another piece of correspondence 

that was received by a consumer advocate by the name of 

Richard Proteau. And that individual has shared a broad range 

of questions as to why the wide-ranging changes have occurred 

and has laid out very specific aspects that he feels need to be 

considered in pieces that . . . in concerns with this specific piece 

of legislation. 

 

So it’s these sorts of submissions that we’ve received to date, 

and I anticipate many, many more. That should allow a very 

informed discussion through this legislative process, a fruitful 

committee process, and hopefully the opportunity as well to 

make sure we get this right as an Assembly, to ensure that if 

there’s a place for constructive amendments that we act upon 

those. Because quite frankly, you know, this is an important 

piece of legislation with financial ramifications for the 

companies themselves, but financial ramifications for those that 

are requiring insurance or that hold policies, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And as I say, the first lens to this legislation has to be through a 

lens of consumer protection in a well-regulated environment, 

one that’s enforceable, with clear delineation of duties and 

responsibilities. And that may have been achieved in the 

300-page document laid down by government, but there’s 

certainly more consultation that’ll be required to ensure that’s 

the case. 

 

I know that there’s been a Saskatchewan lawyer, a Regina 

lawyer from McKercher, Brittnee Holliday who’s weighed in 

on some of the legislative changes, and I’ve read through some 

of her observations through insurance law in an article titled 

Modernizing Insurance Regulation in Saskatchewan: Proposed 

Changes to Focus Largely on Consumer Protection. That’s the 

title. That’s encouraging in the sense that certainly consumer 

protection should be the lens for which changes are made. And 

I guess I would just quote a little bit here from Brittnee 

Holliday, lawyer over at McKercher, a Regina lawyer here: 

 

The most obvious changes in the proposed legislation 

relate to consumer protection. Market standards have been 



March 3, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6419 

set out including the identification of unfair practices such 

as a prohibition on making false or misleading statements 

or engaging in prohibited tied selling practices. Fair 

practices such as the requirement to disclose an insured’s 

right to choose a service provider, the insured’s right to 

rescind a contract of insurance, notice of limitation 

periods, and procedures for dealing with claims and 

complaints are specifically set out in the proposed 

legislation. 

 

And those are certainly positive observations and, you know, if 

reflective of the changes brought forward here, positive pieces 

within this legislation. 

 

To quote Ms. Holliday further, in her submission to insurance 

law: 

 

Further changes including restructuring Insurance 

Councils to allow them to conduct audits and 

investigations, recommendation, screening, and 

supervision of intermediaries by insurers, creation of 

further licensing categories and requirements, and the 

requirement to point out clauses in an insurance policy 

where there are limits on the amount payable also seem to 

be changes specifically directed at clarifying and 

strengthening consumer protection. 

 

So those are a couple pieces of observation, important ones, 

valued ones, by Ms. Holliday of McKercher here in Regina, and 

I thank her and I thank the others that have weighed in to date. 

Certainly as the official opposition, we’ll be engaging in 

wide-ranging consultations as it relates to this 300-page bill that 

certainly governs a very important area within Saskatchewan. 

We invite submissions from any affected stakeholders, whether 

they have a positive view of the changes, what motivates that; 

what’s their perspective, if they have concerns with the 

changes, you know, what those specific concerns are. 

 

And certainly we’ll engage further with the minister throughout 

this legislative process. The one thing that we really would 

appreciate on this front in our request to government is a 

legislative side-by-side analysis to, as I say, ensure that this 

300-page bill is broken out in a succinct way with clear 

understanding of what was in place, what the changes are, and 

then of course allowing us to very effectively speak to why 

those changes have been made and making sure that there’s not 

a host of unintended consequences in parts of this legislation. 

 

Certainly what I’ve read into the record here by Ms. Holliday 

would appear to be rather positive in her review of the 

legislative changes. And certainly legislation like this definitely 

needs to be modernized to make sure that it’s serving 

Saskatchewan people, that it’s protecting consumers, and that 

it’s regulating a very important . . . in a financial market and 

environment, making sure that risks are mitigated and that the 

public is protected. 

 

So with that being said, we’ll certainly look forward to 

significant more time on this piece of legislation, consultations 

ahead, likely an important need to have expert witnesses before 

a committee. But at this point in time I’ll adjourn debate for Bill 

No. 177, The Insurance Act, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 177, The Insurance Act. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of 

Immigration. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 

this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister has moved that the House do 

now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. The House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 20:13.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 168 — The Government Relations Administration Act 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6409 

 Bill No. 170 — The Fire Safety Act 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6411 

 Bill No. 172 — The Naturopathic Medicine Act 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6414 

 Bill No. 174 — The Registered Teachers Act 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6414 

 Bill No. 175 — The Registered Teachers Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 

 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Registered Teachers Act 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6416 

 Bill No. 176 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6416 

 Bill No. 177 — The Insurance Act 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6417 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


