






















































Hansard: March 24, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 39A  TUESDAY, MARCH 24, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6689 
 March 24, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to request leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave 
for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
am pleased to introduce several visitors seated in your gallery 
this afternoon. They are articling students who have been 
working with the Ministry of Justice or the courts in the 
province since last spring. 
 
I had a chance to review their bios this morning, Mr. Speaker, 
and to speak with them a little bit earlier on today as well, and I 
must say that the calibre of these young legal minds is truly 
encouraging. Tamara Denluck, Alysha Rozon, and Khurshed 
Chowdhury have been articling with the Ministry of Justice. 
Tamara is a graduate of the College of Law at the University of 
Saskatchewan, and before that she graduated with great 
distinction with a Bachelor of Arts in history. Alysha comes to 
us with a law degree from the University of Alberta and has 
also completed a Bachelor of Arts in psychology at the 
University of Calgary. Khurshed is a graduate of the College of 
Law at the University of Saskatchewan. His extensive education 
includes a Masters of Science in military studies from 
Bangladesh University of Professionals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Michelle Biddulph, Sarah-Jane Nussbaum, and 
William Lane have all been articling at the Saskatchewan Court 
of Appeal. Sarah-Jane graduated with great distinction from the 
College of Law at the University of Saskatchewan. She won the 
Law Society of Saskatchewan’s Gold Medal and also received 
the prize given to the graduating student demonstrating the most 
promise as a legal scholar. Michelle also graduated with great 
distinction from the College of Law. She received the Law 
Society of Saskatchewan Silver Medal. This summer she will 
begin a one-year placement as a law clerk at the Supreme Court 
of Canada. 
 
William also comes to us from the College of Law at the 
University of Saskatchewan. Prior to that he received a 
Bachelor of Arts in political science from the University of 
Saskatchewan, graduating with high honours. William is quite 
familiar with this building. He spent three summers working 
here as a ministerial assistant for both the Minister of Justice 
and the Minister of Corrections and Policing. 
 

And finally to you, Mr. Speaker, Parveen Shergill has been 
articling at the Court of Queen’s Bench. She graduated from the 
Faculty of Law at the University of British Columbia, and prior 
to that she graduated with a Bachelor of Commerce degree from 
that university’s Sauder School of Business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud of this group of articling students. 
I know we will see great things from them in the years to come, 
and I’m looking forward to following their career. So, Mr. 
Speaker, please join me in welcoming them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
join with the Minister of Justice in welcoming the law students 
to the legislature, and I want to thank them for their service this 
past year. It’s always interesting to get a very capable law 
student working with you as a lawyer or as a judge because they 
ask questions that sometimes you don’t want to answer, but you 
have to because the students want to learn. And so thank you 
for providing that service over the last year, and I know that 
your experience here will enrich your legal careers wherever 
you end up. And we’ll always be proud of you as Saskatchewan 
graduates, Saskatchewan law students who have been part of 
the Government of Saskatchewan. So thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
while I’m on my feet, I would request to do two introductions. 
First, Mr. Speaker, I request leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has requested 
leave to do an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you, I’d like to take this opportunity to 
recognize some of Saskatchewan’s longest serving volunteer 
crop reporters. From seeding to harvest, the observations they 
record provide vital information about crop development, crop 
progress, precipitation through our province. The volunteer crop 
reporters here today have served 25, 30, and 35 years in the 
field voluntarily recording agricultural happenings in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to recognize and thank each of our 
volunteer crop reporters here with us today, and I ask that the 
volunteer crop reporters to, with their spouses, to give us a 
wave as I announce their names. 
 
The 25-year recipients are: Daniel Ruest and his spouse 
Gilberte, RM [rural municipality] of Wise Creek; Larry and 
Shannon Berreth, RM of Piapot; Clarence Finkas and his 
spouse Kerry Obelman, RM of Silverwood; Les Wyatt and his 
spouse Sharon, RM of Kingsley; David Measner and his spouse 
Sharon, RM of Sarnia; Garry Dennis and his spouse Ruby, RM 
of Perdue. 



6690 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2015 

Mr. Speaker, the 30-year recipients are: Derald and Irene 
Ahner, RM of Big Stick; Allan Aitken and his spouse Sherry, 
RM of Eyebrow; Darcy Kentel and his spouse Laurie, RM of 
Churchbridge; and seated on the floor, Mr. Speaker, Lambert 
Wourms and his spouse Lillian, RM of Frenchman Butte. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 35-year recipients are: David Thompson and 
his spouse Carole, RM of Kellross. And I would also like to 
congratulate those who could not join us today, including 
George Gonos and his spouse Catherine, RM of Enniskillen, 25 
years; Kay Berry and her spouse Ray, RM of Battle River, 25 
years; Bryan Bittner and his spouse Carol, RM of Abernethy, 
25 years; Chad Andrews and his spouse Britny, RM of Pittville, 
25 years; Marion Kelly and her spouse Harvey, RM of Round 
Valley, 30 years; and Bernard Cey and his spouse Cheryl, RM 
of Reford, 35 years. I’d also like to mention John Hignett of the 
RM of Big Arm, who suddenly passed away last fall. He would 
have reached his 40th year of reporting this year. 
 
I’d now ask that all members join me in thanking these 
volunteer crop reporters for their service and dedication to 
agriculture and to Saskatchewan, and welcome them to their 
legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, to you and through you I 
would like to recognize some other guests seated in your 
gallery. Joining us today are members from the Saskatchewan 
Pulse Growers association: director and former chair Mr. 
Morgan Nunweiler; current Chair, Mr. Tim Wiens; and also 
joining them today is Tim’s wife, Mrs. Lavonne Wiens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I, along with my colleague the Minister of 
Highways, will be sitting down and meeting with these folks 
later this afternoon. I look forward to the discussion we will 
have. They will also be holding a reception tonight for all 
MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly], and I look 
forward to seeing everyone there. I ask all of my colleagues to 
join me in welcoming these guests to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, I too 
would like to extend on behalf of the official opposition a great 
big welcome to all the reporters, the crop reporters that are here 
today. 
 
I certainly remember as an amateur crop reporter when I was a 
kid, Dad would always send us out and check how much rain 
was in the rain gauge, and that was a really exciting part after 
the rain. So we know how important all these statistics and all 
this information is to the agriculture and the producers in 
Saskatchewan. So I want to welcome you all and, in particular, 
a big hello to Irene Ahner who I have had many enjoyable 
conversations about the status of agriculture in Saskatchewan. 
So hello, Irene. And I would like to welcome all these folks to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to extend a 
welcome to Morgan and Tim from the Pulse Growers. We had a 
very productive meeting this morning, and I appreciated the 
opportunity to chat with them and learn more about the pulse 

industry here in Saskatchewan. Certainly there’s a big future 
ahead for pulse crops, and with community leaders like these 
folks taking charge and showing leadership in the province, I 
know that we’re in good hands. So on behalf of the official 
opposition, I too would like to welcome you to your Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Mr. Speaker, I will be making two 
introductions if I could, please. First of all I am so pleased to 
introduce my daughter, Kelli Smith, up in the west gallery. 
She’s a great mother. She’s a corrections manager with 
Corrections Canada and just a wonderful singer. And with her 
today is Justice Smith who is kind of the total package. He’s my 
grandson and he’s a tremendous athlete, has excelled in 
football, basketball, and baseball, was a member of the North 
American Indigenous Games Saskatchewan team. He’s trying 
out for the Saskatchewan First basketball team. He’s on in two 
weeks, I believe. And he just received his driver’s licence so I 
would ask that all the people in Maple Creek maybe stay off the 
sidewalks. And with them is my granddaughter Tempestt who 
is a beautiful young lady and a real going concern. So I would 
ask that all members make Kelli and Justice and Tempestt 
welcome in their Legislative Assembly. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, it gives me great 
pleasure to introduce a friend of mine, Corinne Harcourt, in the 
Speaker’s gallery. Corinne is a teacher at the Englefeld School, 
a very, very dedicated teacher. And I’m so proud of a gift she 
gave me probably a month ago where she gave me a copy of the 
textbook for grade 8 social studies that she had written, that she 
had authored this book. So she is an exceptional young lady, 
and I’m so pleased to have her in the Assembly today. And I 
would like all members to make her welcome to her Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: —Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I won’t 
request two introductions but I would like to make a request for 
an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly a group seated in the east gallery. I’m talking about 
the SaskTel mentorship group from Scott Collegiate. Can we 
get a big wave there? All right, looking good, looking good. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the mentorship group has been in action since 
2006, a partnership between Scott Collegiate and SaskTel as 
part of the Youth Network, and trying to engage young people 
as to the opportunities throughout the community and the labour 
force. We are joined today by teacher Carmen Danyluk. Very 
good. And SaskTel employees who are serving as mentors, 
congratulations to them. We’ve got Tara Tibeau, we’ve got 



March 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6691 

Melissa Ackerman, we’ve got Kevin Harris, we’ve got Jeremy 
Chasse, and Lyndsey Pankratz who’s the coordinator with the 
Youth Network group. 
 
And then for students, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got Nathaniel Cruz; 
we’ve got Patrick Bray, we’ve got Taneesha Thompson, we’ve 
got Amanda MacFarlane, and we’ve got Brennan Hoffman. 
And these are students that I know from their activities in the 
community council, but certainly very active leaders in the life 
of Scott Collegiate. But Brennan Hoffman, I should say, Mr. 
Speaker, is one heck of a fiddler. And if you want to hear 
“Maple Sugar” done right, just listen to Brennan unleash it on 
the fiddle some time. So if all members could join me in 
welcoming these important guests to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as Minister Responsible for SaskTel, I want to also join with 
my colleague across the floor and welcome these students from 
Scott Collegiate, as well as their teacher and the mentors from 
SaskTel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of our Crown corporation employees across the 
entire province not only serve the citizens of this province with 
respect to their professional responsibilities but also engage in 
community activities throughout the entire province in 
volunteer capacity, Mr. Speaker, and we see that witnessed here 
again today. So hats off to the SaskTel employees providing 
that kind of mentorship, and I would join with my colleagues in 
asking all of us to welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
[13:45] 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition calling for greater support for education here in 
Saskatchewan. We know that education is one of the most vital 
services that government provides to its citizens; and we know 
that this government has failed to deliver a long-term plan and 
vision and the necessary resources to prioritize the delivery of 
educational excellence; and we know that this government has 
failed to deliver a real plan to close the Aboriginal education 
gap or to support English as an additional language students or 
to support community schools and their communities and 
students; and we know we must build the best education system 
for today and for Saskatchewan’s future. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately prioritize education by laying out a 
long-term vision and plan with the necessary resources 
that provides the best quality of education for 
Saskatchewan, that reflects Saskatchewan’s demographic 
and population changes, that is based on proven 
educational best practices, that is developed through 
consultation with the education sector, and that builds on 

strong educational infrastructure to serve students and 
communities long into the future. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
Marquis, Moose Jaw, and Saskatoon. Thank you so much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise once again today to present petitions on behalf of 
concerned residents as it relates to the unsafe conditions created 
by that government on Dewdney Avenue and their failure to 
recognize this unsafe matter and to respond to it in a timely 
way. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on 
Dewdney Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the 
safety and well-being of communities, families, residents, 
and users; and that those actions and plans should include 
rerouting the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial 
funding, and be developed through consultation with the 
city of Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions today are signed once again by concerned 
residents of Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. Homelessness is a major problem in La Ronge and 
other parts of the North, and it is getting worse. Shelter is a 
basic need for everyone. But under this government it’s getting 
harder and harder for people to find adequate housing, 
especially families, seniors, women, and children who face 
abusive situations. The problem is getting worse because of the 
rising level of poverty and the skyrocketing home ownership 
costs. The prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the Saskatchewan 
government to build a homeless shelter in the Lac la 
Ronge area to meet the needs of addressing homelessness 
in the Lac la Ronge area. 

 
This petition is signed by many good people of northern 
Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present a petition today in support of safe staffing levels in 
long-term care. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that many 
aspects of long-term care are deteriorating under this 



6692 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2015 

government. They point out that the Government of 
Saskatchewan needs to recognize the need for safe staffing 
levels to provide hands-on care to residents, and they talk about 
chronic understaffing in long-term care facilities resulting in 
unacceptable conditions, including unanswered calls for help, 
infrequent bathing, and a rise in physical violence amongst 
residents. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to take 
the following action: to cause the government to commit 
to the creation of safe staffing levels for all valued 
members of the health care team and to reintroduce actual 
numbers of staff to match the level of care needs and the 
number of residents under their care in long-term care 
facilities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by folks in Saskatoon, 
Regina, Martensville, Moose Jaw, Bushell Park, Caronport, 
Nokomis, and Strasbourg. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’m rising today to present a 
petition in support of retaining Yarrow Youth Farm. And the 
people who have signed this petition wish the following: they 
understand that the government’s planning to close Yarrow 
Youth Farm and create an open-custody wing in Kilburn Hall to 
accommodate Yarrow’s residents. The provincial Advocate for 
Children and Youth declared he could not endorse such a 
rationalization, as low-risk teens could be influenced and 
pressured by close proximity to high-risk youth who may be 
involved in serious crimes or gangs; and that Kilburn Hall has a 
more institutional environment that could intimidate and 
alienate teens that have committed minor offences. 
 
The prayer reads as follows. They respectfully request that the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following 
action: 
 

To cause the government to keep Yarrow Youth Farm 
open to ensure a caring home environment for youth who 
have committed minor offences and to provide support to 
help these people redirect their lives by setting more 
positive goals. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Saskatoon. I so 
present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

International Women’s Day 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On March 
20th, I had the pleasure to attend and bring a message to the 
Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ Union 

International Women’s Day celebration. It was a fantastic event 
with a strong turnout and I was so pleased to be a part of this 
important event. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, that women continue to face far too 
many barriers globally as well as across our country and here in 
Saskatchewan. Although we’ve come a long way to making our 
province a place where women can find success, there’s still 
much more that needs to be done to ensure real equality and real 
dignity. 
 
This message of unity and change for the better was brought 
home by the event’s impressive keynote speaker, Ms. Zarqa 
Nawaz, the creator of Little Mosque on the Prairie. With her 
trademark wit and humour, she addressed the serious issues 
facing women in our province, country, and world, and noted 
that for many women who are newcomers the barriers facing all 
women are compounded by racism and discrimination. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in 
congratulating Ms. Muna De Ciman, SGEU’s [Saskatchewan 
Government and General Employees’ Union] organizing 
committee, and all those who work tirelessly for progress and 
fairness against injustice and violence every day. It’s only by 
working together that we can ensure equality and dignity for all 
women in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

World Tuberculosis Day 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is World TB 
[Tuberculosis] Day. This day is meant to remind us that 
tuberculosis remains an epidemic in much of the world. Every 
year nine million people around the world get sick with TB. 
Three million don’t get the care they need, and nearly 1.5 
million of these people die. 
 
This year World TB Day calls for reaching those who are not 
getting care, so they can get diagnosed, receive treatment, and 
be cured. Mr. Speaker, unfortunately TB continues to be a 
concern in our province as well. First Nations residents in 
northern Saskatchewan are particularly affected. More than half 
of the TB cases in our province occur in this group. Our 
government realizes that more needs to be done to prevent and 
control TB in our province. 
 
Our government’s TB strategy supports focused work in 
communities with high TB. We also support initiatives of TB 
Prevention and Control Saskatchewan. We’ve been 
collaborating with health regions, federal government, the 
Northern Inter-Tribal Health Authority, and others to raise 
awareness of TB, reduce the stigma associated with it, and 
enhance prevention and control. Only by working together can 
we address the root cause of TB, develop a better understanding 
of the challenges we’re facing, and make progress towards 
eliminating this disease. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 



March 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6693 

Living in Harmony Awards Winners 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week on March 
18th, I was very pleased to participate in the city of Saskatoon’s 
Living in Harmony Awards ceremony, presented by the city of 
Saskatoon’s cultural diversity and race relations advisory 
committee. This was held in conjunction with the International 
Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination that was 
marked this past Saturday, March 21st around the world. The 
annual Living in Harmony Awards recognizes local 
organizations or individuals for their efforts in promoting 
intercultural harmony in our community. 
 
This year’s winners include, in the film category: Facing 
Residential School, Brownell School; I am not, Oskayak 
School; First Nations Racism, Dylan Funk at St. Edward 
School. 
 
Jenna Karmark of St. Edward School won the 2015 Living in 
Harmony poster for her poster, Human. Jasmine Thomas, also 
at St. Edward School, won for her work entitled Connected. In 
the literary category, Dominique Hoffert at John Lake School 
won for her work, “Living in Harmony,” and Shelia Brown’s 
grade 3 class at Father Robinson School also received special 
recognition.  
 
Melody Wood and Glenda Abbott received this year’s 
Community Recognition Award. Both women have been strong 
activists in our community fighting racism, most recently 
showing outstanding leadership in the issues around missing 
and murdered indigenous women.  
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
these Living in Harmony Award winners and thank them for 
dedicating their time and efforts for making Saskatoon a much 
more welcoming place for everyone. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

Optimist Club All-Star Night  
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On March 14th the 
Friendly City Optimist Club put on their second annual All-Star 
Night at the Heritage Inn. This just happened to be chaired by a 
good friend of mine, Gord Currie.  
 
The crowd of about 250 people, including my friend from 
Moose Jaw North and myself, were treated to a night of former 
and current Canadian Football League stars. Hall of Fame 
players Damon Allen, Don Narcisse, and current star Ricky 
Foley were all in attendance. Raising money in support of the 
pediatric unit for the new Moose Jaw Hospital, the crowd 
listened to some behind-the-scenes locker room stories from the 
three Grey Cup champions. Those in the crowd also enjoyed the 
opportunity to ask questions of the CFL [Canadian Football 
League] greats. 
 
Emceed by local radio star Craig Hemingway of 800 CHAB, 
guests were treated to entertainment from the CFLers, supper, 
and many silent auction items. Although the final tally of 
money raised yet hasn’t been announced, organizers saw that 
the night went off without a hitch. 

Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to be part of a community that bands 
together to help our children in need and will go the extra mile 
to provide state-of-the-art equipment that will one day save 
lives. Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me with 
congratulating the Friendly City Optimist Club of Moose Jaw 
for starting such a great tradition and wishing them many more 
successful events in the future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 

Little Princess Ball Fundraiser 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, this past weekend 
Moose Jaw resembled something out of a children’s storybook 
when the Heritage Inn hosted the Little Princess Ball as a 
fundraiser for the Moose Jaw’s youngest hospital patients. It 
was a royal ball fit for any princess, featuring a royal feast, 
crafts, dancing, and entertainment, an event that was truly a 
magical experience for young princesses from ages 1 to 12. A 
committee of volunteers decorated the room with tree stumps 
and mushrooms and moss and leaves and magical lighting for a 
real woodland fairy tale feel that lit up every little face. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this two-day event catered to 680 little princesses. 
It was also raising $50,000 to help equip the new hospital in 
Moose Jaw. An event such as this could not take part without 
extreme enthusiastic and creative volunteers. I would like to 
thank them and especially thank the Co-Chairs, Jen Tribier and 
Sharon Church, for their dedicated service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new hospital in Moose Jaw is vital in keeping 
our community strong and providing the best service for our 
citizens. The Little Princess Ball will raise awareness and 
much-appreciated funds for equipment in aid of some of the 
very young children that will be using the hospital. 
 
I ask all members to join me in recognizing all the special little 
princesses and to congratulate the volunteers for making the 
Little Princess Ball a huge success. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 

Business Builders Awards Gala 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
March 19th I had the pleasure of attending the North Saskatoon 
Business Association’s 18th annual Business Builders Awards 
Gala, along with the Minister of Education, Labour and 
Workplace Safety as well as the Government House Leader. 
 
More than 600 businesses and community leaders gathered at 
Prairieland Park to honour the many outstanding award 
recipients. Thirteen awards were handed out to businesses and 
individuals. These awards were designed to celebrate the 
success, leadership, ingenuity, and persistence of Saskatoon’s 
entrepreneurs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to recognize two of the deserving award 
recipients. Walter Klassen of Keystone Insurance was named 
Member of the Year in recognition of his exceptional 
commitment to the NSBA [North Saskatoon Business 



6694 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2015 

Association] and his work as a successful and involved 
community leader. Wayne Wilson of Business Furnishings 
received the Shirley Ryan Lifetime Achievement Award in 
honour of his outstanding long-term contributions to business 
and to the community in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish I had time to recognize all the deserving 
award recipients. I would like to congratulate the NSBA and 
their members on another excellent awards gala and encourage 
them all to keep up the good work in their businesses as well as 
in their communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to ask all my colleagues to join me in 
applauding all the hard-working Saskatchewan entrepreneurs 
and, in particular, those winners of the NSBA Awards. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Provincial Budget Maintains Revenue Sharing 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, although 
the members opposite haven’t taken time out of their days to 
understand the provincial budget that the Finance minister 
announced last Wednesday, that doesn’t mean the citizens of 
Saskatchewan haven’t noticed. 
 
The 2015-16 provincial budget is helping to keep Saskatchewan 
municipalities strong by providing a record $265.3 million in 
revenue sharing. That’s up 8.3 million or 3.2 per cent from the 
2014-15 budget, Mr. Speaker, and up 138 million or 108 per 
cent from ’07-08 budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ian Hamilton, the mayor of North Battleford, was 
pleased and pleasantly surprised. He told reporters, and I quote, 
“My initial thoughts are very positive.” He went on to say, “I 
am pleased to recognize that the provincial government has 
maintained the revenue sharing of the municipal operating grant 
at one per cent of provincial sales taxes.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, maintaining revenue sharing of the municipal 
operating grant allows communities like North Battleford to 
invest in their citizens to meet the demands of growth. Previous 
NDP [New Democratic Party] governments never offered this 
opportunity to our communities. By maintaining municipal 
revenue sharing, communities across the province can use the 
unconditional funding for services or infrastructure projects to 
meet the demands of a growing community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is responding to the needs of a 
strong and growing Saskatchewan, and leaders across the 
province, like Mayor Ian Hamilton, recognize this. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
 

Quality of Care and Staffing Levels in Long-Term 
Care Homes 

 
Mr. Broten: — Lois Rein was in a seniors’ care facility in 
Saskatoon. On March 12th, less than two weeks ago, her 
mechanical chair was left in the forward position after her 
breakfast tray and table were removed, and she fell. Lois 
fractured her femur just above her knee. She was on the floor 
for hours before she was found. She fell shortly after breakfast, 
but an ambulance was not called until 2:30 in the afternoon. 
Lois died on Friday, and her family is speaking out today. 
 
My question is for the Premier. How many more families with 
heartbreaking stories will have to come forward before this 
government will take the seniors’ care crisis seriously? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
the absence of the Premier, I’ll take this question on behalf of 
the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first and foremost I want to express my 
condolences and my deepest sympathies to the family of Mrs. 
Rein. Mr. Speaker, I’ve had an opportunity to read her 
memorial that was published in the newspaper, and I want to 
note the life that she had lived, nearly 100 years old, Mr. 
Speaker, and all the contributions that she had made to her 
family and the life that she had lived, Mr. Speaker. And I 
certainly express my condolences to the family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am aware that Saskatoon Health Region has 
indicated that the facility director of care has requested a review 
of the resident file as it relates to this fall and this incident, as 
well as the regional patient safety specialist is actively 
investigating this case to determine whether or not it meets the 
criteria of a critical incident. Mr. Speaker, I will await that 
information. 
 
We will work, and are working closely with the health region to 
understand what exactly took place in this case, Mr. Speaker, 
and what we can learn from it so that it doesn’t happen to 
another resident. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, last Thursday the Health minister 
said that it was difficult to budget for seniors’ care because the 
government was waiting for the report from the Ombudsman’s 
review in order to know the real needs. This government just 
completely dismisses the 360 pages of the CEO [chief executive 
officer] report and the 250 pages of urgent requests from 
seniors’ care facilities. That’s how seriously this government 
takes the seniors’ care crisis. 
 
Here’s what Lois’s family has to say: 
 

Some people have asked why we haven’t spoken up 
sooner. We were warned by others not to say anything 
about our observations of negligence and poor attention to 
detail because there could be repercussions to the resident, 
our loved one, or to ourselves being barred from the 
institution. And so we took that very seriously. 



March 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6695 

Does the Premier agree that no family should ever have to be 
afraid of repercussions for advocating for their loved one? And 
what will the Premier do to ensure that family members know 
that it is okay to speak up? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Again, Mr. Speaker, in the absence of 
the Premier, I’ll take that question on behalf of the Government 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, certainly we encourage staff and family members 
to report incidences so that our processes can change, so that we 
can avoid the errors and the mistakes, and so that we can avoid 
harm that does happen in the health care system. Mr. Speaker, I 
have to say that this is a major focus of the continuous quality 
improvement work that’s happening in the health care system, 
which I believe the Leader of the Opposition disagrees with the 
direction that the government is going. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I certainly would say that we want that 
information reported. I think it’s fair to say that when this 
government was elected in 2007, there was in the health care 
system a fear of reporting, a fear of transparency when these 
types of incidents took place. We are working hard to instill a 
culture of safety, a culture of transparency, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As it relates to seniors’ care though, prior to, Mr. Speaker, this 
government asking the CEOs to look at our health facilities and 
seniors’ care, Mr. Speaker, we put in place a falls collaborative 
that has seen a reduction of 25 per cent in the number of falls in 
long-term care. We have added each and every year to the 
full-time complement of long-term care workers, Mr. Speaker, 
and we are replacing facilities all across this province. We take 
this issue very seriously. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the response that 
we see from the government, even in the face of a CEO tour 
report of hundreds of pages of urgent needs coming from 
seniors’ care facilities, Mr. Speaker, is simply not addressing 
the crisis that we hear coming forward from families day after 
day. 
 
Lois’s family has this to say: 
 

We feel that the realities of nursing home life cannot be 
ignored any longer, and we know that more people are 
starting to speak up to advocate for their loved ones. We 
feel very strongly that we must now speak up too. 

 
Lois’s family is most concerned about the lack of staffing, the 
lack of proper communication, and the lack of accountability. 
 
Now these are the exact same concerns that the independent 
Provincial Ombudsman identified when she gave an update on 
her investigation into the seniors’ care crisis. Will the Premier 
at least admit that the lack of staffing, the lack of proper 
communication, the lack of proper accountability are 
contributing to the seniors’ care crisis in our province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, in the 
absence of the Premier, I’ll take that question on behalf of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the record clearly demonstrates that when 
this party, when this government was elected in 2007, right 
from our initial first budget, Mr. Speaker, we started to add 
resources back into long-term care after what had been cut from 
long-term care and seniors’ care in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
Twelve hundred beds across this province were closed by the 
NDP at a time when the seniors population of this province was 
actually on the increase. Nineteen facilities across this province 
were closed under that government, Mr. Speaker, not to 
mention all of the positions that would have been cut because of 
those closures, Mr. Speaker, and we know that was in nurses 
and in doctors. 
 
So we have begun the work, over the last number of years, of 
making renewed investments back into long-term care. In 
long-term care alone, with RNs [registered nurse] and LPNs 
[licensed practical nurse] and care aids, nearly 800 full-time 
equivalents have been added, Mr. Speaker, without a very large 
increase in the number of actual residents and actual beds in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. So we have begun the work to add back 
in. We have added $10 million last year in mid-year, Mr. 
Speaker, when it comes to equipment and staffing. We’ve 
added an additional $10 million in this year, Mr. Speaker. This 
is a priority for this government. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how this 
government can just continually pat itself on the back when we 
have these stories coming forward day after day. Lois’s family, 
Mr. Speaker, they’re coming forward because they want to 
speak up because of what they have seen. They’re watching the 
proceedings, Mr. Speaker, and they want to know why this 
government isn’t taking the seniors’ care crisis seriously. 
 
Like other families that we’ve heard from, Lois’s family had to 
hire private care aids to go into the care facility to ensure that 
the basics were taken care of for their mom. Her daughter says 
this: 
 

You pay these caregivers over and above what you pay for 
your loved ones to live in that residence. But many 
families now feel that care could be better, and to meet 
their loved one’s basic needs — maybe a little exercise, 
make sure they have enough to drink, make sure they eat 
as much as possible — you need to hire over and above 
what the nursing homes provide for them. 

 
My question for the Premier: does he think the families should 
have to pay extra to have private care aids go into a care facility 
just to make sure that the basics are taken care of? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the absence 
of the Premier, I’ll be taking that question on behalf of the 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to all of our facilities across the 



6696 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2015 

province, certainly this particular facility would have seen and 
has seen an increase in the full-time complement for not a 
change in the number of residents, Mr. Speaker. So in fact the 
ratio of staff to residents has increased in this facility. This 
particular facility in the last seven years under this government 
has seen an increase to their budget of over 30 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker, far and away exceeding the rate of inflation in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to long-term care, we have added 
resources, as I’ve already mentioned, Mr. Speaker. We’ve also 
changed the way though that we are doing our processes so that 
we can ensure that harm does not happen to our residents, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’re very focused on that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even prior to the CEO report, as I’ve mentioned, 
we had a falls collaborative in 2011 that related to long-term 
care, a long-term care falls prevention and reduction initiative in 
2010-2011 that has seen a 25 per cent reduction in the number 
of falls, and a reduction in the total number of falls per 1,000 
resident days, Mr. Speaker. We know that there is more work to 
do, but this is something that we take seriously and we are 
trying to address. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, there was no answer there about 
whether or not it should be expected that families have to hire 
private care aids to go into a facility to care for their loved ones. 
Lois’s family . . . And I will listen to the families who are 
coming forward, Mr. Speaker. They say that they have seen the 
quality of care deteriorate over these last several years, and they 
are appalled that this government removed the minimum care 
standards from the regulations. They should have strengthened 
those minimum care standards, not eliminated them as they did. 
 
Lois Rein’s funeral is this Thursday. Her family is grieving her 
loss, and they are devastated that her final days were filled with 
unnecessary pain and suffering because of the awful fall that 
she experienced. And they don’t want other families and other 
seniors to go through what they have experienced. Yet this 
government, Mr. Speaker, has just $1 million for non-capital 
needs in seniors’ care in this recent budget. You know, that’s 
just one-third of what this Premier spent on an American 
lobbyist. 
 
To the Premier: how many more families will need to come 
forward with concerns about seniors’ care before this 
government will take this crisis seriously? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, with respect to seniors’ care in this province, this 
budget does provide provision for enhancements in long-term 
care, Mr. Speaker. It also provides for enhancements to seniors’ 
care for those seniors that do not live in long-term care, may 
never live in long-term care, which we know is the vast 
majority of seniors in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of the work that we’re trying to do in 
continuous quality improvement, this is an area of focus for us, 
is patient safety, is resident safety. And that’s why, and I think 

it’s because of some of our new processes, some of our new 
initiatives, and yes because we’ve added additional staff into 
the system, Mr. Speaker, significant additional resources when 
it comes to staffing. 
 
But we’ve seen just in the last year, Mr. Speaker, a reduction in 
the number of falls by seniors in long-term care from about 13 
per cent down to 9 per cent, Mr. Speaker. In fact that is roughly 
4 per cent lower than the national average when it comes to 
falls. And this is something that we monitor, that we put 
strategies in place to try to reduce that, because we don’t want 
to see a single resident in our care fall. We don’t want to see 
any harm come to anybody that is in the health care system. 
That is what continuous improvement is all about, Mr. Speaker, 
and I would hope that the Leader of the Opposition would join 
us on that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 

Funding for Long-term Care in the North 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Six years ago the Croft report said our health 
region needed 48 long-term care beds. The need has grown 
since then. Right now we have just 14 beds. Last year’s budget 
contained some planning dollars. This year’s budget contained 
nothing for seniors’ care in our health region. To the Health 
minister: why not? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to thank the member opposite for asking about 
long-term care in his constituency, something that had been 
neglected for a great number of years, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I am glad that the member opposite has noted that 
there was $500,000 in planning in last year’s budget. Mr. 
Speaker, I think his constituents would be interested to know 
that he actually voted against last year’s budget that had money 
for planning for long-term care expansion in his own 
constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the health region has some of that money, has 
carried that money over, Mr. Speaker, and so I’m pleased to say 
that planning will continue in ’15-16 for replacement of 
long-term care, of additional long-term care beds in La Ronge. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Year after year this government has had 
record revenue. It has drained the rainy day fund and it has 
added lots of debt. This year alone it’s adding 1.5 billion of new 
debt. With all that spending, people should be feeling the 
benefits. Our elders and seniors in northern Saskatchewan 
should be feeling the benefits, but they aren’t, and that is 
shameful. To the Health minister: when will this government 
finally deliver senior health care beds we need in our health 
region? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 



March 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6697 

Speaker, again I will repeat myself to the member opposite, the 
member from Cumberland. Mr. Speaker, last year’s budget did 
include $500,000 for planning, long-needed planning dollars for 
La Ronge to add additional beds for the North, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now you have to actually plan and design what that’s going to 
look like before you can start construction. I’m not sure how 
NDP construction works out, Mr. Speaker, but there is planning 
that is under way. Mr. Speaker, the region still has those funds 
available. They didn’t expend all of those funds this year. We 
allowed them to continue to do the planning, Mr. Speaker. They 
will continue the planning in 15-16. Once that planning is 
complete, Mr. Speaker, I would hope that in a subsequent 
budget there will be dollars to actually begin the construction. 
 
And I would hope, Mr. Speaker, that the member opposite 
would vote in favour of a budget that includes, Mr. Speaker, for 
planning dollars. He didn’t last year, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think 
he will this year either. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone. 
 

Funding for Post-Secondary Education 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the editor-in-chief of the Global 
Higher Education Strategy Monitor says this government’s 
approach to university funding is “. . . a truly awful piece of 
government policy.” 
 
This government forced the University of Saskatchewan to 
make deep cuts. The university achieved its targets and 
budgeted for a surplus. So the Sask Party targeted them and said 
that U of S [University of Saskatchewan] is supporting the 
2015-16 expense growth capacity. Here’s what Alex Usher says 
about that: “Next time someone mugs you and takes your 
money, just remember you’re supporting the mugger’s expense 
growth capacity.” 
 
To the Advanced Education minister: why should students have 
to pay more and get less because this government has 
challenges with its expense growth capacity? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, I’m always delighted to 
get up and speak about this government’s track record in 
supporting post-secondary education in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
By virtue of his own words, the Leader of the Opposition is 
having difficulty understanding how the budget is spent in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, how the money is allocated. Whether 
it’s through his television ads or the speeches that he gives or 
questions that he asks in this House, Mr. Speaker, he doesn’t 
quite understand how the money is allocated throughout the 
province and the various sectors of the budget, Mr. Speaker, so 
we’re going to help him out with some of those speeches in the 
budget debate here, to help him understand where the money is 
spent. 
 
Since this government came to office in 2007, $6.5 billion has 

been spent on post-secondary education, Mr. Speaker. To the 
post-secondary education institutions over the last eight years, 
$5.3 billion has been spent, $1.9 billion more than was spent in 
the last eight years of the NDP government, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s up 56 per cent. I don’t know how . . . Maybe the NDP 
could pull out their big calculator from the 2011 election 
campaign, Mr. Speaker, and figure out how a 56 per cent 
increase in post-secondary education spending is a decrease. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, Star Wars fans would consider 
that the “these aren’t the droids you’re looking for” defence. 
 
Saskatchewan’s post-secondary students already pay the 
second-highest average tuition in Canada. The University of 
Regina president says this government’s budget will leave 
students paying even more. Class sizes will be larger. Programs 
will be scaled back, and “students are going to find it harder to 
get their degree in four years because we are going to have to 
stagger our offerings.” So students are paying more but getting 
less while at university, and that’s unacceptable. But until this 
budget, students could at least count on the graduate retention 
program after they completed their degrees. 
 
Well not anymore, Mr. Speaker. Can the Advanced Education 
minister tell us how much a single mom would have to earn in 
order to get the full benefit from the scaled-back version of the 
graduate retention program? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
let’s examine the record, the track record of this government 
with respect to supporting post-secondary education in this 
province. To the University of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
when this government took office, the base operating grant at 
the University of Saskatchewan was $209.7 million. Eight years 
later, Mr. Speaker, the base operating grant is $331 million, Mr. 
Speaker, an increase of 58 per cent or 7.25 per cent average 
increase over the last eight years, Mr. Speaker. At the same 
time, enrolment at that institution, Mr. Speaker, is up about 9.2 
per cent or an average of 1.15 per cent per year. And the rate of 
inflation, the compounded consumer price index, Mr. Speaker, 
in this province is up about 14 per cent or 1.74 per cent a year. 
 
Funding is up 7.25 per cent on average per year, Mr. Speaker. 
Enrolment’s up a little over 1 per cent average per year. 
Consumer price index up a little over 1.75 per cent a year, Mr. 
Speaker. I’ll stand by this government’s track record to 
supporting post-secondary education over those folks over there 
any day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, a single mom would have to earn 
almost $55,000 a year right out of university in order to qualify 
for the full benefit under the scaled-back version of the graduate 
retention program. This is the very same program that the 
Premier was boasting about in television ads just a few short 



6698 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2015 

months ago, yet now the Sask Party government has cut the 
program back by $33.5 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And lower income people will feel this cut the most. First they 
pay the second highest tuition in Canada while dealing with 
cuts at university. Then they lose out on something that the 
Premier told them they could count on. To that minister: how 
can you explain this broken promise to students? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, to correct the 
record yet once again of the information that’s brought into this 
House that’s incorrect on the other side, students at the 
University of Saskatchewan, out of 59 English-speaking 
universities in Canada, pay the 16th lowest tuition in Canada, 
Mr. Speaker. Students at the University of Regina pay the 18th 
lowest level of tuition in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now with respect to the graduate retention program, Mr. 
Speaker, some 58,000 students have taken advantage of this 
program, resulting in some $200 million being spent in . . . back 
into their pockets, Mr. Speaker, or reducing the amount of 
provincial income tax they pay — 58,000 students that would 
have left this province under the program of the NDP before, 
Mr. Speaker, who are now here working in this economy, 
contributing to the largest population in the history of this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What I found interesting on budget day is when the member 
who just asked the question was asked by the reporters, what 
would you do differently? The deer-in-the-headlights look came 
on, Mr. Speaker, a complete blank, and said, well we wouldn’t 
do that. So we ask again: what would the member opposite 
stand up and do today for the students of this province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Establishment of Long-Term Savings Fund 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — My question is for the Finance minister. 
Will this government just admit that it has completely 
abandoned . . .  
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — My question is to the Finance minister. 
Will this government just admit that it has completely 
abandoned the idea of establishing a futures fund, a long-term 
savings fund? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, our government was pleased to receive the report 
from the past president of the University of Saskatchewan, 
Peter MacKinnon. Peter did a lot of great work in analyzing 
funds that exist outside of Canada and those that exist within 
Canada like the Alberta fund, and he made some 
recommendations regarding the amount that should be 

contributed from non-renewable resource revenue when it 
reaches a certain percentage of the total non-renewable resource 
sector. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we remain committed to building a fund. Mr. 
Speaker, the dollars, according to the criteria that was set out by 
Peter MacKinnon, have not been reached in this budget, and 
therefore, Mr. Speaker, we will not be setting aside any dollars 
in this year’s budget into that fund. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that government’s story 
changes by the day on this matter. There was a time that the 
government talked about and pretended that it was going to 
establish a long-term savings fund, and he talks about the report 
that they actually commissioned. But despite raking in record 
revenues year after year, this government hasn’t been able to 
save a single penny. In fact, even though it’s governed during 
very sunny times for our province, this government has drained 
the $1.4 billion rainy day fund. 
 
So we don’t have a futures fund, no long-term savings for the 
future, and we also don’t have a rainy day fund anymore. No 
savings for the short-term, unanticipated needs. How does the 
Finance minister justify that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Well again, Mr. Speaker, you have to 
be mindful of the words that come from that side of the House. 
And I won’t get myself in trouble, Mr. Speaker, but it’s 
interesting to note how the member opposite twists things to 
suit his needs, Mr. Speaker. He says that it has changed. My 
response today to Peter MacKinnon’s report has suddenly 
changed. Mr. Speaker, that’s the furthest from the truth. 
 
We have remained committed to ensuring that there be a fund 
when indeed the criteria that Mr. MacKinnon talked about are 
met. Mr. Speaker, we’re looking at making sure that it’s at 
arm’s length because, Mr. Speaker, in the NDP days, in the 
NDP days when they had something they called the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund . . . You know, Mr. Speaker, I do remember, 
I do remember accountants who had to come forward and 
actually . . . Not only accountants in the private sector, but the 
Provincial Auditor had to say the definition of a fund is actually 
a fund that contains money, because they had no money in the 
fund. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I think we have to put in 
context that the bellowing Finance minister is the one, the only 
one in Canada’s history to fail an audit by the Provincial 
Auditor that I’m speaking of. This government has raked in 
record revenues, but instead of saving a single penny, this 
government has spent all the money and more. Not only that, 
but this government has drained the rainy day fund despite 
governing during very sunny times for this province. And on 
top of that, this government is adding more and more debt. It’s 
adding $1.5 billion this year alone and has added over $5 billion 
since just 2011, Mr. Speaker. 
 



March 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6699 

So the minister speaks of, you know, potential interest again in 
the fund. We’d hope so. We’d like to see a timeline. But I think 
what it’s time for the minister to share with Saskatchewan 
people is that the reason this government isn’t willing to 
establish a fund is that it just doesn’t have figured out a plan or 
the ability to save a dime, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
something very, very positive has happened to the province of 
Saskatchewan under this party’s government leadership. Mr. 
Speaker, in the past under the NDP there was never something 
called an AAA credit rating. Mr. Speaker, because of the kind 
of practices that we’ve put into place — prudent financial 
management, Mr. Speaker — Saskatchewan now is the envy of 
many, many provinces. In fact, Mr. Speaker, yesterday 
Moody’s said Saskatchewan’s sound fiscal practices, combined 
with potash royalties, support the province’s balanced budget 
for 2015/16, and Saskatchewan and British Columbia stand out 
from all the other Canadian provinces that will have deficits. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I take no lessons from the member opposite 
about whether or not our province is moving forward. We have 
an AAA credit rating, Mr. Speaker. We manage the finances of 
this province in a prudent way, and the people of Saskatchewan 
and the province’s health remain strong. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 722 to 801. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered responses 
to questions 722 through 801. 
 
[14:30] 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Wotherspoon.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in and, I 
guess, make some comments about the budget. And it’s 
interesting, you know, like every member in this opportunity 
likes to do a thank you to certain individuals, and again I would 
like to take an opportunity to thank my CA [constituency 
assistant] who works in the constituency office back home in La 

Ronge. And also we are fortunate to have a couple of staff who 
come in at casual, part-time, whenever they can, to come in and 
do a little bit of work. And it’s really great work that they’re 
doing and we appreciate the good work they do for the 
constituents back home. Our staff do a lot of casework because 
of the, I guess, again, the lack of response from this 
government, the lack of responding to the needs of many 
northern residents. 
 
So but having said that, again I want to say to Devin 
Bernatchez, thank you very much for your support. Thank you 
for your commitment to the constituency, the Cumberland 
constituency, and to the good work that you’re doing. 
 
An Hon. Member: — A good hockey player too. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Oh, and he’s a great hockey player. I give 
you that, yes. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to also acknowledge, you know, 
individuals — I know I have an executive that works along with 
me in the riding — that do some great work. They do. And you 
know, they give me the support that I need, some of the 
guidance. And you know, we have our elders. We have our 
community members who share their hope for our province, for 
the constituency, for the North. 
 
There are serious issues that many of us are facing in northern 
Saskatchewan. Sometimes they want a government to hear that 
and hear the concerns that are going on, and I’m going to get 
into that as we talk about some of the areas in the budget. The 
government wants to cheerlead itself, how great it is. And I will 
talk about some of the organizations and some of the CEOs, 
leaders, you know, some of their comments, and we’ll get into 
that as we debate the bill. 
 
But having said that, I remember and I’m thinking about this, 
that we were hearing the Premier, and he was talking about 
getting ready for a tough budget. You heard all these things, 
you know. And I don’t know what you’d call it, but I started 
thinking about it. The only thing I could think of, and I have the 
story but I’m not going to go through it into the record, but I 
think . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well, I could do that yet. If 
there’s enough time I will do that. But you know, it’s 
interesting. Chicken Little, the story is the sky is falling down, 
you know. The story goes about they run around, and they go 
through a process. The sky is falling down, and they make it all 
sound how terrible it is. And at the end of the story, it’s 
interesting. Foxy Loxy does what Foxy Loxy does, wants to get 
them into the den. 
 
But having said that, I just want to say, it’s that story growing 
up as a kid . . . It’s an interesting story. I’m going to read it to 
my grandkids. You know, it’s interesting because it is an 
interesting story. And you know, at the end of the day, people 
were prepared for this budget and everybody went around 
making it sound like it was going to be terrible. Then at the last 
minute, they come out like everybody is supposed to be, oh it’s 
just great. The Premier and the government saved the day. 
 
But we’ll get into the details about that and who’s going to pay 
for saving the day. It isn’t going to be the government. It isn’t 
going to be the Premier and his ministers. It’s going to be the 



6700 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2015 

good people of Saskatchewan and working families that will 
actually end up paying the price, our seniors. We’ll talk about 
that and who will pay in the end. We’ll get into that. 
 
You know, I want to talk about some of the issues facing our 
seniors. In question period today we had a chance to talk about 
. . . We know that family after family have been coming to the 
Legislative Assembly to raise their concerns. And these are 
serious matters, serious matters. Families are losing loved ones. 
They are dealing with situations, situations that are pretty 
serious and terrible — loss of a loved one. But having said that, 
Mr. Speaker, having said that, they don’t take it serious. This is 
exactly what’s going on. They’re not hearing the families that 
are coming one after another to this Legislative Assembly to 
raise their concerns. 
 
And some of them were scared, and we heard that today. Our 
leader talked about that, the Leader of the Official Opposition 
calling on government, saying you can’t . . . You’re not going 
to scare families away. You can’t push families away. They’re 
concerned and they’re going to start coming. And I think more 
and more were going to come and raise their concerns, and 
they’re not going to go away. 
 
This government has record revenues. They’ve had record 
revenues for years, you know, and they could have done so 
much for many. Our seniors, the most vulnerable, they could 
have done lots for. But they’ve chosen different priorities, and 
some of those priorities — we’ll get into that list — but some of 
those priorities this government has chosen has . . . you know, 
lean, $40 million. We look at the cost that this government has 
wasted on their pet projects. 
 
I’m going to get into that in a little bit, but I want to go back to 
this area on roads. And you know, many northern roads need 
support and they need repairs. At the end of the day, at the end 
of the day, I’ve watched this government make press 
announcements. They make the announcements about the 
all-weather road to Wollaston Lake in 2008. And what do they 
do after? They turned they back on the community of Wollaston 
Lake. They turned their back on that community. Why? Why? 
Well they have to answer that because there have been some 
tough questions asked. We’ve had the leaders come here. That’s 
not going to go away. That issue is not going to go away. 
 
It’s about safety. It’s about making communities have access to 
services and goods that they need to make sure that their 
children, their elders, their community does all right and fares 
well in this province. Governments are supposed to take care of 
all constituents of this province. It is a beautiful province. It’s a 
good province. But this government unfortunately is not 
governing all the province. It’s picking and choosing where it 
wants to, and that’s the sad reality. A fair government, a good 
government takes care of all the people and shares the 
resources, shares the supports with everyone, and this 
government’s record is terrible when it comes to that. 
 
But having said that, we look at, you know, Pelican Lake, 
Pelican Narrows-Sandy Bay highway, 135. There was some 
commitments to the road over there, paving and stuff, 7 
kilometres. They need some work on their road’s safety. And 
this is about safety, I remind the government, you know, as 
they’re looking out and they’re spending their record spending 

and they talk about all the highways money that they’re 
spending in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m going to get into some of the quotes from northern 
Saskatchewan from some of the CEOs and the leaders. And you 
know, at the end of the day, it’s interesting to see this 
government’s lack of commitment on many issues facing 
northern Saskatchewan. And it’s not just northern 
Saskatchewan, and I’ve said this. It’s seniors. It’s families. It’s 
housing. There’s a lot of issues. 
 
But I want to get into this. I think about a road. It’s a provincial 
road, fire reserve road. It goes through the community of Lac 
La Ronge Indian Band’s traditional territory. And they’ve been 
petitioning, and we’ve served that petition, so government’s 
well aware of it for a number of years, knows that the road was 
a health issue with respiratory with the elders, with community 
members. And the amount of traffic going on that road creates a 
lot of dust and problems, and I think for some of the seniors, the 
respiratory. 
 
But this government had an opportunity to address this road and 
fix it, pave it, do what it needs to do. It’s had the resources to do 
that, and for some reason it hasn’t done that. And they’re going 
to have to answer to that. We know that people are not going to 
go away, and the concerned citizens will not go away, and 
they’re going to speak up. 
 
Now we also know we have trouble with other northern roads, 
whether they’re new roads or roads that need complete 
upgrades, you know, attention of a government, commitment. 
And that’s what I want to say: it is a commitment. We see, you 
know. And the list goes on. Highway 123, that was voted the 
worst highway, CAA [Canadian Automobile Association]. It 
won the award I think three years ago or two years ago. Having 
said that, we’ll see what happens this year as the thawing 
happens and it goes through, and we’ll keep an eye. I know a lot 
of people in the community were very concerned, and we’ll 
continue to raise their issues. And as they need to, they’ll move 
forward, and we’ll support them in any way we can to make 
sure that government’s well aware of the issues facing that 
community. 
 
You know, yes, government spent some money on it and it was 
needed. I mean the road was unbelievable. It was unpassable at 
times. So having said that, that area we’ll look at. 
 
I think about another road, 165 west. That’s the Hall Lake 
Road. It needs . . . And I know the good work of the 
maintenance staff in the highways. They do a great job for the 
staff that are there. We know that, and no one’s going to say 
that. They work hard and they do what they can do. But 
sometimes more needs to be done, and there has to be a 
commitment of dollars by government. 
 
And government does have a lot of money. I mean, it’s unreal 
the money, you know, record spending, like I said, years and 
years of record revenue coming in. This government could have 
chosen to fix a lot of the situations facing northern 
Saskatchewan, the residents. But having said that, they chose 
not to in many areas. And we see that. Whether it’s seniors’ 
care, affordability for families, we see the cuts that this 
government has made. But having said that, I’m hoping that, 



March 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6701 

you know, the government will have a serious look at it. 
 
Going through the list, then I think about 165 east as well, the 
cut-across road. It’s just to make sure that this road is safe for 
people. It gets quite a bit of traffic. We have large trucks 
hauling on there, and sometimes they’re harvesting wood out of 
the forest and they’re taking it to market. 
 
Economics sometimes is good, but again I go through the 
process of making sure individuals, our First Nations, our 
Métis, our northern leaders are consulted when harvesting . . . 
[inaudible] . . . Our traditional trappers are consulted. Yes, it’s 
great to say you’re harvesting wood and the economic spinoff. 
There’s jobs. And I’ve heard some of the members say that and 
talk about that. But having said that, Mr. Speaker, you have to 
make sure that traditional users of the land — and some of them 
have their trapper’s cabin and they trap furs in the area — that 
they’re consulted and they’re well aware before any harvesting 
goes on. There is that obligation and it’s important, and I’ve 
said that. 
 
But sometimes for some reason this government gets stubborn 
and they think it doesn’t have to do that or it doesn’t think it has 
to enforce that, and I think they’d better start doing that because 
people are getting tired. Especially many of the trappers are 
getting tired. Traditional land users are getting tired of having 
the forest harvested. They’re not against working, but they want 
to be consulted. They want to have input, and they want the 
industry to talk to them. They want government to make sure 
they’re well aware of what the plans are when it comes to 
harvesting. But having said that, you know we’ll talk about that. 
 
I did say I realized . . . We were hoping there was planning 
dollars for the long-term care health region in the last year’s 
budget. It was planning dollars. And I want to be clear on that. 
It wasn’t a facility. It was planning dollars. We were hoping 
that, you know, this budget would bring in the dollars to 
complete the project. You could have used the 40 million you 
spent, that you wasted on John Black, American consultant. 
You could have used those dollars to build our long-term care 
facility that our seniors need, deserve, do deserve. 
 
You know, we talk about our seniors who are our veterans who 
have fought the good fight, who have done everything they can 
for this province, and we need to take better care. This 
government should be ashamed of themselves, the way they’ve 
treated the health region in the sense of long-term care with the 
need in northern Saskatchewan — pretty sad. But at the end of 
the day, they can say what they want and they can say, oh you 
voted against whatever. That’s up to them. They can sit there 
and spin it the way they want it. At the end of the day, we want 
a long-term care facility for our seniors. We demand it. We’re 
going to continue to fight. 
 
And I want to thank the good people of the Cumberland 
constituency and the health region who have fought, who have 
signed hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of petitions, who 
have meetings year after year. We’ve been raising the concern 
from the leadership. Everybody’s been raising it. The health 
region, they have done the good reports, the Croft report in 
2009. The community has done their part. The seniors have 
done their part. Everyone else has done their part except for this 
government when it has record revenue. It hasn’t done their 

part, and it’s time they do their part. It’s time. I think northern 
people and our seniors deserve better. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Speaker, having said that, you know, 
we talk about the resources and we talk about the different 
resources that are out there. And you know, government has an 
opportunity here and a role to play. 
 
You know when I think about some of the other challenges and 
when I think about and we talk about health, the challenge of 
health, and we’re talking about addictions . . . And I’ve talked 
about that, addictions. I talked about suicide. We’ve heard from 
this side. Many times we’re talking about it. We’ve heard our 
leaders talk about it, that we can’t wish it away. It’s time that 
the resources are put into mental health to deal with suicide, to 
deal with addictions. 
 
This government has the resources to fix it if there’s a 
willingness. And I’m hoping that this government will truly 
open its ears and hear some of the challenges, the suffering that 
families are going through, not just in the North. I know that 
they struggle in the rural areas as well when it comes to mental 
health, addictions. There are many challenges facing many 
Saskatchewan residents. Yes, rural areas. Yes, as well the 
North, rural, and urban. It’s all over. It’s the province when we 
talk about that. 
 
But having said that, we go back to the need. This government 
and members can heckle all they want. They think it’s funny. I 
don’t find this funny at all. When we’re talking about suicides, 
when we’re talking about challenges that are facing many 
families, you have members over there that want to heckle and 
say, that’s okay. I’m hoping that some of the members will 
hear. I’m hoping some of the ministers and the Premier will 
take some of the suggestions that we are bringing forward. 
These are concerns that Saskatchewan residents, northern 
residents want to share, the members of the Cumberland 
constituency want to be addressed. 
 
[14:45] 
 
So I talked a little bit about the addictions area. The other area 
we want to talk about, when it comes to northern schools and 
communities, there are many challenges facing school 
divisions. And we’re going hear them. I know the overcrowding 
in classrooms . . . TAs [teaching assistant], we need more TAs 
to work with individual students to make sure those that have 
challenges . . . And I talk about that. You know, Mr. Speaker, 
there are many students who have challenges when it comes to 
disabilities, when it comes to learning, individuals, we all do. 
 
I myself am a person with a disability. Is it to hide and be 
heckled by people? That’s all right. I’m a very proud person. 
My grandfather, as a Métis veteran, a very proud man, taught 
me many things: to be proud, do your best, try, do your best. 
And if you try your best, at the end of the day, that’s all anyone 
can ask. And I try to represent the people of Cumberland and I 
am proud to represent them. 
 
I hear the challenges and I feel sometimes for the challenges 
that many northern people . . . When I talk about our children, 
my grandchildren, our community members who are suffering 
with a government that has so much wealth, you know, 



6702 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2015 

sometimes it’s hard when you see the challenges. 
 
You see the challenges that many northern families, many 
people are feeling, the challenges that are going on, but I don’t 
want to lose sight of the schools because there are many great 
teachers, our great administrators, our boards of education that 
are working hard to do a great job. They’re doing all they can to 
make sure that our kids get the best quality of education, but 
when you are limited with resources and you have such a . . . 
We have large schools, small schools in northern 
Saskatchewan. There are many challenges, even just covering 
off housing to house a teacher to bring them into a community. 
 
It’s a situation sitting on the board. It’s huge, the costs to a 
board, you know, and you look at travel to get to anything, a 
function. Everything costs so much more in northern 
Saskatchewan. And I realize in rural areas they have a lot of the 
same costs and challenges. We know that, you know, urban has 
its challenges as well. We know that. There are many 
challenges. 
 
But again I want to talk a little bit and give credit to the 
teachers, you know. They do such a great job. And sometimes 
I’ve been to meetings where teachers, Mr. Speaker, do not feel 
valued — by this government, they don’t feel valued. They’ve 
said that to me. I’ve had members tell me, you know this 
government, we want to feel respected. We want to feel like we 
are part of decision making, and they feel like they’re not. 
They’re frustrated sometimes. They get told the way it’s going 
to be instead of consulting, sharing, and talking with them. 
 
And you can run around after the fact, say, oh well, we’re going 
to fix it now. We’ll make a mistake. We’ll amend things. We’ll 
do it now. It’s after the fact. It’s time to make sure that you ask, 
ask the people who are on the front line, our teachers, our 
administrators, those individuals, our support staff. There is 
many of them within the school divisions that help out. But let’s 
try to work on that. 
 
Now when I think about some of the other challenges that are 
facing . . . the Internet in northern Saskatchewan. Some of the 
other challenges that face our schools. You know, we have a 
mega . . . You know, the Internet, and we’re going to talk about 
megawatts, 3 megawatts versus 100 megawatts provincial 
school. Some of the band schools, some of the northern schools 
don’t have opportunity to that. The bandwidth isn’t as strong, 
and technology . . . And I know there’s been a commitment, 
you know, somewhat to hear, and I’m hearing that, that there 
might be plans. And that’s good. And if is happening, then 
that’s good. You know, we want to improve the Internet so that 
our students in northern Saskatchewan and First Nations 
communities have access to the Internet. And we want, you 
know, the technology and you need sometimes the programs . . . 
You have to have the high-speed. You have to make sure it’s 
working. 
 
When we talk about housing as well, I want to talk a little bit 
about housing because there was such an opportunity for this 
government, like I’ve said, to fix housing in northern 
Saskatchewan. There has been lots of concern raised. And they 
talk about different programs, and then some of the 
municipalities that apply for those programs find out, well, they 
may not qualify for that program. So in one way you cheerlead 

this program — it’s a fix, it’s going to fix it all — and then you 
find out later you’ve got to go through so many hurdles and 
challenges, Mr. Speaker, that you can’t actually apply, you 
don’t qualify. So if that’s going on, what good is it going to do 
for a community if they don’t qualify and they can’t access 
some of the programs because they just don’t meet the 
requirements or whatever hurdles government has put in place 
saying that. 
 
So, talking a little bit about that, the other area I would like to 
talk about, and I think it’s so important in northern 
Saskatchewan, and many . . . you know, we have our northern 
trapping association, many northern trappers. We just had an 
election. Adam O. Charles was elected as the new president. 
There’s an executive, and they’ll govern. And I know that this 
trapping industry is important to many northern families, and 
we know we have the southern trappers’ association as well. 
There’s one in the South, Saskatchewan Trappers Association, 
but then there’s the northern trappers’ association, and I want to 
talk about that. 
 
They do some good work. Not only do they . . . is it about the 
culture, it’s about the lifestyle. Adam O. Charles speaks highly 
about that. And he tries to work with his grandchildren, with 
community members, with leaders, and I think with all trappers, 
to encourage them to work with the youth of the community, to 
make sure that they’re proud of their culture, that trapping was 
a way of life and is a way of life for many of them. 
 
Okay, you know, when you look at the different ways, some 
say, well do many still do the trapping? You know, some of the 
trappers out there still live the traditional lifestyle. They live off 
the land, the food that they are provided, sustenance. You 
know, when you look at the income, it subsidizes their income 
from the fur and the food for their health. Eating right is so 
important, and some of them, the food that they’re getting does 
that. 
 
So I give them credit, and they’re very proud. They’re very 
proud of the culture. When you go to trappers’ meetings and 
you meet up with the elders and you talk to them, and you go to 
feasts and you go to different community events, they always 
have wild meat and fish. They’re very proud of that, and they’ll 
always make sure you’re welcome at their table. And whether 
it’s ministers or anyone else, they come to the North, the 
hospitality of northern Saskatchewan, they will invite anyone to 
the table. They will greet you with respect. And the northern 
people know how to be a host, a great host, and that I give them 
credit on. 
 
And you know, you look at some of the challenges that they’re 
facing in the trapping industry, those that do the hunting and 
fishing. We see an opportunity where a government had the 
resources, the money to do some fixing. They could have, with 
all the money that they have spent on their priorities, their pet 
projects, if they would have just taken a little bit of the money, 
just a little bit — it wasn’t much, Mr. Speaker, they could have 
taken — they could address the trapping, fishing, many of the 
northern issues you could have faced. 
 
Now government will say, oh like there isn’t enough to go 
around. There is more money being spent, record spending this 
year again, again. We talked about that. 



March 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6703 

An. Hon. Member: — And more debt. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — And yes, and then more debt. But having 
said . . . You know, who’s going to pay for the government’s 
missed priorities, their pet projects that they have, the lean, the 
consultants? We look at how much money they’ve spent on 
consultants. 
 
But I wanted just to let the families in northern Saskatchewan 
but also in the rest of the province . . . You know, we look at the 
middle class, and we look at some of our seniors. We look at 
some of the most vulnerable who are going to pay. Some of the 
students are going to pay a price. We see what’s going on, you 
know, the graduation retention program, the claw back that this 
government’s clawed back from those students that were 
expecting those dollars to help them survive. Now they’re going 
to get a tax credit. You know, later, down, when you pay this, 
you might, you might, you might get some back, or you might 
not have to pay some tax. Really the government’s wondering 
why, why people are angry, students are frustrated. They’re 
wondering about that. 
 
Well you talk about the seniors’ drug plan. You know, you take 
a . . . It was interesting because I believe we have heard from a 
few seniors so far, one saying he’s at about, I think, $800 over 
the threshold that the government says if you’re at 60,000 . . . 
He’s at 60,000, let’s just say, 800-and-some dollars. It’s not 
very much he’s over, but he will no longer have the drug plan 
for seniors covering him. He’s now paying somewhere around, 
I think it’s 6 or 7,000 he’ll have to pay out of his pocket for the 
drugs. He was covered. Now he’s not. So when we’re hearing 
stories like that, those are the challenges facing many families. 
 
You talk about affordability. You know, we have a government 
who likes to spend. We heard our critic today, Finance critic 
today, our colleague on this side of the House explaining about, 
you know, you talk about not a penny, not a dime saved. This 
government has spent everything. Rainy day fund’s gone. They 
have spent I guess the next generation. And then not only that, 
Mr. Speaker, but what they did: 700 million they’ve mortgaged 
for my grandkids and my kids to pay. And they don’t think 
nothing of it. They just think they should keep spending. And 
then, you know, they want to go around and spin it. They want 
to spin it that it’s a balanced budget. 
 
And you’ll see some of the people talking about that. You’ll see 
people talking about that . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And 
allow that, allow that, and that’s just right. Keep patting 
yourselves on the back, and you’re going to get what, exactly? 
The arrogance; this is the way it is. Keep doing what you’re 
doing. Keep ignoring many of the areas where you could have 
addressed with the amount of money that you guys have wasted 
as a government, as a government did administer, you know, 
when you look at the planning. And some of the backbenchers, 
they love to call out and yell out. Some of those members back 
there, that’s all they do, but they don’t fight for their 
constituency. And we’ve seen some that in Regina recently with 
Corrections. We see. But they’re going to be pay a price for that 
at the end of the day. We’ll see what’s going to happen. People 
will speak up and they will talk. We know that. 
 
Now having said that, I talked a little bit about, you know . . . 
And then our seniors, our most vulnerable. You know, the most 

vulnerable citizens in our province — and I say that — who 
have done their part are paying a price . . . [inaudible] . . . and 
will pay a price. Families are going to pay a price. 
 
When you take money from the Crown corporations the way 
you do — and I think it’s another 250 million, if I’m correct — 
well you think, where is that money? Any money that you take 
from our Crowns on top of your existing money you’re getting, 
where are you going to get that money from? Now if that is 
happening and, you know, at the end of the day somebody’s 
going to pay for that. Somebody’s going to have to pay for that 
because if that money was allocated for other projects, for 
upgrades and stuff, and then you take . . . Well we’ve seen 
government take special dividends before. And then all they do 
is, you know, they go, they go to the review panel, rate review 
panel, and they say, we need increases to get the money back. 
And they get it. And in the end, it is the working families, it is 
the families in the province that have to pay again, you know. 
 
And the cuts. We talked about the cuts. There’s cuts. You 
know, this government has made cuts in different areas, and 
here and there. This one’s been cut. That one’s been cut. But at 
the end of the day, they’re asking Saskatchewan families to pay 
a little more, just a little more, they say. But you get a little less 
service. Isn’t that amazing to watch how that works. Well you 
know what? You pay a little more but you get a little less 
service. I don’t know how they figure that’s so great and people 
are going to cheerlead that this is a great thing, Mr. Speaker. 
There are those challenges. 
 
But having said that, you know, I talk about in this budget what 
was not in this budget. There was such opportunity. The 
government had such opportunity to address many of them. It 
isn’t that they didn’t have the money. It isn’t that they didn’t 
have the money, Mr. Speaker. It’s that they’ve had, again and 
I’ll say it again, for the record revenue, their pet priorities, and 
they’ve chose to spend it the way it is. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, that is the sad reality that 
Saskatchewan families are again going to have to pay for this 
government’s waste. And I say waste because they have wasted 
such opportunities for our generation, you know, our 
grandchildren. They’re going to pay for this . . . [inaudible]. It’s 
30 years. How much interest will be on? They can say what 
they want at the end of the day, and the members have a right to 
say. 
 
But I want to talk a little bit still about highways. Well you 
know, they talk about record spending on highways. And I want 
to talk a little bit about that because I think this is important. 
This is important. We have an opportunity to correct some of 
the issues facing northern Saskatchewan when it comes to 
highways and infrastructure. And I know one of the CEO, we 
have the health region, you know, we have New North. We 
have different CEOs that work for organizations. And I’m 
thinking about the one member here, and this gentleman, Al 
Loke, he’s the CEO of New North. 
 
[15:00] 
 
There’s 35 municipalities that represent New North, the mayors 
and aldermen. And they do a great job. They lobby hard and 
they try to raise the issues of northern Saskatchewan so that, 



6704 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2015 

Mr. Speaker, so that at the end of the day government is well 
aware of the issues facing many northern municipalities. It’s not 
only First Nations, it’s not only, you know, Métis that raise 
their concerns and lobby with government. New North has a 
CEO. And like I said, I’m going to get into some quotes from 
an article when he was interviewed, and he was asked his 
thoughts about the budget. So here, and I’m going to quote Al 
Loke the CEO: 
 

We have been stressing to the government on the need for 
infrastructure for roads and other areas, but once again we 
have been left on the wayside and southern projects have 
been put above northern needs. 

 
So there’s some of the frustration that you’re hearing from 
some of the organizations out there that are looking at this 
budget and looking at the dollars and how much dollars are 
coming into northern Saskatchewan for roads and other areas 
and other needs. And that’s interesting, you know, that’s 
interesting more than ever before . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Well you know what? Here, yes, go ahead. Go ahead, pat 
yourselves on the back and do what you want. Again, that’s 
what I’ve been talking about. There’s the entitlement, the 
arrogance of a government that’s not listening to the people. 
Keep doing that, Mr. Speaker. They have turned their back for 
whatever reason. 
 
I talked about this earlier, about governing all of the province, 
all Saskatchewan residents. And this government picks and 
chooses what it wants to do. But that’s okay, that’s okay. They 
can say what they want. 
 
Now I want to get into a little bit more, and in this area, here’s 
what I want to talk about. Sometimes I’m getting all this 
cheerleading there, Mr. Speaker. It’s hard to wonder what they 
want to hear, how bad they want to hear this stuff. I thought 
they would. But I’m going to make another quote from the 
CEO, Al Loke. Here’s what else he had to say: 
 

There is no other money for road infrastructure, just for 
the maintenance grant for the airports, says Loke. The 
budget is $56 million, but it was stated that $14 million 
would be for new construction. But that had already been 
announced earlier this year, so there is no new money 
coming in for road infrastructure. 

 
I mean you don’t have it much simpler than that, simpler than 
that. That’s a quote. So you know, government can sit there and 
pat itself on the back and say it’s record spending. At the end of 
the day, the leaders, leaders of northern Saskatchewan know, 
know. Residents of northern Saskatchewan know. First Nations, 
Métis leaders, Métis community members, First Nation 
members, many northern residents know. Our trappers, 
fishermen, many people know. This government is about smoke 
and mirrors. That’s all they do. They like photo ops. They like 
to announce and reannounce and reannounce. And all the blame 
game, the blame game. But you know, Mr. Speaker, they’re 
going to come one day soon, and people in northern 
Saskatchewan and the rest of the province will send this 
government a message. 
 
Sometimes they mock at us. They mock at the nine of us on this 
side, Mr. Speaker. They laugh. They mock about the nine. But 

I’ve had people tell me this. It’s thank you for being in 
opposition, when they look at the size of that government. You 
can clap. Here’s what they say. Yes, I’ll say it again. They 
thank these members on this side of the House for holding that 
government to account, to hold that government to account. 
When you have 49 members on that side of the House, it is too 
large. It is unbalanced. It isn’t right. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — What would they like? They would like to 
have a dictatorship where they could rule, get rid of everyone so 
they could do whatever they want and nobody question them. 
Well it ain’t going to happen, and the people are going to send 
that to them. You’ll see. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, you know, having said all the 
challenges that are facing many Saskatchewan families, our 
seniors, you know, this government doesn’t want to hear 
anything. It ignores the challenges of many residents in this 
province. And I know they heckle all they want. They can 
heckle all they want. At the end, Mr. Speaker, it is about the 
people of this province sharing in the wealth, sharing, having a 
fair opportunity at a quality of life. This government does not 
feel that way. It doesn’t listen to the many challenges, and I’ve 
quoted some of the challenges that are here. I’ve talked about 
the challenges that people are talking about back home. I’m 
talking about when you see somebody saying, I don’t know 
how I’m going to pay my rent. I honestly don’t know how I’m 
buying groceries for my kids, Doyle. I don’t know how I’m 
going to pay this power bill. Utility bills are going up. The cost 
of living is crazy. 
 
Yes, we hear the government brag about, oh our economy is 
doing . . . Everything is growing. And we want that to happen, 
and that’s very important. We want business to do well. We 
want our province to do well. You know, I even say we want 
our province to do very well. We do. We want the resources. 
 
But we want a government, and the people of this province 
want a government who takes care of that seriously, who 
seriously has a look at the wealth. And they look at the money 
— no savings. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, at the end of the day, I want to give a few 
reasons why, and I think I have given quite a bit of reasons why 
I will not be supporting that government’s budget. I will not be 
supporting that government’s budget and I will be supporting 
the amendment for the simple reason that this government again 
was supposed to govern for all of Saskatchewan and chose not 
to. So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I have no further comments, 
and I will be supporting the amendment and not the main 
motion. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my privilege and my pleasure to take part in the 
budget debate this afternoon. I want to first of all thank the 
constituents of Weyburn-Big Muddy that have given me this 
opportunity and this privilege, Mr. Speaker. I also want to thank 



March 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6705 

my family. I want to thank our son Jack, Mr. Speaker, who I 
understand might be watching the proceedings right now 
although I think he’s having a snack. But, Mr. Speaker, I look 
forward to having the opportunity to introduce him in the House 
hopefully at some point this spring. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank my wife, Amanda. Mr. 
Speaker, I think it’s important for me to say that I wouldn’t be 
here without her, Mr. Speaker, and just I can’t thank her 
enough, Mr. Speaker, for all that she’s done and all that she’s 
sacrificed. She is the most wonderful mother to our son Jack 
and, Mr. Speaker, I am so grateful and so fortunate that our son 
has such a terrific mother. And we’re just very, very blessed, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to . . . I’m not going to take a lot of 
time to speak on the budget, Mr. Speaker, but I do want to talk a 
little bit about how it both impacts my constituency, Mr. 
Speaker, as well as the Ministry of Health. And I want to take 
an opportunity to maybe talk a little bit about and follow up on 
the member from Cumberland who referenced, where’s the 
money gone. That seems to be the refrain of the NDP, Mr. 
Speaker, is, where’s the money gone? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as has been demonstrated by the Premier 
and other members of this House, the dollars in this province 
that we have been fortunate to preside over, Mr. Speaker, have 
gone directly back into the people. Whether it’s through record 
debt reduction, Mr. Speaker, and lowering the interest rates that 
we and that my son will pay into the future, Mr. Speaker, and 
others, the young people of this province, that’s where the 
money has gone. It’s gone back into record levels of tax 
reductions, Mr. Speaker. That’s where the dollars have gone, 
back into the pockets of the people of this province. It’s gone to 
improving the services that we provide, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to where the money has been spent 
in the Ministry of Health, I can tell you that, when we formed 
government in November 2007, we inherited the longest 
wait-lists when it came to surgery in this entire country. The 
birthplace of medicare in Canada had the longest wait-lists for 
surgery in the entire dominion of Canada, in the entire country, 
Mr. Speaker. So where did the money go? Well we have spent 
over $236 million over the last five years on top of what regions 
were already spending when it came to reducing wait times for 
surgeries, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it . . . It’s interesting. A couple of years ago, 
I think a year ago or maybe two years ago in an estimates 
committee when the former Health minister on the other side 
took a little bit of credit for trying to reduce surgical wait times 
in this province, Mr. Speaker, and what came out in that 
committee meeting is that the rate that the NDP were going 
with their surgical initiative, it would have taken 30 years to 
reduce surgical wait times to where we have done it in five 
years, Mr. Speaker. So that’s where the money has went. 
 
The number of people waiting longer than 18 months for 
surgery is down 100 per cent. The number of people waiting 
longer than 12 months for surgery is down 98 per cent, almost 
zero people waiting longer than 12 months in this province. The 
people waiting longer than six months, which I think is a fairly 
reasonable wait for surgery, for elective surgery, is down 94 per 

cent. And, Mr. Speaker, the number of people waiting three 
months for surgery is down 86 per cent under the surgical 
initiative. So that, in terms of surgery, is where the money has 
went, Mr. Speaker. We have, from the days where the 
government of the day did about 74,000 surgeries a year, Mr. 
Speaker, in ’13-14 — and this number would’ve been increased 
in ’14-15, and we’re still calculating those numbers — but in 
’13-14 nearly 90,000 surgeries were done in the province of 
Saskatchewan, to the point where we have the lowest waits in 
Canada when it comes to surgery. 
 
We are a model once again when it comes to surgical waits, 
when it comes to health care in this country. At the same time 
when our population has been increasing and the demand for 
surgery has been increasing and the volume, the requirements 
for surgery has been increasing, we’ve still seen those 
significant waits. 
 
Where did the money go, Mr. Speaker, when it came to the 
capital of this province, when it came to health facilities, Mr. 
Speaker? And I know that the member from Cumberland will 
be interested in this because, Mr. Speaker, we have funded 
$500,000 to begin adding new long-term care beds in the North, 
Mr. Speaker, which was an important issue to him for a couple 
of days, Mr. Speaker. But then what happened last year after the 
dollars were in the budget? He voted against the budget, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s how important it was to him, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have invested over $1 billion in health capital in less then 
eight years as government, Mr. Speaker: 250 million on 
long-term care replacements; 235 million dedicated towards the 
children’s hospital; 100 million for the Moose Jaw replacement 
hospital; $150 million when it comes to renovations, Mr. 
Speaker; not to mention what we’ve done on equipment, on life 
safety and emergency repairs, Mr. Speaker, across the province. 
 
And I know that it was interesting about, I think it was two 
summers ago, the Leader of the Opposition was touring around 
to some facilities across the province and he was posting online 
pictures of things that he didn’t like in long-term care facilities 
and some, you know, I think some of the general maintenance 
that needs to take place, Mr. Speaker. And that one facility that 
he was in was in Grenfell, which has been a very important 
project for the member for Moosomin, Mr. Speaker, to see a 
replacement to that project. 
 
I’d like to tell the members opposite the record when it comes 
to that one facility, and I think that it demonstrates the record 
between this government and the previous government. This 
government has provided Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region 
with $731,000, $731,000 in maintenance for the Grenfell 
facility, Mr. Speaker. In that same time period under the NDP 
government, you know what they put into Grenfell for 
maintenance on that long-term care facility, Mr. Speaker? 
Forty-six thousand dollars. $731,000 on this side of the House; 
$46,000 on that side of the House. In fact in their last budget 
what they had for Grenfell facility, Mr. Speaker, for a long-term 
care facility, was $5,629 for a facility at that time that was 
already 50 years old. That is the record of the NDP. That is 
where the money has gone under this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have seen in terms of the supports that 
people need when it comes to the front-line personnel . . . And I 



6706 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2015 

think we’ve talked a lot about it in the House, Mr. Speaker, but 
I’ll remind the members opposite. Today under this 
government, because of changes that we’ve made to how we 
recruit foreign-trained doctors so that we ensure that we 
actually have an assessment program that is 
Saskatchewan-made, so that we’re not relying on the 
Government of Manitoba whenever they had seats available, 
Mr. Speaker — through that, through increasing the number of 
training seats that we have at our college here in Saskatchewan 
and residency positions, Mr. Speaker, 423 additional physicians 
are practising in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have work to do. We know that there are communities that 
are still out there looking for physicians, Mr. Speaker, but a far 
cry from the days of the NDP where under the same time frame, 
where we have 423 more physicians in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, when they saw 173 physicians leave the province. 
They saw 455 fewer nurses of all designations, Mr. Speaker. At 
the same time, 2,600 additional licensed nurses of all 
designations, Mr. Speaker. And you can talk to the regulatory 
bodies. The SRNA [Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 
Association], Mr. Speaker, the regulatory body for the 
registered nurses of this province, I think just in the last couple 
of months issued a report that they’ve never had more licensed 
nurses practising, more licensed RNs practising in the 
province’s history as a regulatory body. And that’s a regulatory 
body that has existed for a long time obviously, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to things like diagnostics, where 
has the money gone, Mr. Speaker? Well we know the record of 
the NDP, where people would wait not just months for elective 
diagnostics. I remember there was a report out back under the 
NDP — I think it was about 2004, 2005 — where the 
radiologists association, the national body, was saying that the 
waits that people were enduring in this province, up to 22 
months in one case, Mr. Speaker, almost two years for an 
elective MRI [magnetic resonance imaging], and the national 
body, what did they say at the time? That it was almost criminal 
what Saskatchewan’s health care system was doing to our 
patients, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In 2007-2008, the last year under the NDP, they paid for 15,700 
MRIs in the province. This year we will pay for nearly 35,000 
MRI scans for the people in this province, Mr. Speaker, and an 
increase as well in the CT [computerized tomography] scans, 
Mr. Speaker, that are being provided for. And, Mr. Speaker, 
what we’re also doing is we’re not being bound by ideology, as 
the NDP were. On the surgical waits, Mr. Speaker, in part why 
we’ve been successful is we’re doing things like pooled 
referrals. We’re doing things like ensuring that we have a 
streamlined process, that we have patient pathways, that we are 
using the private sector when it is economical, when it is cost 
effective, Mr. Speaker. And we demonstrate that. We have to 
demonstrate that. We do demonstrate that, something that the 
members opposite would oppose, Mr. Speaker, if they were in 
the government. They never did it when they had the chance in 
government and I think if they ever got the chance — and I’m 
not sure that they will for a long time — but I don’t think that 
they would continue on with things like private surgical clinics. 
 
We’ve also gone to the market to purchase, to procure things 

like CT and MRI scan in the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker, 
something that I don’t think the members opposite are . . . They 
haven’t said where they are on that, Mr. Speaker. But that’s the 
way that we have achieved some of the gains that we’ve made, 
Mr. Speaker, and I think that that is a stark contrast between 
members on this side and members on that side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to talk on seniors, Mr. Speaker, and 
some of the initiatives that we are doing. What we’re trying to 
do in this province is a couple of things when it comes to 
seniors. It is to dig ourselves out of the legacy of the NDP when 
their answer to the seniors’ issues in this province was to not 
increase the seniors’ income plan for those seniors that were 
provided with some income support. I think they made a change 
back in 1992, Mr. Speaker, and they never touched it again for 
16 years. They never touched it again for 16 years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They also made decisions that saw 1,200 long-term care beds 
being cut out of the system. And we’ll have a debate and I think 
we’ll have a debate on when it comes to standards in long-term 
care, Mr. Speaker. But when the members opposite ask about 
where the standards are for long-term care, well I can tell you, 
in 19 communities across this province, Mr. Speaker, they don’t 
have to worry about that because they don’t have a long-term 
care facility anymore in their community. Twelve hundred beds 
in this province were closed over those years, Mr. Speaker, at a 
time where the demographics of our province were showing 
that we were an aging population in Saskatchewan. We had 
gone through a generation after several generations before that 
of our young people not staying in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
And so how did the NDP prepare the seniors of this province 
for that? Well they cut the beds in this province. So we have a 
long ways to dig out of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve also added back staff into long-term care facilities. Over 
nearly 800 full-time equivalents are working in long-term care 
in our integrated facilities all across this province, Mr. Speaker. 
But we want to also make sure that we are providing support for 
seniors that aren’t in long-term care, may never live in 
long-term care, but need support to live in their own homes. 
And that’s where this budget comes into play, Mr. Speaker, 
$700,000 for geriatric program for southern Saskatchewan to be 
based out of Regina. 
 
We have one geriatrician in this province, Dr. Jenny Basran, 
and she does a great job in this province but she is one person. 
So we need to recruit a second for the southern part of this 
province, Mr. Speaker. We also need to ensure, especially in 
our two major cities, that we have special areas for those, Mr. 
Speaker, that are suffering from those complex cases of 
dementia and Alzheimer’s, Mr. Speaker. So there’s capital 
dollars in this budget to identify, most likely within existing 
facilities, to ensure that there are the supports in place for those 
very high, complex cases, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re also ensuring something that has been successfully tested 
in Regina Qu’Appelle, purposeful rounding, to ensure that our 
seniors know that on a regular basis that somebody’s going to 
be checking in on them, and in specific areas around the Ps, Mr. 
Speaker: proximity to personal items like the call bell, like 
water; pain and how they are doing with their pain 
management; their position, Mr. Speaker. So this is something 
that’s going to be rolled out to every single facility across this 



March 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6707 

province and that’s beginning this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re also ensuring that we can continue with programs that 
have been piloted in Regina and Saskatoon and P.A. [Prince 
Albert] and now rolled out to Lloydminster, Mr. Speaker, the 
HomeFirst/Quick Response program that is helping to ensure 
that seniors are getting more timely access. They’re getting into 
the home care system, Mr. Speaker, more quickly. We’re able 
to not have seniors going into the emergency and in acute care 
if they don’t actually need that, Mr. Speaker. So this will 
enhance that and it’ll enhance the home care programs, so that 
when those seniors become home care clients, we can look after 
them. 
 
It’s also going to ensure, in our major health regions, that the 
individualized funding that we have for people that are on home 
care but that would like other options — could be a non-profit, 
could be the private sector, could be a private nursing company 
— that they have those options and so the money in this budget 
will eliminate the wait-list that we currently have on those 
programs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So those are some of the initiatives that we’re working on. 
We’re also working on through our emergency department 
waits initiative which has received an increase in this budget. 
We’re also working on, Mr. Speaker, ensuring some testing, 
some other ideas, when it comes to seniors, like putting nurse 
practitioners into long-term care so that we can avoid some of 
those admissions into the emergency department that are based 
really on assessments and evaluations. Those could be done by 
somebody like a nurse practitioner that could avoid a trip to the 
emergency department. And there’s been great work that’s been 
done, Mr. Speaker, on our emergency department waits. And 
they have additional . . . I am pleased that they have additional 
money, Mr. Speaker, in that part of the budget. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s what we’re doing when it comes to I 
think an issue that has been highlighted. When it comes to 
seniors’ issues, that’s a big part of the new dollars in our 
budget. 
 
I really quickly, Mr. Speaker, want to move to more locally. 
Obviously the impact on the dropping price of oil has not only 
had an impact on the budget, but obviously as well it’s had 
impact on areas that are producing oil, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 
certainly my constituency. It would be one of those areas, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And so we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, businesses that have tried to 
adjust in terms of their spending programs, in terms of their 
employment. We certainly hope that this is not going to be a 
long-term issue, Mr. Speaker, but certainly in this budget there 
is good news when it comes to the Weyburn-Big Muddy 
constituency. There is going to be highway construction, I’m 
pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, some important work that’s going 
to be done on some maintenance on Highway 39 as well as I 
believe Highway 6 north of the Highway 13 junction, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’m very pleased about that. 
 
I’m also pleased that the Highways minister has included 
continued planning for the twinning of Highways 6 and 39. We 
know that this is a longer term proposition, Mr. Speaker, but I 
think where this budget is a difference from previous NDP 

budgets is that, first of all, it’s a growing province with a 
growing number of population and employment, Mr. Speaker, 
something that the NDP didn’t necessarily have to contend 
with, but when they had difficulties in their budgets, what did 
they do? They just stopped everything. They stopped planning, 
they stopped building, they stopped construction, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve taken a different course and I’m pleased to see that that 
money is in place in the Highways budget to continue that 
work. 
 
I’m also pleased to see that the Minister for Advanced 
Education has included over $10 million to hopefully wrap up 
our Southeast Regional College building. This has been a 
tremendous construction project for the city of Weyburn, Mr. 
Speaker. And I think that it’s going to serve the employees and 
the employers and the young people, and frankly people of all 
ages in the Weyburn area for many years to come. And it’s 
really making what was our high school really a much broader, 
larger educational facility for not just the city, but the entire 
region so that there’s a good continuity between the students in 
high school going into post-secondary, whether it be through a 
SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology] program or whether it be some of the university 
classes, Mr. Speaker. I’ve said before that Southeast Regional 
College was, the southeast college was where I did my entire 
first year of university through the University of Regina. So it 
serves not just the trades, not just through SIAST programs and 
other institutions, but obviously there is a university component 
that our young people are able to take advantage of. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that the budget did include 
planning dollars to begin looking at the replacement of the 
Weyburn hospital, something that was built in 1952, Mr. 
Speaker. It has served for many years, Mr. Speaker, but I think 
anybody that has gone through it knows that it is time to start 
the conversation about what a replacement is going to look like. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I just want to thank and I want to 
congratulate obviously all the members of the caucus and the 
treasury board and the cabinet for their deliberations. These are 
never easy decisions that have to be made. I think, you know, I 
think it was former Finance minister Rod Gantefoer that used to 
say that it would be easy if it was between good and bad 
decisions, Mr. Speaker, but they’re all good ideas that come 
forward from the members. 
 
And in closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the Finance 
minister. It’s an honour to know him. It is a privilege to sit next 
to him. Mr. Speaker, it’s a reminder that sometimes I should 
maybe bring an earplug on my right side, Mr. Speaker, 
depending on what it gets like in question period. But I just 
want to put on the record my feelings for him and what he has 
meant for this party, for this caucus, for this province, Mr. 
Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a privilege to work with him 
and it’ll be an honour for me to look back on however short or 
long my time is to be able to count him among my colleagues 
and somebody that I consider a friend. 
 
And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I will most definitely not be 
supporting the amendment put forward by the Finance critic 
opposite, and I will be very pleased and very proud to support 
the budget. Thank you. 
 



6708 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2015 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is an honour to be 
able to stand here to speak to the budget, but prior to me doing 
that I’d like to thank some people. In the back here we don’t 
stand up very often so I’d like to be able to thank my Meewasin 
constituency executive: Brent Penner who’s the president, 
Lynette Weiler who’s the treasurer, Edward Hudson who’s the 
director, Matt Donlevy who’s the VP [vice-president] and also 
my CA, and the secretary is Tim Steuart. These people, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re always there when I want to have some kind of 
an event or even door knocking or whatever. They’re always 
there to help the party. They’re always there to help me and our 
constituency, and to do what they can for the people of 
Meewasin. 
 
I would also like thank the people of Meewasin constituency, 
Mr. Speaker. They’ve given me the honour to be able to stand 
here and be privileged enough to stand in this House and bring 
greetings or whichever to deal with some of the issues with 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank the caucus staff who, every 
time I have questions or need something, they’re always there 
to bring the answers or in some cases tell me I can’t speak about 
something. And you know, I understand that. 
 
I would also like to thank all the ministry staff who, every time 
I get questions from constituency people about various things, 
whether it’s in Health or whether it’s in Highways or whatever, 
they’re always there to find the answers. Whether it’s the 
answer the person wants to hear or not, they get the answers for 
me, and I really appreciate that. 
 
And mostly, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the Minister of 
Finance and his staff for doing a wonderful job of providing us 
with this budget that is balanced and the foresight used in 
developing this balanced budget under the low oil prices. 
Because it’s critical that we maintain some of the things that 
we’re going to do with infrastructure. Infrastructure keeps the 
economy going, and I think it’s critical that it continues. And 
I’ve been told that by many people, that they were extremely 
happy to see us investing in infrastructure. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m at it, I would like to thank some other 
people who have been instrumental and very important to the 
party and to us, that are all going to retire, and we’re going to 
really miss them. Again of course, the MLA from Canora-Pelly 
who has been an inspiration, especially balancing the budget 
under these conditions and all the other budgets that he’s 
balanced. 
 
Also, this woman, Mr. Speaker, from Kelvington-Wadena is 
probably, in my opinion, the most influential woman who has 
ever been a member of the House. This MLA has had foresight 
to move this province forward, not just keep it going steady but 
have the foresight to build this province to what it is today — a 
place to be and not a place to be from. I’m proud of her. 
 
Then there’s the member from Melville-Saltcoats, who I’m 

going to really miss his speeches. But mostly I’m going to be 
happy when he moves out of the office he stole from me with 
the only washroom in that area, as well as punting me out of the 
seat I was in before and moving me to the backbenchers. But 
we will miss him, and I will greatly miss him. 
 
Also there’s another fellow from Moosomin who was probably 
the best Speaker we’ve ever had . . . I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker — 
past Speaker, yes. And another MLA from Estevan, our caucus 
Chair, who I won’t say much about because she walks around 
with that wooden mallet and I don’t want to get hit. And last of 
all, of the ones that I can think of that are retiring, from Wood 
Mountain. I’m still waiting for that ride in that Hornet. I don’t 
know if I’ll ever get it, but it was a pleasure working with him, 
and we’re going to miss him. He’s a great guy. 
 
You know, I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, about the importance of 
infrastructure work. And I attended a conference in Chicago 
several years ago, and the main topic to the conference was 
surviving an economic downturn, which the US [United States] 
2008, 2009 went into quite a tailspin along with a lot of Canada, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Chicago though, they had the foresight to realize that in order to 
keep the economy going, the best thing to do was to borrow 
money and to work on their infrastructure and build their 
infrastructure that was over 100 years old. Like they starting 
redoing all their waterlines, underground waterlines that were 
ready to collapse and they would have had to have been done 
anyway. And then their sewer lines, they worked on all of 
those, replacing those sewer lines. And then they also worked 
on roadwork, which created lots of work and that maintained a 
strong economy for Chicago. It was one of the few cities that 
didn’t go into a recession like most of the cities in the US. 
 
Mr. Speaker, businesses won’t move to a city or to a province 
or state that doesn’t have the infrastructure, the workforce, and 
the facilities that it requires to operate. And Chicago realized 
that, and the foresight of our MLAs on this side, they knew that 
too. And that’s what they’ve been doing; they’ve been creating 
an environment to get investment in here, bring business in,. 
And it shows with all the activity that’s been happening in this 
province for the last seven, eight years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, lastly I would like to thank the most important 
person in my life, my wife Sheila, and my daughter Shanaya 
who’s about to make mom a grandma for the first time, which 
by the way . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, raises the 
population to this province, in my eyes, to 1,132,641, and he is 
truly the one. Since finding out that she was going to be a 
grandma, our house has been turned into a house of ready for 
growth with a baby room completely furnished with crib, baby 
swing, vibrating chair, change tables, strollers. When that baby 
comes over to visit grandma, it’s going to be wearing a T-shirt 
that says, who needs Santa Claus, I’ve got Grandma. Just 
fantastic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I used to come to Regina for the last few 
years, my wife didn’t like it. She just, you know, would say, 
well can’t you wait until tomorrow to go in the morning? And 
I’d say, well I kind of like to go Sunday so I can get things 
done. And now I kind of feel like the pet family dog. It’s okay, 
see you, we’re going shopping. And it’s easy for me to leave, 



March 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6709 

and I’m waiting for my suitcase outside when I go back one of 
these times. But that’s a great thing at home to have another kid 
coming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is about keeping Saskatchewan strong. 
The Finance minister last week tabled the budget, balanced 
budget that will keep Saskatchewan strong by keeping taxes 
low, investing in infrastructure, controlling operating spending, 
and providing new incentives that will help create jobs. The 
2015-16 budget is balanced with a surplus of 107 million. The 
overall revenue is 14.28 billion, up 1.2 per cent, and 
expenditures for the year is 14.17, also up just 1.2 per cent. 
 
Investment in health, education, and social services continues to 
be priorities, accounting for nearly three-quarters of all the 
spending in the 2015-16 budget. The overall spending increase 
in those areas is just under 2 per cent. All other areas will be 
point six per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition, the active families benefit, graduate 
retention program, research and development tax, seniors’ drug 
plan, and Saskatchewan employment are being changed to 
ensure their ongoing sustainability. The strength in the potash 
industry and a change in the potash production tax will help 
offset the 600-plus million decline in oil revenues from last 
year’s budget due to the falling oil price. The total tax reduction 
potash producers receive from their capital spending will now 
be used over a longer period of time. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as a result of controlling operating 
spending, budget 2015 contains no tax increases, no reduction 
in revenue sharing with municipalities, which could have 
contributed to higher taxes at the municipal level. And I’ve 
already been with the mayor of Saskatoon at a board meeting, 
and he was ecstatic to hear that there was no change there. The 
budget 2015-16 provides 265.3 million in revenue sharing, the 
largest grant ever provided to Saskatchewan municipalities, an 
increase of 8.3 million compared to last year, an increase of 138 
million or more than 108 per cent from the 2007-08 budget. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan population grows, so it’s 
infrastructure and capital needs. The budget begins a four-year, 
5.8 billion commitment, the Saskatchewan Builds capital plan, 
to construct and maintain needed infrastructure such as schools, 
health care facilities, municipal infrastructure, roads, bridges, 
and highways. And I know from my days, I’m not exactly that 
young. Most of the guys I went to school with, Saskatoon 
Southeast, I went to school with his younger brother, much 
younger. Most of the guys we went to high school with have 
left the province. Most of the guys that I went into engineering 
technology with, they’re all gone. And when I went to 
university and took business admin, they’re all gone, just about 
all of them. What’s coming back though is their kids, their 
kids’s kids. They’re coming here because there’s work here. So 
it’s great to see. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as Saskatchewan’s population continues to 
grow, you know, we’ll continue to invest in infrastructure to 
make businesses more attracted to coming to Saskatchewan and 
growing the province and continue to grow that growth that we 
have had. 
 
I mean, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the NDP government were 

in power from 1996 to 2006, they cut infrastructure funding and 
they raised taxes. They cut jobs. And that’s when the population 
dropped. That’s where I saw, you know, my few friends that I 
did have even moved away. It’s been sad to see the population 
drop by 28,000 people in that 10-year period. 
 
With that said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the four-year plan provides 
more than 1.3 billion for core infrastructure, the largest 
infrastructure allocation in Saskatchewan history and an 
increase of almost 50 per cent from last year. This investment is 
in addition to 2 billion in capital investment forecast this year 
by the commercial Crown corporations, largely SaskPower, 
SaskTel, and SaskEnergy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is about making choices, and they had 
some tough choices to make. And you know, I was proud of 
some of the choices they had made. I’m glad they’ve done what 
they’ve done to make a balanced budget because when the NDP 
were in power and they faced a tough, challenging budget, you 
know, what did they do? They’d raised taxes. The PST 
[provincial sales tax], they raised it three times, and it was as 
high as 9 per cent, almost double what it is today. They raised 
income tax twice. They raised business taxes four times. That 
doesn’t even count all the education and property taxes, the 
hikes that they had just to make up for the failure in providing 
proper funding for education. 
 
What, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what the NDP also did was they 
stopped investing in infrastructure and closed facilities. I mean, 
our rural guys, they can tell you what it was like to have their 
hospitals closed, you know. They had 52 rural hospitals closed, 
and even in Regina here, they closed the plainsman hospital, 
which was sad. 
 
During that time period as well, 176 schools, mostly in rural 
Saskatchewan . . . Well you want to talk about kill a small town. 
It was crazy. They also closed 1,200 long-term care beds, you 
know. And they always say, well there’s a shortage. Well who 
created that shortage? You know, who closed all the beds? You 
know, and they talk about shortages of doctors. Well when you 
closed all those hospitals, what happened? Well we lost 
1,100-plus health workers — you know, 175 doctors, 455 
nurses, the list goes on. And what was the result? A decade of 
decline under the NDP. 
 
An Hon. Member: — And they don’t care. 
 
Mr. Parent: — And they don’t care, exactly. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this budget creates two new growth tax incentives to 
encourage job creation and capital investment. I like these. 
 
The new manufacturing and processing export tax incentive 
will provide tax credits to eligible exporting corporations that 
increase their number of full-time employees who do work 
typically considered to be head office functions. In addition, 
Mr. Speaker, the traditional manufacturing process sector 
incentive will also apply to corporations involved in the 
commercial development in new economic products, including 
interactive digital and media creative industry products. 
 
The second new tax incentive is a rebate for primary steel 
production, supporting the growth plan commitment to 
encourage new capital investment. The rebate will provide a tax 



6710 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2015 

incentive for eligible primary steel producers that make a 
minimum capital investment of 100 million in new expanding 
productivity. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, health, education, social assistance, social 
service assistance account for 73.2 per cent of our government’s 
expenses. Spending in these areas is forecast at 10.4 billion in 
2015-16, up 1.9 per cent from last year’s budget, an increase of 
67.7 per cent. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, investments in social services and 
assistance will reach 1.2 billion in this budget, an increase of 
3.2 per cent. A record infrastructure investment, more than $3.3 
billion through Saskatchewan Builds capital plan and provides 
Crown corporations . . . will keep Saskatchewan strong. Capital 
projects ranging from investments in power and transmission, 
telecommunications networks to highways, schools, hospitals 
are part of the largest single-year capital commitment in the 
province’s history. 
 
In the budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Saskatchewan Builds 
capital plan commits 1.3 billion to core capital projects, an 
increase of almost 50 per cent over the last year’s capital 
budget. In addition Saskatchewan Crown corporations including 
SaskPower, SaskTel, SaskEnergy are projected to spend 2 
billion on capital projects in 2015-16, matching the previous 
year’s budget from the Crown infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a number of twinning, interchange projects . . . I’d 
like to comment on some. The $23 million for twinning of 
Highway 16 east of Saskatoon to Clavet, that one is one that I 
had been talked to several times by friends of mine that run the 
Prairie Steel plant just south of Clavet. It’s a grain bin 
manufacturing company. They talk about how busy the 
intersection is just prior to Clavet, where they turn off the 
highway to go south, and at the same time, you have the 
highway that turns north to go to the Agrium, the canola solvent 
extraction plant that houses well over 100 people in that facility. 
Then you also have the large trucks that come there and turn in 
that same section. 
 
Our Highways department knew that it was time to do 
something about it because the members opposite didn’t do 
anything about it. And now they’re going to twin the highway 
there, and it’ll make it a lot safer for the people that are (a) the 
kids going by bus to Clavet school and for the workers going to 
the Prairie Steel and to Agrium. 
 
Another one I’d like to talk about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the 
11.4 million for twinning Highway 7 from Saskatoon to Delisle. 
And I know they’re not in my constituency, but a lot of the 
people I know from Saskatoon travel to the two potash mines 
out there, and I’ve got lots of friends that live out in the Pike 
Lake area that come into town. It’s very congested at certain 
times of the day, and it’s going to be really nice to have that 
twinned to make it a lot of safer for all those people that travel 
that road. 
 
And probably this next one, which probably hits other MLAs a 
little more than me but still means a lot to see them done 
because it’s part of that whole road system that’s going to 

happen north of the city, that’s the 7.5 million for the 
interchanges at Warman and Martensville. There’s a lot of 
traffic that goes to the different facilities up in that Corman Park 
industrial area. And I’ve got quite a few friends up in that area 
that have different facilities, whether it’s Q-Line Trucking 
which is a huge trucking company that has a lot of semis that 
travel that area, another one being the various other places up 
there. But the trucking company, it’s going to be a godsend for 
them and for anybody else that’s travelling into that area. 
 
Lastly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the passing lanes, the $1 million 
for passing lanes from Saskatoon to Humboldt. I travel that 
highway once in a while when I’m going back to my old roots, 
which is up the back way up to the Hoey-St. Louis area where I 
originated from. 
 
But with that said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was going to go on 
and on and talk about, you know, where did the NDP invest. 
You can talk about the 26 million they lost on Big Sky Farms or 
the 90.8 million lost on Navigata or the 35 million they lost on 
SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company] or 15 million they lost on Channel Lake, etc., etc. I 
mean there’s two pages of the craziness that they wasted money 
on. 
 
With that said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m going to mention a few 
things on when they ask all the time — and I watch the 
commercial; my wife just can’t stand it — where did the money 
go? In Saskatoon, in the city that I love: 25 million in 
renovations to Holy Cross, 20 million to Willowgrove 
elementary, roughly 20 million to Holy Family School, 6.1 
million to E.D. Feehan, 13.5 million to Georges Vanier School. 
 
The list just goes on and on of all the different, you know . . . 
Two hundred million for the brand new children’s hospital 
which hopefully we never have to use in our family, but with a 
grandson on the way, it’s good to see it happen; you know, 8 
million on renovations to Parkridge Centre. It’s just on and on. 
Seniors, 10 million investment in targeting funding to support 
seniors living in their own homes, and that’s an important one 
especially for me. I might have to access that one some day in 
the very near future. Who knows? 
 
And the highways, the Circle Drive South project, we get 
comments on that one all the time, how nice it is to get around 
Saskatoon with that south bridge. It has taken off so much 
pressure, and you know that’s 98.5 million that we invested in 
that bridge. 
 
With that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could go on and on about 
Saskatoon, all the different stuff that’s happened there. I really 
thank all the different ministries that have invested in Saskatoon 
and helped us get some of this stuff that we do have. And with 
that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with that said, I will be supporting 
the budget and not the NDP amendment. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to start off by thanking the 
citizens of Saskatoon Southeast for their support. 
 



March 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6711 

As most of the members here will know, Saskatoon Southeast 
was one of the largest, by population, constituencies in the 
province, if not the largest, and with redistribution has 
effectively been broken in half. The south portion of the 
constituency is now going to be known as Stonebridge-Dakota. 
 
Last week they had a nominating meeting there and nominated 
Bronwyn Eyre as the Saskatchewan Party candidate for that 
area. A lot of people will know her as a newscaster or as a 
columnist or as somebody with a law degree that hasn’t 
practised. But the reality of it, in very short order, most of the 
people will soon know her as the new MLA for Saskatoon 
Stonebridge-Dakota, and we look forward to having her sitting 
on this side of the House as part of the large mass of people that 
look over the very small group of people on that side. And I 
suspect it’s something that is not going to change, except that 
that group may get smaller yet over time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank a few people as well. In my 
Saskatoon constituency office, I have Gord Rutten working for 
me. He has worked for me for a number of years. He’s the 
former mayor of the city of Martensville and was in fact the 
mayor when Martensville became a city. Very competent, very 
professional, used to be a teacher and is very generous with 
giving his opinions and his thoughts on teachers, and it’s 
opinions that are usually right and very much valued. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my office in this building, I’m blessed with 
some really superb staff members. My chief of staff is Drew 
Dwernychuk, also somebody from Saskatoon. Drew has worked 
for me for a number of years and is one of the brightest, most 
competent, hard-working people, one of the best researchers, 
and is actually a great blessing to have in there. A number of 
people have said to me that he ought to be the minister instead 
of me, and one of the people who have said that is in fact the 
Premier of the province. So perhaps after the next election, 
things may be different. 
 
I have a chief admin person in my office, Jean Watts who has 
looked after my calendar scheduling and a lot of things and has 
been the only admin person as chief admin that I’ve had since 
we formed government. I want to thank her for what she does 
and encourage her to stick around because I’m only going to get 
worse as far as being more forgetful and more confused, and I’ll 
need her more and more as time goes on. 
 
We have a new junior admin, Bailey Salkeld, who is working in 
the office who is turning out to be a quick study, catching on 
very fast and fitting in with the office incredibly well. 
 
I have some ministerial assistants. I have Julie Leggott who is 
from Lanigan, Saskatchewan. She has worked in education for 
quite a number of years, was originally brought in by the 
member from Humboldt, and knows everything there is to 
know about the Ministry of Education: how the funding formula 
works, how everything else works. Her background is from 
Lanigan, which is the next town from where my mother grew 
up, Esk, and I know the two families have had some back and 
forth between the two of them. So I’m not sure whether that 
makes Julie my stepmom or my half-sister, but nepotism aside, 
I’m only too glad to allow her to continue working because 
she’s incredibly confident. 
 

I also have Trent Blezy working there. Trent is the one that 
walks around this building and a lot of people think looks like 
Harry Potter. He is from Storthoaks, Saskatchewan and has a 
great career ahead of him. 
 
I have as well Matthew Glover who has worked for me for a 
number of years, a bright, thoughtful person, married to a 
teacher. The teacher, Justine, that he is married to is very direct 
and also equally generous with her opinions about teaching and 
the education system. She regularly passes her opinions on to 
her husband, Matthew, who shares them with me in a most 
vigorous manner and probably in a very good way. So thanks to 
all of those people who have been very good to me and very 
good to work with for the last while. 
 
I’ve also had some changes in the Education ministry. I want to 
use this opportunity to thank the former deputy minister, Dan 
Florizone, who is now the CEO at the Saskatoon Health 
Region, a very bright, hard-working person, thoughtful, sees the 
big picture, and is somebody that is a true team and consensus 
builder. So I would say to the people in Saskatoon Health 
Region, use this as an opportunity for learning and moving 
forward because I hope he stays there for a while because they 
will do very well under his guidance and direction. 
 
The ADM [assistant deputy minister] is a person named Greg 
Miller who has been there for a number of years and has got a 
true, deep understanding, somebody that has started as a teacher 
and moved up within the system and has got a strong 
understanding of First Nations and of the issues that we deal 
with and is somebody that is sort of the backbone and is the 
corporate memory of the system. 
 
We have a new deputy minister, Julie MacRae, who is 
somebody that thought she was going to be retiring from 
Regina Public School Division. We now have her as the new 
deputy minister, and I’m confident that she is going to do 
incredibly well. She seems to be showing a quick insight and 
likes to send me emails late at night with her commentary on 
this, that, the other, comments on how well I’m doing in the 
House or not doing in the House, as the case may be. Anyway, 
a good person and I’m sure will continue the direction that Dan 
Florizone had left. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my constituency, we have some changes that 
have taken place. We have new schools that are announced in 
both Rosewood and Stonebridge. These are going to be some of 
the new P3 [public-private partnership] schools, and that 
planning process is well under way. You’ll hear from some of 
the other members who will talk more about that later on as we 
go through the process. We’re looking forward to that process 
being completed. The schools are scheduled to open in fall of 
2017, and construction should start later this year. These 
projects are under way. So I am pleased that that’s taking place 
in both of these constituencies. I know they’re going on 
elsewhere, but today is the time I want to talk a little bit about 
what’s going on in my own constituency and the constituency I 
held before. 
 
I also would like to point out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are 
going ahead with the twinning of the Highway 16 between 
Saskatoon and Clavet. This is an area, a high-traffic area, a lot 
of daily commuters, and a growing number of businesses that 



6712 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2015 

are along that route, so I am pleased to see that that’s taking 
place. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to just, on a personal note, 
thank a little bit on my family. My mother lives at Luther 
Riverside Terrace, and I frequently mention her when I speak in 
the House. She’s now 93 years old. The home that she lives in 
is one that’s actually in the constituency of Saskatoon Nutana. 
My mother reports to me periodically that the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana comes over there, visits people, and does 
what MLAs are supposed to do. So when my mother reports to 
me what the member for Saskatoon Nutana does, I have to go 
over there and sometimes make two and three trips to undo the 
damage and the mischief that she’s created over there. But I 
want to say to the member for Saskatoon Nutana, I’m going to 
keep on doing that and keep those folks over there because 
they’re great people over there, but I will keep them in line. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to thank my wife, Sandy, who 
has been a really great partner and has been really good to me 
as an MLA and enjoys going door knocking. She’s not to the 
point yet where she calls door knocking a date night, but we 
will continue to do that. 
 
I would like to share with you briefly a little bit about the 2003 
election. It was an election I didn’t know who was going to win. 
Nobody knew ahead of time where it was going to go. The 
election, as it got closer and closer, got increasingly tight, so 
there was a lot of tension going on. I would come home, and I 
would have gone through the door knocking. And then after we 
were going through the process, it was getting closer, I would 
be caught up with the whole process. She worked at Robertson 
Stromberg, which by coincidence was where Frank Quennell 
worked. Frank Quennell, as you’re aware, became the member 
for Saskatoon Meewasin after that election. And I knew that she 
had had enough of electioneering when she came home one day 
and she said, I can’t stand this anymore. I listen to Frank all day 
at work coming in, and I listen to you all night, and I’m not 
listening to either of you anymore. In any event, we reached an 
understanding, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we didn’t talk about 
politics over suppertime, although we could of course 
immediately afterwards when we were going out door 
knocking. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank her for her ongoing commitment 
to me and to being a strongly supportive spouse. So it’s one of 
the things that we do, you can’t do without good support from 
family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the budget, why I’ll 
be supporting the budget, why I won’t be supporting the 
amendment, and why I think the members opposite ought to 
support the budget as well. This year’s budget controls 
spending while maintaining important investments in our 
people and our infrastructure, which is very important for 
education as it means investments in our students and our 
schools. 
 
As a government, even when faced with challenging fiscal 
circumstances, it is our responsibility to ensure that the 
education system is well supported and that students continue to 

be a priority. Investment in our students not only prepares them 
for a successful future, but it also helps to build a strong future 
for our province. By continuing to put the student first, these 
investments will also help us reach the goals set in the 
Saskatchewan plan for growth through our priorities in the 
sector plan, as we work to improve graduation rates and the 
outcomes for our students. 
 
That is why this year’s budget continues to make students a 
priority by investing in pre-K to 12 [pre-kindergarten to grade 
12] education, early years, libraries, literacy, and 
community-based organizations. The overall operating budget 
for school divisions is now $1.87 billion — that’s billion with a 
“b” — an increase of 2.9 per cent over last year. This includes a 
$52.8 million increase in operating funding in 2015-16, and is 
an average of 4.5 per cent per school division. 
 
Government continues to maintain the balance of operating 
grant to education property tax at 65/35. We may in the future 
seek to rebalance back to around 60/40, but for now there is no 
change. We will also begin consultations and reviewing 
requirements for the collection of the education property taxes 
centrally. I’m very pleased to say this year that no school 
division will see less dollars this year than they did last year. 
 
There is also funding to cover the collective bargaining 
agreement increases. We are continuing to provide the $4.6 
million in supports for learning that was added mid-year last 
year. There is also $6 million to continue to implement the 
recommendations of the joint task force. As well, we are 
continuing transition funding for the school divisions that 
would have experienced decreases through the new funding 
model. We know some divisions still have concerns with the 
funding model, and we are committed to working through those 
challenges. 
 
This year’s budget includes $248.5 million in school capital 
funding, the largest budget day capital education ever, ever for 
education. While there are no new projects outside a small 
project in Hague, all previously announced capital projects are 
continuing. This is an increase, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of $152.3 
million, or more than 158 per cent over 2014-15. 
 
Included in the school capital funding this year is 157.5 million, 
which includes both construction and technical costs, to begin 
work on the 18 new schools, nine joint-use facilities in 
Warman, Martensville, Saskatoon, and Regina. These are areas 
that have experienced extraordinary growth over the past 
number of years. This investment will help to meet the demands 
of that growth. Construction will begin this fall, and the schools 
are scheduled to open in fall 2017. These projects are well into 
the planning stage and on track to meet our target date. 
 
The remaining capital of $91 million will advance existing 
projects, including $47.8 million, a $3.6 million increase, to 
begin construction for Connaught elementary in Regina, Sacred 
Heart in Regina, and also in St. Brieux, as well as funding to 
complete eight other projects started in previous years: 
Langenburg, Gravelbourg, Hudson Bay, Martensville High 
School, Weyburn, Georges Vanier in Saskatoon, St. Matthew in 
Saskatoon, and Saskatoon Holy Cross High School; $31.6 
million, a 32 per cent or $7.6 million increase, for school 
preventive and emergency maintenance; $10.6 million, a $3.7 



March 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6713 

million increase, for up to 31 new relocatable classrooms 
throughout the province. 
 
Traditional school capital funding also includes $12.9 million as 
a result of changes to the way we fund capital projects. 
Government will also assume 100 per cent funding for major 
capital investments. This change was made at the request of 
school divisions and will take effect as of April 1st, 2015. With 
this change, school divisions will no longer be required to 
borrow for their share of capital projects. This will mean less 
administrative work for school divisions and overall savings, at 
least $25 million over 20 years, for the education sector on 
interest cost. This brings the Government of Saskatchewan’s 
overall investment in school infrastructure since November 
2007 to nearly $1 billion, approximately $948 million, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are also investing $66 million in early 
years, which will provide a 1 per cent increase in CBO 
[community-based organization] funding including child care 
centres, to support recruitment and retention of early childhood 
educators. This includes $2.14 million increase in operating 
funding for ongoing costs of recently developed child care 
spaces. This also brings the number of licensed child care 
spaces in our province to more than 14,200, an increase of 
4,935 or 53 per cent since 2007. 
 
In addition to these spaces, we’ve also committed that a 
90-space child care centre will be part of each of the new nine 
joint-use schools. That’s a commitment of 810 additional child 
care spaces for these communities when these schools open in 
fall of 2017. 
 
In addition to this funding, we’ve also provided $546,000 more 
to school divisions to support recently developed pre-K 
programs. Since 2007 we have more than doubled the number 
of pre-K programs in the province from 155 to 316. 
 
While the drop in the price of oil this year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
has made this a more difficult budget year, thanks to a diverse 
and resilient economy and our ability to manage spending, our 
province is in a good position to weather these challenges. 
Without question this budget reinforces our government’s 
commitment to education and to putting the student first. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting this budget. I will be voting 
against the amendment. I want to encourage the members 
opposite to look carefully at the things that are in this budget. I 
want to point out to them some of the things that were in 
previous budgets that they chose not to support because we’re 
going to be reminding the voters in their constituency. 
 
To the member for Athabasca who is sitting over there, Mr. 
Speaker, he should note that what he did not support in a 
previous budget was the $4 million that went to a brand new 
school in Turnor Lake. Mr. Speaker, to the member from 
Athabasca, I would say this: you go and apologize to the people 
of your constituency for not supporting it. We supported it here. 
They didn’t support it over there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the member from Cumberland I would say this. 
He didn’t support a budget that contained a $30 million 
renovation at Churchill High School in La Ronge, something he 

opposed, something he didn’t support on budget day, something 
we will remind the people of La Ronge what took place. 
 
To the member for Saskatoon Nutana, $14 million went to 
Nutana Collegiate for renovations, renovations that were 
needed back in the time when I was on the board. Those 
renovations are now complete. We will be reminding the people 
in that constituency that she did not support the budget that 
contained that. 
 
The member for Regina Elphinstone-Centre, two replacement 
schools, Sacred Heart and Seven Stones. Mr. Speaker, I would 
say to him, because some of that money is coming out of this 
year’s budget, I would say to the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre, vote for this, so at least he can tell the 
people that he supported this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member for Regina Lakeview — not running 
again and I’m not surprised why — did not support Connaught 
Community School replacement. Mr. Speaker, we’re going to 
remind the people that the people over there did not support, did 
not vote for those things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member for Saskatoon Riversdale, $16 million 
state-of-the-art facility at St. Mary’s school. I’ve been in that 
school. It’s a great facility serving the community as well. To 
her I would say this, I would say this. She ought to go to that 
school and say, I’m sorry I didn’t support this. I will support 
this budget even though I didn’t support it last year. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member for Saskatoon Centre, $6 
million renovations to E.D. Feehan school. He did not support 
that, did not support it. What he needs to do is go over to E.D. 
Feehan school, ask to meet with the principal, ask to meet with 
the parents and say, I’m sorry I didn’t support this. I realize 
now I was wrong. He ought to apologize to those people 
because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will be reminding those 
people and we will be reminding them carefully who voted 
which way. And we will bring it to a head and we will tell the 
people they have a chance to vote. He didn’t vote for it. They 
won’t be voting for him, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to point out the deputy leader, 
the member for Regina Rosemont, received new child care 
spaces. Do you know where they are? In the same building as 
his constituency office. They’re under construction now. He 
ought to go down when they have an opening and say, I’m sorry 
I didn’t support this. Please vote for me anyway. Well they’re 
not going to. They’re going to be voting against him. 
 
And you know, another one, another one over there, the Leader 
of the Opposition, a brand new joint-use school in Hampton 
Village, not under construction yet. He still has a chance to 
support this budget and support the things that are going to be 
helping his constituents. If he doesn’t, we’re going to be 
reminding those people, he didn’t vote for it; you ought not vote 
for him. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t have anything else that I want to 
say, other than we’re going to be reminding people what their 
record is on voting, what their record was before 2007. We’re 
moving the province forward. They’re taking the province 
backward. We’re not going to let them drive back. Thank you 



6714 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2015 

very much, Mr. Speaker. I will not be supporting the 
amendment. I will be supporting the budget. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. “Dad, what is math? 
I don’t know, son. I’m a socialist.” I like that. It’s a quote off 
Facebook I read the other night. 
 
I would like to start my speech in the traditional way by 
thanking my two CAs in Melfort, my constituency association’s 
Peggy Gordon and Debbie Perkins. These people are valuable 
to my office but more importantly they’re valuable to the 
constituency of Melfort. These people, when people come in 
with their problems, they care about them. They empathize with 
them and they work very, very hard to make solutions happen. 
 
I see that our Minister of Education kind of stirred the pot on 
the last speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But I wanted to thank all 
the people in the Melfort constituency because wherever I go in 
the constituency from LeRoy to Quill Lake to Melfort, Star 
City, I feel so welcome. They have taken me in. And not all of 
them voted for me; the vast majority did but not all of them, and 
yet those people have also made me feel welcome in their 
community, so I thank them all for that. 
 
[16:15] 
 
When I talk what I’m going to talk about today, I’m going to 
talk about the budget. I’m going to talk about my wife. I’m 
going to talk about attitude, and I’m going to talk maybe a little 
bit about the member from Athabasca because it’s fun. I’m 
going to talk about the Riders, and I’m going to talk about my 
mother. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m afraid you may have to settle 
in for a while. 
 
First and foremost I want to talk a little bit about, and I wanted 
to thank, the Minister of Finance. I have followed this person’s 
career for longer than I would like to remember. But through 
Kinsmen, through the SSTA [Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association], and through the Legislative Assembly, he has 
been a leader in every part of those organizations all through his 
life, and I thank him very much for the last 20 years of service 
to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And when we talk about the budget, we talk about $14.2 billion. 
I’m sorry, but that’s a big number. That’s more than I can really 
get my head around. So what I want to talk about, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is I want to talk about what we have done for the 
people of Saskatchewan, for the Saskatchewan families since 
we’ve been in power. And the first thing we’ve done is we’ve 
allowed them to keep more of their money, whether it be 2,000, 
3,000, $4,000 or more of their own money in their pocket with 
our tax reductions. 
 
We’ve cut education tax which will be coming out, has been 
coming out, by 40 per cent. That’s even more money into the 
average family’s pocket. We have new schools for their 
children to attend, elementary schools. I notice a quote from the 
mayor of Saskatoon, who I respect very much, but he said, you 
know, it’s nice to see a government that will announce a school 
and then go and build it. And that’s something that, again 

moving away from it’s something that wasn’t happening in the 
past. 
 
We have enhanced maintenance for all the rest of the school 
divisions to look after the schools because we’re on a repair 
program too. We have to keep these schools going because we 
have a growing population. We have 16 years of neglect by the 
party opposite. 
 
We have a new savings plan to encourage and reward the 
families in Saskatchewan that are saving for their children’s 
education, further education, whether it be a tech school or 
whether it be university: new grants of $500 per year for up to 
four years for when their children leave high school and go into 
university or tech schools, a non-refundable tax credit of 3,000 
to a maximum of $20,000 for graduates from tech schools and 
universities who stay in the province of Saskatchewan. These 
are all new programs from the Saskatchewan Party government. 
 
Then you drive by the University of Saskatchewan and you see 
the big new dorms going up, inviting dorms that’s going to help 
the people of rural Saskatchewan who move in to go to 
university. And it will help people who it’s just time to leave 
the house and get off on their own. 
 
We have research programs that will ensure your children have 
a bright future right here in Saskatchewan. Our people in 
Saskatchewan, they work hard and they also play hard. They go 
to provincial parks, and we’ve spent over $40 million 
improving those parks for Saskatchewan people, and they’re 
used in record amounts. And when they go there, what they do 
is they drive on improved roads. They drive on repaved roads, 
reconstructed roads, or on sometimes absolutely new roads. The 
people who are leaving Saskatoon to go up to Emma Lake and 
Candle Lake and La Ronge and up there, they’re driving on 
brand new, four-lane paved highway from Saskatoon to Regina. 
 
We have safer highways. We have the four lanes. We have the 
passing lanes on 7 and on 10. We’ve got interchanges, new 
interchanges going up, the Regina bypass. These are things that 
people care about. These are things that happens and people use 
on a day-to-day base. 
 
We put more money into health care and senior care resulting in 
2,600, 2,600 new nurses and 400 new doctors, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. That’s good for Saskatchewan. That’s good for 
Saskatchewan people. New hospitals that are actually being 
built. It’s not one of these ones I’m going to announce it this 
year, I’m going to announce it next year, and for the next 10 
years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m just going to keep announcing 
it because without an economy, there’s nothing you can do. 
And better programs for some of the disadvantaged and the 
people who have challenges in Saskatchewan like Transition 
House, people who are at their most vulnerable in 
Saskatchewan, and like the SAID [Saskatchewan assured 
income for disability] program, people who face far more 
challenges than we do. 
 
You know there’s a flood relief program that relieved most — 
and I repeat, most — of the challenges that people have faced 
from flooding in the last three or four or five years. Yes, we 
have some problems out there, and we’re working on them, but 
most of the challenges . . . And I could go on and on and on. In 



March 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6715 

fact I think I will. 
 
But I’m going to leave the budget just for a couple minutes and, 
in the sake of time, I’ll move along. But you can see how every 
man, woman, and child in this province has benefited from the 
policies of this government, including the 114,000 people who 
now pay zero income tax in the province. 
 
Now many of the members may wonder why it has taken so 
long for me to talk about my wife. That is because she’s one of 
the thousands in this province that not only showed leadership 
at a city council meeting, but she shows leadership on a 
day-to-day base. She has a great attitude that is reminiscent of 
so many thousands of Saskatchewan people. 
 
And on November 5th last year, just last November, I was out 
with the Special Olympics soccer team. And I had tore my 
Achilles tendon that night. I had the operation to put it back 
together on Saturday, November 8th. But I remember Thursday, 
November 13th and I had kind of an NDP kind of day where I 
felt the whole world was against me. I was whining. I was 
snivelling. I was complaining. And April, bless her heart, she 
came over to me and she sat down beside me. She took my 
hand, and she says, Kevin, do you really think this is helping? I 
was maybe looking for a little more sympathy than that. But it’s 
true. It wasn’t helping at all. It was just beating me up more. 
 
And I looked at it and I said, okay. I got hurt on Taylor Field. I 
was helped off Taylor Field by Luc Mullinder, a Rider or 
ex-Rider now. I have pictures of that. I looked at it as a 
challenge. I looked at it as an education and as an experience, 
and it made life a whole lot easier. It was still hard and it was 
painful on a day in, day out, but it’s an attitude that I carried 
because of the simple words, Kevin, do you really think this 
helps? To April I would like to say, thank you for all you do, 
and I love you for all you are. 
 
But attitude is a great attribute for any person or really any 
province. Let’s move to the Saskatchewan Roughriders. Last 
week Rider President Jim Hopson retired and it was an end of a 
. . . And there were a lot of interviews that talked to Jim about 
it. And one of the interviews that stuck out was an early one, ten 
years ago, where Jim Hopson said the first thing he had to do 
was to change the culture of the team. Change it from an 
atmosphere of mediocrity, from a team that was satisfied with a 
nine and nine season to a team that was only satisfied by a Grey 
Cup. Changing the culture, that’s leadership. That’s what Jim 
Hopson did with the Saskatchewan Roughriders, and that’s why 
all of us who bleed green say thank you to Jim Hopson. 
 
But it’s leadership like this that we see every day. We see it 
here in the chambers, and we see it all across the province from 
the Premier of Saskatchewan. The Premier recognizes that it’s 
the people of Saskatchewan that made this economy what it is. 
He had to change the culture of Saskatchewan after the province 
had been brutalized by 16 years of continuous NDP 
government. You see, what had to be done was to create an 
atmosphere of growth, an atmosphere of prosperity, and an 
environment where business is welcome. The people of 
Saskatchewan have made this happen and through . . . It’s 
happened because of the leadership of our Premier that changed 
the culture. 
 

I want to read a quote. And this is something that doesn’t 
happen a whole lot in the Chamber, but I want to read a quote 
by Murray Mandryk of the Leader-Post here. A couple weeks 
ago Murray was talking about how Premier Brad Wall, and this 
is a quote from the sheet, “. . . needs . . . to hire a few 
consultants who could teach him how to sell bad news.” That 
was the quote. Now what he goes into, and the quote I’m going 
to read: 
 

Ironically, two of the best in the province were likely his 
NDP predecessors — former premiers Lorne Calvert and, 
especially, Roy Romanow. Heck, even when times were 
tickety-boo, these two could make Saskatchewan people 
feel like they were on the eve of destruction. 

 
Whether it was shutting down hospitals, stopping nurse 
training or demanding changes to equalization formula to 
exclude natural resource revenues so that Saskatchewan 
would be forever considered a have-not province, the NDP 
were clearly masters of accentuating the negative as a 
means of lowering voters’ expectations. 

 
Isn’t that the kind of leadership that every person in this 
province wants? Somebody who will nail you everyday, knock 
you down, and you have to pick yourself up every morning. 
That’s leadership that they have on the other side. 
 
But let’s go back to the Roughriders. And I have a little bit of 
my mother in me that really thinks about numbers and why 
things happen the way they do. Forty-seven years, forty-seven 
years of CCF-NDP [Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation-New Democratic Party ] government in the last 70 
years in Saskatchewan. Forty-seven out of 70 years. How many 
Grey Cups were won by the Saskatchewan Roughriders during 
those 47 years? 
 
An Hon. Member: — How many? 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Zero. There wasn’t one. Twenty-four years of 
non-NDP government, how many Grey Cups were won? 
 
An Hon. Member: — How many? 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Four. Four, and that’s a fact. It’s right from the 
archives. I had to look at the archives for both the legislature 
and the archives for the CFL and compare the two. And if you 
look closer at these archives, you will see that there has been 95 
years of CCF-NDP government in provinces that have a CFL 
football team — 95 years. 
 
The archives also show that only the 1998 Winnipeg Blue 
Bombers were able to beat the NDP jinx in Manitoba. And the 
same archives also show that — and I do know what happened 
— in spite of the fact that there are three CFL teams in Ontario, 
only the 1991 Toronto Argonauts were able to win the Grey 
Cup. BC [British Columbia] and Saskatchewan, how many? 
Zero, zip, nada. Now is it just a fluke, just two-thirds of an 
opportunity for 47 years? Can we say that that was just a fluke? 
The archives show it all, the percentages: the Grey Cup 
champions in 47 years; the percentage of NDP leadership, 0.00; 
non-NDP government, 16.6 per cent; and Saskatchewan Party 
government, 25 per cent. Is that a fluke? 
 



6716 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2015 

Across Canada, in provinces with CFL teams, 95 years and two 
Grey Cups, 2.1 per cent average — 2.1 per cent. Why does this 
happen? Why would that be? You know, seriously it happens 
because of the attitude. That’s how it happens because when 
you come from a winning province, you win. That’s how it 
happens. And you can put that in the archives. So I would 
suggest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that if you bleed green, you 
should vote Saskatchewan Party green. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, turning to a little more serious note, I have spent 
too much time in hospitals lately, whether it be for my leg or 
visiting. And there was one moment a couple of weeks ago that 
I found really fascinating. I went down to the cafeteria for a cup 
of coffee, and I was sitting there and I noticed five nurses were 
sitting at a table close to me having a coffee break. And these 
health care professionals were sitting there and they were 
laughing and they were joking and they were just having a 
really good break — what you would hope that people would 
do on their break. Then I noticed another nurse walk in looking 
a little bit, and I would probably . . . That might be an 
exaggeration that she was a little more than a little bit grouchy. 
And she joined these five nurses who were enjoying their break, 
and within one or maybe two minutes, the laughing was gone, 
the joyousness was gone, they weren’t giving each other a bad 
time. But luckily within five minutes the other five people who 
she joined were also gone. And I watched them leave, and they 
gave a respectful 15 feet between the table and where they were 
leaving before they started to laugh and to joke and to enjoy 
themselves again. It’s attitude, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It really is. 
 
I think I have gone on far enough that maybe I’ll leave the 
member from Athabasca out this time. I’ll make sure I mention 
him next fall. 
 
But I do want to talk just a little bit about the windfall revenue 
that the NDP Opposition Leader talks about, the windfall 
revenue for the people of Saskatchewan. Don’t forget, it’s the 
people of Saskatchewan’s economy. It’s not us. It’s them that 
are working, them that are excited, and them that are building a 
province. But again that slights the people of Saskatchewan 
because what would make the revenue windfall? To me, if you 
have windfall, you’re walking down the street and a whole bag 
of money lands on you, because windfall means you didn’t 
deserve it. That’s what windfall means. That’s what the NDP 
are still talking about. They’re still telling us that the people of 
Saskatchewan don’t deserve the revenue that they have in the 
province. That’s what they say about our people. 
 
And I’m sorry, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I don’t know if they think 
that $50 a barrel for a price of oil is right. I think if they do, 
they’re the only ones. Potash isn’t at huge dollars today. Wheat 
and grains, we’ve had a decent year but not a great year. What 
would make the NDP think that they’re windfall revenues? He 
mentioned that on both March 12th and March 13th in this 
House, you know, and it’s, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s attitude. 
And last week twice I heard the line, the government is asking 
Saskatchewan families to pay more for less. My answer is, how 
dare they? How dare they insult the intelligence of the people of 
Saskatchewan once again? How can you say pay more when 
you have raised taxes 17 times, including three PST times, two 
income tax times? They raised business taxes. They did 

absolutely nothing about the education tax when they were 
paying 38 per cent of the budget. We’re now, we’re paying 62 
per cent of the budget. 
 
How could they say that they get less, when they closed 52 
hospitals? They closed 176 schools. They closed 19 long-term 
facilities with 1,200 beds for our senior citizens. They drove out 
teachers, they drove out doctors, they drove out nurses. They 
drove out 28,000 Saskatchewan residents. Winston Churchill 
said, and I read this for the first time the other night, I contend 
. . . And the quote is, “I contend that for a nation to tax itself 
into prosperity is like a man standing in a bucket and trying to 
lift himself up by the handle.” That’s what they believe. That’s 
what they think. The masters of asking people for more money, 
more taxes for less services. 
 
And while I’m on pet peeves, I want to say a couple of words 
about their talking point for two years now for the Opposition 
Leader, talking about 19 Japanese words in the lean vocabulary. 
Two years of talking about 19 words. Kaizen means to try to do 
one thing better, make one small improvement every day. 
That’s what kaizen means. Is that hard to understand? How do 
these people opposite ask for sushi? How do they ask for 
poutine? Give me some of those potato things where there’s, 
you know, some cheese curds and gravy. Like, just say poutine 
and forget where it comes from. There are thousands of words 
in our language that come from languages all across the world. 
Don’t you think Saskatchewan people can figure out 19 
Japanese words? You might not be able to, but trust me, they 
can. Have we made mistakes? Yes, we have probably made 
some mistakes. But you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have 
made those mistakes going forward, not standing still and 
certainly not going backwards. 
 
I feel, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I got all that out of my system. 
And I know it’s very disappointing, and the member from 
Athabasca wanted so much for me to talk about him, but I am 
going to say a few words about my mother. I have mentioned 
her before and how she was intelligent, determined, and 
possibly a little stubborn and a little headstrong. She passed 
away on Sunday. And I’d like to tell you a short story, a story 
that my dad used to tell. 
 
When I was a kid, we spent some time up at Waskesiu. And we 
used to go down and we used to look at the bears. Remember 
when we used to do that? You know, you could go down to the 
garbage dump, and there would be the bears, and you could 
watch them. Mom and dad drove up, sitting in the car, and dad 
said, I’m going to go out and take a picture of them. There’s 
quite a few of them today and I want to. Mom says, don’t do 
that, Wes. You know, you can get out there and you can be 
taking a picture and a bear can come out from over there, and 
it’s between you and the car. And he said, I’ll go out. I’ll take 
the picture, and I’ll be right back. You know, there’s nothing 
. . . So he goes out, takes a picture, turns around, and in the 
exact spot that mom had pointed out that a bear could come 
from, a bear came from. So there was a bear, and dad says, well 
I went back to the car. He started going back to the car. And I 
looked in the car and I saw mom. And I looked at the bear. And 
I looked at the car and saw mom. And I looked at the bear. And 
he said, you know, I thought I might have a better chance with 
the bear. 
 



March 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6717 

I would like to think that I showed a little bit of mom in my 
speech today. She was a loving mother, grandmother, 
great-grandmother, and someone we will dearly miss. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the reasons that I’ve stated in my 
speech this afternoon and for many, many other reasons, I will 
be supporting the budget motion and I will definitely not be 
supporting the opposition amendment. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
Mr. Norris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I’m delighted to be able to join in this debate and dialogue 
especially as it relates to our budget. Like others, I’d be remiss 
if I didn’t begin by recognizing and offering my sincere 
appreciation to the people of Saskatoon Greystone. It has been a 
remarkable journey, a journey started well in advance of the 
November 2007 election, and a journey that has allowed me 
into many people’s homes. It’s allowed me the opportunity and 
afforded me the opportunity to hear many stories and to share a 
far greater understanding of the promise of so many families 
but also the struggles of so many families. We know how 
important that is, and it’s today where I stand in what will be 
my last budget speech and I offer my sincere thanks for the trust 
that the people of Saskatoon Greystone have bestowed upon 
me. 
 
This past Sunday, I had an opportunity to sit down with a 
constituent over on Potter Crescent, and to sit down and talk 
about some public policy, both past and future, to talk about 
reasonable expectations of government, and to talk about 
aspirations for families, especially as we think about our future, 
our shared future. 
 
So in addition to offering my sincere thanks to all of the people 
of Saskatoon Greystone, I’d like to specifically mention Katie 
who runs the office just off 8th Street and who helps so many 
people in so many ways. In fact often they’ll report to me that 
they appreciate working with Katie and she’s far more effective 
and efficient at getting things done than probably the MLA is. 
 
I’d also like to thank so many who have helped to make this 
journey a remarkable one. And I can think about all those who 
have worked in various ministerial offices with me as 
colleagues and various Crown corporations and a variety of 
other institutions and organizations right across the province 
that I’ve had the privilege of working to serve and working in 
collaboration, in partnership. 
 
I’ve benefited specifically from some very, very talented and 
unique individuals, deputy ministers: Wynne Young and Clare 
Isman, and most recently from Louise over in Advanced 
Education. 
 
I’ve benefited from terrific chiefs of staff: Mary 
Donlevy-Konkin and more recently Shelly. Some will say 
there’s something of interest there, unique to this government 
— only female deputy ministers and only female chiefs of staff. 
And that would probably, many would say, help to account for 
what was able to be done. And when their mistakes were made, 
it was probably because I wasn’t listening close enough. And so 

I’m very, very honoured to have worked with such esteemed 
and talented and hard-working colleagues. 
 
I’d like to thank as well so many who work in this building, 
often without recognition, whether it’s in this very Chamber 
within the Assembly and right across the building, to help 
ensure that we’re able to do our work and focus on the needs of 
our constituents in the interests of the province. 
 
[16:45] 
 
To get to where we are individually but also collaboratively, 
collectively, there are a number of volunteers that we all rely 
on. And I want to thank all of those individuals from Saskatoon 
Greystone, from our association, or now associations. 
Importantly Saskatoon Greystone like a few other ridings is 
actually being divided up, so about 70 per cent will become 
what is now Churchill-Wildwood and about 30 per cent will fit 
into the Saskatoon-University riding. And so as we see the 
evolution of the riding, it’s an opportunity to offer my sincere 
thanks to all of those who have worked so hard to ensure that 
we remain connected to and attentive to the needs, the wishes, 
and the dreams of people of Saskatoon Greystone and now the 
new ridings. 
 
To all the members of my family, I want to say a special and 
sincere thank you, and most especially to my daughter, to 
Jacqueline. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we offer our sincere thanks to friends 
and family and to others, we can cast back in time to the first 
premier in the earlier opening stages and phases of this province 
when the notion of Saskatchewan was a bold ideal. In fact a 
boldness reflected in a key conversation some would suggest 
may be apocryphal, but in fact the roots are legitimate. They are 
real. A conversation between the first premier, Walter Scott, 
and the first president of the University of Saskatchewan, 
Walter Murray . . . Walter Murray came from a well-established 
university on the East Coast, and he arrived and asked a simple 
question of the premier, and that is, why should I stay? Why 
should I stay? And the first premier, Walter Scott, offered, 
because this is a big land for big people with big ideas, or words 
similar and to that effect. 
 
And when we think about this budget, we can think about the 
significance of it being a balanced budget that will keep 
Saskatchewan strong, the first premise being Saskatchewan 
today is strong and thriving, Saskatchewan today where we see 
a budget that keeps taxes low, where we see significant 
investments in infrastructure. At the same time there’s a sense 
of prudence, controlling operating spending while at the same 
time focusing on opportunities that will help spur on additional 
growth, growth not for its own sake but because we understand 
a strong economy helps to ensure that investments can be made 
for families and communities, those investments that make a 
real difference in people’s lives. 
 
Investments in health care and education and social services 
continue to be key priorities for this government, in fact 
accounting for nearly three-quarters of all spending in this 
budget and an overall spending increase in these key areas of 
just under 2 per cent. 
 



6718 Saskatchewan Hansard March 24, 2015 

And in other areas of government, when we combine those 
initiatives and endeavours, we see a budget that actually offers 
point six per cent less this year. That reflects a sense of balance. 
It reflects some of the challenges, externally imposed 
challenges that our Minister of Finance, our government, and 
our Premier have had to grapple with. 
 
And I’d like to take a moment just to say how much, like so 
many of us on this side, I have appreciated the opportunity to 
work with and learn from our Minister of Finance. He’s a 
professional. He’s a great friend. He’s a mentor. And he’s also 
brought a sense of cheer to the task of his work, and for that this 
province will forever benefit from those efforts and the efforts 
of all the treasury board. 
 
I’d like to highlight just a couple of interesting initiatives that 
are in place to help foster and facilitate growth because they’re 
worthy of mention. In addition to the investments, we can think 
of the manufacturing and processing exporter tax incentive, an 
incentive to help spur on, in this case provide tax credits to 
eligible exporting corporations that increase their number of 
full-time employees who do work typically considered to be 
head office functions. And in addition to the traditional 
manufacturing and processing sector, the incentive will also 
apply to corporations involved in commercial development of 
new economy products including interactive digital media and 
creative industry products. That is a response to listening to 
some of the ideas and initiatives in our innovation sector, and I 
applaud those that have stood up and put those forward. 
 
I also want to highlight a second new tax incentive which is a 
rebate for primary steel production. Like so many, I’ve sat 
down with some of the steel manufacturers. I’ve sat down and 
listened, much like our Minister of Justice, the MLA from 
Meewasin, and others, and said, are there some steps that can be 
taken? And this budget offers a tangible example, obviously 
more to do and certainly more conversations to be had, but a 
tangible example of us attempting to work with that sector. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit about what we 
can do regarding infrastructure because we know that 
infrastructure is essential to help us continue on this path of 
growth. In this budget, the Saskatchewan Builds capital plan 
commits $1.3 billion to core capital projects, an increase of 
almost 50 per cent over last year’s capital budget. In addition to 
this, Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations including SaskPower, 
SaskTel, and SaskEnergy are projected to spend $2 billion on 
capital projects this year, matching the previous year’s budget 
for Crown infrastructure. When we think about these combined, 
it’s obvious that again that big land for big people with big 
ideas continues to inform the work that is under way. 
Saskatchewan: a land full of growing communities, a growing 
economy that requires increased investment within 
infrastructure. 
 
There are a number of examples that we can continue to point 
to, but what’s most important here is that when we think about 
Saskatchewan Builds capital plan, there’s a commitment of 
more than $580 million to transportation infrastructure projects. 
And there’s a broad range of what those include. And thanks to 
our Minister of Justice who has responsibility for that portfolio, 
we’re actually seeing in very real, tangible ways, continued 
progress and continued momentum in that area. So when we 

think about infrastructure and we think about incentives, these 
are to help foster and help facilitate growth that’s under way. 
 
But along the way, we recognized the key resource in 
Saskatchewan. That is our people, especially our young people. 
And that’s why it’s so important for us to recognize investments 
that are going into the post-secondary sector. 
 
Today during question period our Minister of Advanced 
Education highlighted that in fact it’s well over $6 billion that 
we’ve invested as a government in post-secondary education. In 
fact when we think about some key areas of investment in this 
budget, we can think about more than $20 million in direct 
supports for First Nations and Métis post-secondary education, 
like $428,000 in additional operating funding for the 
Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies, an increase of 
24 per cent year over year and 121 per cent since 2007. This 
demonstrates a significant commitment, not simply to this vital 
institution, but to the students enrolled and engaged in that 
institution, that we’re working to ensure that there are some 
additional resources to help close that education and 
employment gap. 
 
When we think about an additional $40,000 in operating 
funding for the Dumont Technical Institute, an increase of 2 per 
cent over the last year and 169 per cent since 2007, and the list 
goes on right across this crucial sector, I call it a community — 
our post-secondary community which continues to see 
increased enrolments for the most part right across the system 
because our population continues to grow and it’s helping us to 
meet these vital needs. 
 
In addition to convention or traditional post-secondary 
investments, we also see that the Ministry of Economy in this 
budget sees a $600,000 increase to adult basic education for a 
record investment of $25 million, an increase of 62 per cent 
since 2007 and 2008, an investment that will add 200 ABE 
[adult basic education] seats for an estimated program capacity 
of more than 8,700. 
 
What we see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is increased investments, 
including to the provincial training allowance fund to ensure 
that more people have greater access to skills training, to 
education, personal and professional development, therefore 
allowing them to meet their full potential and allowing 
Saskatchewan to meet its full potential. 
 
We also see an additional $1 million increase to the 
Saskatchewan Apprenticeship and Trade Certification 
Commission. We know how vital these apprenticeship positions 
are, and we also know that the total number of seats is going to 
go from essentially the total number of seats to 7,000, up from 
just over 3,000 during 2007-2008. That is a significant increase, 
an 84 per cent increase in the number of seats providing more 
opportunities for our young people. 
 
We also know that we’re making progress, not simply in 
investing in Saskatchewan youth, inviting Saskatchewan expats 
back or their families back, their children or grandkids. We’re 
also seeing real significant progress when it relates to 
immigration. That helps to account for the population that is 
more than now 1,132,000 — a record. And as Tony Blair says, 
there’s a very real indicator, simple, straightforward indicator of 



March 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6719 

how a jurisdiction’s doing and that is, are people moving in or 
are people moving out? And one of the things that we can 
answer is, people are moving into Saskatchewan. They’re 
staying in Saskatchewan. They believe in Saskatchewan. 
They’re investing in Saskatchewan. And that institution, that 
program is helping to ensure that new opportunities are 
available to people from around the world as they call 
Saskatchewan home. 
 
Importantly, we know that there is a lot more to do in some key 
sectors. For example in education, this 2015-16 budget includes 
$3.7 billion for education spending, up 2.8 per cent over this 
last year’s budget — which is very significant when it comes to 
offering more opportunities for our young people. Importantly, 
we know, and the Minister of Education has already spoken to 
some of the significant infrastructure investments that will be 
included, but we also see the inclusion of $4.6 million for 
supports for learning, funding for school divisions to continue 
funding announced first in 2014, $420,000 in funding for 
additional English as an additional language supports to deliver 
on commitments made in school divisions again during last 
year, continuing that progress. And that list goes on because we 
know how significant education is. 
 
We also know how important it is for us to see that our 
communities are thriving. And that’s why we see significant 
third party support for this budget, because the budget is 
helping to keep Saskatchewan municipalities strong by 
providing a record $265.3 million in municipal revenue sharing 
— something that the mayor of Saskatoon certainly has come 
out in support of — and that is reflective of a community, a city 
that is among the fastest growing in all of the country. 
 
We see Calgary growing at 3.6 per cent. We see Edmonton 
growing at 3.3 per cent, and we see Saskatoon growing at 3.2 
per cent. It’s this kind of initiative, the Saskatchewan 
municipalities in their revenue sharing, that they’ve 
demonstrated their support, their appreciation of this 
government keeping its word and moving forward. 
 
But we’re also making sure that we are doing more for those in 
need. That is, dedicating $7.7 million to help at-risk children, 
youth, and families, including $3 million for foster care and 
extended family care, $2 million for medically fragile children 
with complex needs, $1.3 million for assisted adoption, and the 
list goes on. 
 
Importantly, we also see support for seniors — $26.5 million, 
an increase of 1.8 per cent, to increase seniors’ income plan 
monthly to benefit by $10 a month, meaning that since 2007 the 
benefit has tripled from $90 to $270 per month. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I see that my time is soon to be running 
out, but I want to simply say this. What a privilege this has been 
to be able to engage in this debate on this budget. But it has also 
been a great privilege to be able to serve the people of 
Saskatoon Greystone. I’m delighted to support this budget and 
the endeavours of this government. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It now being past 5 o’clock, this 
House stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6689 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6689 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6689 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6690 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6690 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6690 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6691 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6691 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6691 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6691 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6691 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6692 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 International Women’s Day 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6692 
 World Tuberculosis Day 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6692 
 Living in Harmony Awards Winners 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6693 
 Optimist Club All-Star Night  
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6693 
 Little Princess Ball Fundraiser 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6693 
 Business Builders Awards Gala 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6693 
 Provincial Budget Maintains Revenue Sharing 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6694 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Quality of Care and Staffing Levels in Long-Term Care Homes 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6694 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6694 
 Funding for Long-Term Care in the North 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6696 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6696 
 Funding for Post-Secondary Education 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6697 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6697 
 Establishment of Long-Term Savings Fund 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6698 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6698 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6699 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6699 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6704 
  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6708 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6710 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6714 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6717 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


