




















































Hansard: March 05, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 29A  THURSDAY, MARCH 5, 2015, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6451 

 March 5, 2015 

 

[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, I am 

pleased to introduce a number of guests seated in your gallery. 

Last month, 10 teenagers took their oath and enrolled in the 

basic military training course, becoming the first students to 

earn a high school credit under this dual-credit program 

initiative. 

 

Nine of those students are here today, and I’m going to ask 

them to stand. They are from Archbishop M.C. O’Neill High 

School. They are grade 11 student, Private Madison 

Holowachuk; grade 12 student, Private Alyse Ludwar; grade 12 

student, Private Christopher Busch; grade 11 student, Private 

Connor Wilder; grade 11 student, Private Brandon Quong. 

From Winston Knoll Collegiate: grade 11 student, Private 

Joshua Baker; grade 12 student, Private Slade Mascotto. From 

Thom Collegiate: grade 11 student, Damian Claveau-Haasen; 

and from Campbell Collegiate, grade 12 student, Private Jason 

Klink. 

 

I would also like to welcome program staff here with us today, 

without whom this program would not be possible. From 

Cochrane High School, Mr. Paul Marcotte; course director, 

Lieutenant Tanner Schroh; course warrant, warrant officer, Pat 

Cote; 2 section commander, Sergeant Terrence Elford. 

 

Through this program, Mr. Speaker, these students will learn 

valuable life and leadership skills. I can attest to that, Mr. 

Speaker, because I was a sea cadet a couple of lives ago. Our 

government has deep respect, Mr. Speaker, for the armed 

forces, and I would ask that all members join me in welcoming 

these guests to their legislature today and also to thank them for 

their service. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to join with the Education minister here today and 

welcome these students that have enrolled in this new program 

and to recognize their service, to thank them for coming here 

today, and to thank them for continuing to provide service back 

to our community. 

 

This is a new program, one that presents new opportunities for 

these students. And it’s one that expands some of the 

opportunities through experiential learning and through direct 

involvement with the Canadian Forces, giving them a window 

as to what service with the Canadian Forces may look like, 

gives them a window as to what a career with the Canadian 

Forces may look like. This is a program that’s voluntary, one 

that they’ve chosen to enter into, and certainly I want to thank 

them for choosing that service and choosing to join us here 

today. 

 

I also want to thank all those instructors, all those that are 

assisting them every step of the way with the Canadian Forces 

that are here today. And I want to recognize Mr. Paul Marcotte, 

a good friend who’s here today, a very fine carpenter who’s 

made one of the nicest birch bark canoes I’ve ever seen, Mr. 

Speaker, and who’s an exceptional runner and just an all round 

good guy as well who’s involved with this program. 

 

So it’s a pleasure to welcome these students, these members of 

the Canadian Forces to their Assembly along with Paul 

Marcotte of Regina Public Schools. Thank you so much. I ask 

all members to join with me in providing a warm welcome. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I rise this morning in the Assembly to introduce 

some very special people to this Assembly. It’s my pleasure this 

morning to announce that the renewal of the 

Saskatchewan-Ukraine Relations Advisory Committee, also 

known as SURAC, has been renewed for another three-year 

term. And I’ll have more to say about that in a member’s 

statement later on this morning. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce four members of the SURAC 

committee: Alicia Klopoushak is a superannuated teacher from 

Saskatoon and serves as the Vice-Chair; also joining Alicia are 

Dave Dutchak, a business owner in Saskatoon; Holly Paluck, a 

teacher from Regina; Kari Harvey is the secretary to the 

committee and the government representative. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also joining these four committee members, I 

would also like to welcome Orest Gawdyda. Orest is the 

president of the Ukrainian Canadian Congress here in Regina, 

the Regina branch, and many of you know is a very strong 

leader and advocate for the Ukrainian community. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d ask all members to join me this morning in welcoming 

Alicia, Kari, David, Holly, and Orest to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 

the Deputy Premier in welcoming the members of the advisory 

committee to the Assembly today, to thank them for the input 

and the advice that they have provided, and to say that it is 

appreciated by all people in the province. 

 

You know, as everyone in Saskatchewan watches events 

unfolding in Ukraine, we’re deeply concerned, and we want the 

absolute best for the country and the region over the long term. 

And as we watch, it’s almost reminiscent of many decades ago. 

It’s important that we in the province stand in solidarity with 

those who support democracy and support freedom and the 

values that we hold near and dear to us here in province. So I 

ask all members to join me and to thank these members for their 

service. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 



6452 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2015 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 

to join with the Minister of Education in welcoming the 

students who have taken that basic military training and their 

instructors from Thom and Winston Knoll. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also have a quick introduction to make to you 

and through you to all members. Seated in your gallery, a 

couple of gentlemen I’d like to introduce, two members who’ve 

joined us this morning. The president of our party, of the 

Saskatchewan Party, James Thorsteinson from the Lloydminster 

area where he ranches, has joined us today. I just want to thank 

him on behalf of all of the members on this side of the House, if 

not all members in the Assembly, for his volunteer service and 

involvement in politics and his leadership for our organization. 

 

He’s joined by the executive director of the party, Patrick 

Bundrock, who’s no stranger to this building, Mr. Speaker. We 

had the chance, James and Patrick and I, to see a little history 

unfold, some bittersweet history unfold last night in Sturgis, 

Saskatchewan, Canada where we nominated a brand-new 

candidate in front of about 600 people in that community to 

replace someone who’s pretty hard to replace frankly, as our 

candidate in that particular constituency. That of course is the 

Deputy Premier’s riding. 

 

I want to thank James and Patrick for being here this morning, 

and I ask members of this Assembly to welcome them to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 

join in with the folks introducing some of folks of the Ukrainian 

community. I’d like to give a special shout-out to Alicia 

Klopoushak who I had the pleasure of teaching with at Caswell 

School for many years. It was great working with her, and I 

know her husband quite well, Larry, and their family. I think 

the last time we saw each other was just a couple weeks ago at 

the King of Kovbasa event in Saskatoon. Good to see you here, 

Alicia, and I’d ask all members to give her a warm welcome to 

her Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today I 

rise to present a petition yet again calling for greater protection 

for Saskatchewan citizens from developers who default on 

fixed-price contracts. 

 

And we know that in September of 2014 this government 

walked away from a new 48-unit affordable housing project in 

Regina, allowing a private developer to instead take control of 

and then rent the units at full market price. This government 

allowed the private developer to back out of a fixed-price 

contract without any penalties, setting a dangerous precedent 

for this type of default. And further, when asked to explain the 

government’s decision, the Minister of Social Services, and I 

quote, “You’re assuming that there’s these desperate homeless 

people,” showing how disconnected this government is from the 

realities within our communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to 

recognize that there are indeed desperate homeless people 

in our province and to immediately reverse its policy of 

now allowing private developers with whom the 

government has close relationships with to default on 

fixed-price contracts for affordable housing projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present petitions on behalf of concerned citizens as it relates to 

the unsafe conditions created on Dewdney Avenue, created by 

that government, their failure to properly plan heavy-haul truck 

traffic, and the fact that because of their failure to plan and 

because of their decisions, they’ve inundated Dewdney Avenue, 

which is an important residential artery, Mr. Speaker, and puts 

people and families directly at risk. Certainly this is important 

to anyone who lives along Dewdney Avenue, near Dewdney 

Avenue. It’s important to anyone who uses Dewdney Avenue, 

Mr. Speaker. And it’s past time that this government gets those 

heavy-haul trucks off of Dewdney Avenue. And the prayer 

reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 

government to immediately take action as it relates to the 

unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 

damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on 

Dewdney Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the 

safety and well-being of communities, families, residents, 

and users; and that those actions and plans should include 

rerouting the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial 

funding, and be developed through consultation with the 

city of Regina, communities, and residents. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions are signed by concerned residents of Regina. I 

so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition to stop the practice of evicting working 

families in northern Saskatchewan from their homes. And, Mr. 

Speaker:  

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: to cause the provincial 

government to restore the rent-to-own option for 

responsible renters of the social housing program and to 

reinstate the remote housing program for northern 

Saskatchewan and throughout the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are from 

all throughout Saskatchewan. And on this particular page, Mr. 



March 5, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6453 

Speaker, or the many pages, the people that have signed this 

petition are primarily from Ile-a-la-Crosse. And I so present. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 

today to present a petition in support of better seniors’ care. 

 

The undersigned residents point out that many seniors are 

unable to find spaces in care facilities in their communities with 

their partners or near their family. 

 

The petitioners point out that many seniors are waiting in 

hospital beds due to the lack of spaces in care facilities, that the 

Provincial Auditor found that many seniors’ care facilities do 

not have high enough standards of care, that the nutrition 

provided in some seniors’ care homes is not sufficient for a 

healthy diet, and that families have spoken out about the lack of 

staff to help their loved ones with basic needs, and that this 

government has removed the regulations requiring a minimum 

standard of care for seniors, resulting in neglect. 

 

And they finally point out that chronic understaffing in seniors’ 

care facilities results in unacceptable conditions, including 

unanswered call bells for help, seniors being left unattended on 

toilets, and infrequent bathing for residents. I’d like to read the 

prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take 

the following action: to cause the provincial government 

to immediately undertake meaningful steps to improve the 

quality of seniors’ care, including creating more spaces 

and more choices for seniors; ensuring higher standards of 

care in public facilities, private facilities, and for home 

care; ensuring appropriate staffing levels in seniors’ care 

facilities; restoring regulations that provide minimum 

standards of care; and providing more support to help 

seniors remain independent and in their own homes for as 

long as they desire. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Regina. I so 

submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 

present a petition signed by several hundred people to the 

Legislative Assembly, and this petition says: 

 

We, the undersigned residents of the province of 

Saskatchewan, wish to bring to your attention the 

following: northern Saskatchewan is being targeted by the 

Nuclear Waste Management Organization to become a 

storage site. 

 

Now that has changed this week, but they’re still calling for 

legislation to permanently ban nuclear waste storage and 

transportation of nuclear waste into, out of, and through 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is signed by individuals from over 50 

communities including Air Ronge, Archerwill, Battleford, Big 

River, Biggar, Bruno, Buchanan, Canora, Carrot River, 

Christopher Lake, Cowessess First Nation, Creighton, Delisle, 

Denare Beach, Deschambault Lake, Endeavour, Estevan, Flin 

Flon, Fond-du-Lac, Fort Qu’Appelle, Hafford, Handel, Hazel 

Dell, Hudson Bay, Invermay, La Ronge, Lac Vert, Landis, 

Lintlaw, Loon Lake, Martensville, Meadow Lake, Melfort, 

Muenster, Nipawin, Norquay, North Battleford, Pelican 

Narrows, Prairie River, Preeceville, Prince Albert, Rama, 

Regina, Saltcoats, Sandy Bay, Saskatoon, Sturgis, Swift 

Current, Tisdale, Victoire, Wapella, Watson, Weekes, White 

Fox, Wilkie, and Yorkton. Mr. Speaker, I am very honoured to 

submit these. 

 

The Speaker: — I’d like to remind members not to precipitate 

or enter into debate in their remarks to briefly describe their 

petitions. 

 

[10:15] 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Social Justice Week at the University of Saskatchewan 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today in this House to recognize an important initiative 

happening this week at the University of Saskatchewan. This 

week is the first ever University of Saskatchewan Students’ 

Union, USSU’s Social Justice Week. 

 

Throughout the course of the week, each day has focused 

around a central social justice theme. Tuesday centred on queer 

and LGBT [lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender] issues. 

Yesterday was devoted to indigenous international matters. 

Today’s focus is on issues facing women, and tomorrow will be 

committed to concerns surrounding food security and children 

in care. 

 

The organizers have brought in a number of groups and experts 

from the community to discuss these important problems that 

are relevant to Saskatchewan citizens today. With important 

inputs from the Human Rights Commission, CHEP [child 

hunger and education program], the Avenue Community 

Centre, and a number of local activists, I’m certain there will be 

many important conversations about the interrelationships 

between the different social justice issues people in our society 

are facing. 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join in with me in 

thanking USSU vice-president of student affairs, Jack 

Saddleback, and all of the organizers who helped make this 

event a success, and also for helping to raise awareness about 

the issues that prevent everyone in our province from fully 

living with the dignity and respect they deserve. 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 

 

 



6454 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2015 

Renewed Commitment to Relationship with Ukraine 

 

Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, earlier today I had the 

honour of announcing that our government has renewed its 

commitment to our relationship with Ukraine. The 

Saskatchewan-Ukraine relations advisory committee, SURAC, 

will be extended until 2018. 

 

SURAC works to strengthen relations between Saskatchewan 

and Ukraine and has provided leadership to our government on 

many issues. With the escalation of political violence in 

Ukraine, SURAC has also played a key role in raising 

awareness of humanitarian concerns by being a voice for the 

Ukrainian community. Mr. Speaker, our government responded 

to concerns by donating $60,000 in aid to Ukraine that was used 

to buy medical supplies and provide support for families and 

health care professionals. 

 

Currently Ukraine is fourth in the number of immigrants 

coming to our province. In 2013-2014, more than 900 

Ukrainian newcomers chose Saskatchewan as their home, and 

now more than 13 per cent of Saskatchewan residents are of 

Ukrainian origin. 

 

SURAC committee members include Gerald Luciuk, Chair; 

Alicia Klopoushak, Vice-Chair; Kari Harvey, secretary; Dave 

Dutchak; Dr. Natalia Khanenko-Friesen; Laurent Mougeot; 

Holly Paluck; Nadia Prokopchuk; Danylo Puderak; James 

Shevchuk; and Mary-Anne Trischuk. 

 

I would like to thank all the committee members and other 

leaders in the Ukrainian community for their dedication to 

cultivating strong connections between Saskatchewan and 

Ukraine. Mr. Speaker, our government remains committed to 

enhancing these special, long-standing relationships. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Opposition to Nuclear Waste Storage in Saskatchewan 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this morning 

I had the honour to present petitions signed by hundreds of 

people from all over our province who are opposed to the 

creation of a nuclear waste repository here in Saskatchewan. 

Earlier this week the Nuclear Waste Management Organization 

announced that there won’t be any nuclear waste repositories 

coming to Saskatchewan at any time soon. This was welcome 

news to many northern residents who have been actively 

campaigning to keep nuclear waste out of Saskatchewan, 

including the committee for future generations. 

 

The committee for future generations was formed in May 2011 

after Max Morin from Beauval was invited to an elders’ 

gathering near Pinehouse, where he discovered NWMO 

[Nuclear Waste Management Organization] representatives 

promoting nuclear waste storage as the solution to youth 

suicide. The 10 elders immediately rose and walked out. It was 

the first time Morin had ever seen a sacred circle broken. 

 

People need to keep educating themselves on the hazards 

of the nuclear fuel chain and on the way the industry 

deceives the public for its own gain. Grassroots is 

powerful. We need to push our leaders to invest in 

energies and economies that are sustainable, like solar, 

wind, and geothermal. We have the knowledge and the 

means to do it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the hard work of community leaders like Max 

Morin, Marius Paul, and Debbie Mihalicz from English River 

First Nation and Fred Pederson from Pinehouse, along with the 

dozens of other individuals who rallied for this cause, deserve 

to be recognized. And they’re not done yet. They are vowing to 

continue their cause to push for legislation that will prohibit 

nuclear waste storage in Saskatchewan. I ask all members of the 

Assembly to join with me today to congratulate them on their 

success. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Lymphedema Awareness Day 

 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 

announce that March 6th is recognized as Lymphedema 

Awareness Day in Saskatchewan. Lymphedema is a chronic 

condition caused by a compromised lymphatic system. People 

with this condition experience discomfort on a daily basis. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since 2011 a focused effort has been undertaken to 

better serve people living with lymphedema. Our government 

has funded combined decongestive therapy, a best practice 

standard for the treatment of lymphedema. There are now 13 

clinicians trained in this therapy across Saskatchewan. By 

enhancing the Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living 

policies, we have continued to improve access to compression 

garments needed to best support therapy and personal comfort. 

By purchasing multi-chamber compression pumps for regional 

health authorities, patients have access to these machines closer 

to home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the ministry has supported a patient-developed 

resource called Your Journey. This resource was developed by 

the lymphedema working group and includes a resource binder 

and a video to guide women who have been diagnosed with 

breast cancer. It has been distributed to health regions and is 

available on saskatchewan.ca. 

 

While there is currently no cure for lymphedema, the condition 

may be managed through proper treatment and patient care. We 

will continue to work closely with health regions, partners, and 

stakeholders to deliver high-quality care and to strengthen 

awareness, education, and outreach. And we do this to help 

make living with lymphedema a little bit easier. 

 

So please join me in observing March 6th as Lymphedema 

Awareness Day. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Successful Initiatives at Pinehouse 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to profile 

some of the great work that the northern community of 

Pinehouse has done. A few decades ago the situation in 

Pinehouse was hard. Substance abuse, dysfunction, and 



March 5, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6455 

unemployment were far too often the norm. The community 

decided to change their future. Pinehouse took the initiative to 

work with government to make sure that their most vulnerable 

citizens do not slip through the cracks of the larger system. 

 

One of the programs implemented is Recovery Lake. It offers 

opportunities for people struggling with substance abuse. Their 

road to recovery includes working with Pinehouse Business 

North to build skills relevant to today’s economy and to better 

their own lives. 

 

The community also created an exciting program called 

Reclaiming Our Community or ROC. Community members and 

service providers, supported by elders and elected leadership, 

gather to discuss potential problem cases and then intervene. 

The results speak for themselves, Mr. Speaker. In 2013, 

Pinehouse had the lowest crime severity out of any community 

in the northern administration district, less than half of that of 

the closest community. 

 

I would ask that all members of this Assembly join me in 

congratulating the hard work of the citizens of Pinehouse, as 

well as their community partners, for their outstanding, 

proactive work, and encourage them to keep this trend going. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 

 

Basic Military Qualification Co-op Training Program 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise in the House today to acknowledge the 10 students who 

have entered into the basic military qualification co-op training 

program. Our government has a deep respect for our Canadian 

Armed Forces and their commitment and dedication to serving 

our country. Not only do they protect, defend, and support the 

freedoms and democracy that we enjoy, but they’re also helping 

to grow tomorrow’s leaders. 

 

This training and these experiences go far beyond military 

training. It’s a unique way to learn and develop valuable life 

and leadership skills. This program wouldn’t be possible 

without the partnership between the Regina Public and Catholic 

school divisions and 38 Canadian Brigade. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government supports alternative pathways to 

graduation. We believe that opportunities like this provide 

students with the option to explore other interests while 

nurturing and encouraging their unique attitudes, skills, and 

abilities. This also addresses one of our goals in our 

government’s plan for growth of expanding alternate credit 

programs for high school completion. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I encourage all members of the Legislative 

Assembly to join me in recognizing these students, their 

families, and program staff for their commitment to this 

program, and to the Canadian Armed Forces for serving our 

country and growing our next generation. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

New Health Centre to Open in Radville 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, from 

time to time we get an opportunity to celebrate the benefits of a 

strong economy. At the same time, it’s important to remember 

the costs of decline that Saskatchewan experienced under the 

NDP [New Democratic Party]. Tomorrow we are celebrating 

the benefits of a strong economy through the grand opening of 

the new Radville Marian long-term care centre. 

 

The Radville Marian LTC [long-term care] centre is an example 

of the new Saskatchewan. It is the replacement of a 66-year-old 

building and incorporates design functions that will help 

implement the Eden philosophy, which focuses on building 

comfort, companionship, and privacy for each senior. It is a 

30-bed, two-unit centre with a connected physicians’ clinic. 

 

Thanks to a strong economy, the provincial government was 

able to contribute $17 million or 80 per cent of the $22 million 

cost. And we’ve replicated those actions across a total of 13 

communities. To date we’ve invested over $200 million in an 

effort to build new long-term care facilities. 

 

Compare that to the costs of decline under the NDP’s weak 

economy. Instead of opening new long-term care beds, the NDP 

closed 1,200. Instead of opening new long-term care facilities, 

the NDP closed 19. Instead of hiring over 400 new doctors and 

2,600 nurses, the NDP drove out 173 doctors and 455 nurses. 

Mr. Speaker, let’s never go back. Let’s keep Saskatchewan 

moving forward. Thank you. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Cancellation of Urgent Surgery 

 

Mr. Broten: — Tony Kot is 34 years old. He badly injured his 

back in June. He’s in debilitating pain and his health has 

deteriorated significantly. Last week his neurosurgeon told him 

he needs emergency surgery. The emergency surgery was 

scheduled for Tuesday but was then cancelled because there 

was no bed available in Regina General. On Tuesday morning, 

the bedline unit told him he’d get a bed that afternoon, but 35 

minutes later they called back to reverse that. 

 

Tony’s mom has called the minister’s office and she’s called 

the MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley, but she’s received no help — just 

government rhetoric, which she is sick of hearing. 

 

So will the Premier spare us the self-congratulatory spin? Will 

he simply agree to meet with Tony’s mom to hear the details of 

this nightmare? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

not aware of the details of this case, but I would be very happy 

to meet with Tony’s mother right after question period to find 

out more information on this. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our health regions are working very hard to ensure 

that we have the lowest waits for surgery in this country, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve seen some tremendous progress, Mr. Speaker. 

In this case, again I don’t know all the details but I would be 



6456 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2015 

more than happy to meet with Tony’s mother and to find out 

what we can do to help see that Tony get his surgery as soon as 

possible. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Tony’s mother contacted the 

minister’s office. Tony’s mother contacted his MLA, and that’s 

why Tony’s mom would like to have a meeting with the 

Premier to discuss this. 

 

Because Tony’s neurosurgeon has bent over backwards to make 

special arrangements, it looks like Tony’s emergency surgery 

may take place next Wednesday. Next Wednesday, for surgery 

that is desperately needed, all because the hospital does not 

have a bed for him. 

 

Does the Premier think it’s acceptable for someone who needs 

emergency surgery to have to wait almost two weeks because 

the hospital cannot find a bed? 

 

[10:30] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Certainly we are working very hard with our regional health 

authorities, providing over $200 million in the last five years on 

our surgical initiative to drive what were the longest waits in 

Canada for surgery, Mr. Speaker, to the point where even the 

CBC [Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] National report I 

believe of Monday night recognized Saskatchewan as the only 

province to make significant headway when it came to certain 

orthopedic surgeries, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re working hard to ensure that not only 

elective surgeries, but yes, emergency surgeries happen when 

they need to happen, Mr. Speaker. In this case, Mr. Speaker, 

again I don’t have the details of this case. I’m not aware of the 

contact that has been made with my office, but I will be more 

than happy to meet with Tony’s mother afterwards and to work 

with the health region to see that this surgery is done as soon as 

possible. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, those self-congratulatory lines are 

the same lines that were given to Tony’s mom when she called 

the minister’s office looking for help, and that’s why she wants 

to meet with the Premier. 

 

Tony’s condition has deteriorated so badly that he’s at 

significant risk of losing some bodily functions. That’s why his 

neurosurgeon has deemed this an emergency situation. But the 

Regina General said it’s not enough of an emergency. The 

bureaucrats said Tony’s organs would have to be compromised 

before it would be enough of an emergency. His neurosurgeon 

says that the surgery is desperately needed, but the hospital says 

it can wait until Tony’s organs are compromised. 

 

To the Premier: how can he possibly justify that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I don’t 

have all the details in terms of Tony’s case, Mr. Speaker. 

Obviously it is the specialists that make the decision in terms of 

how a surgical patient would be prioritized and scheduled, Mr. 

Speaker. If this is deemed to be an emergency surgery, then 

obviously priority is put in place to ensure that these emergency 

surgeries are done as soon as possible, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I will be not only happy to meet with Tony’s 

mother, but we will be following up with the health region, Mr. 

Speaker, to determine what is in fact taking place with Tony’s 

surgery and to see that this surgery does happen as soon as 

possible. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve spoken to Tony’s mom. She 

desperately wants help for her son, but she also wants the 

system fixed for others. She has huge respect for Tony’s 

neurosurgeon and is incredibly grateful for all his efforts to get 

Tony into the hospital for the emergency surgery that he 

desperately needs, and she’s worried that this kind of situation 

will drive good specialists away. When specialists say that 

surgeries are desperately needed, bureaucrats should not be 

allowed to overrule that and say that they can wait until the 

patient’s organs are compromised. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. Is it a written 

policy that organs need to be compromised before a doctor’s 

orders for emergency surgery are followed? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, certainly the advice and the recommendations of the 

specialist is what is taken into account when it comes to 

scheduling surgery, Mr. Speaker. That’s the way it should be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to Regina Qu’Appelle, this 

government has increased the number of acute care beds by 

over 12 per cent in the last seven years, knowing that we have a 

growing population now in this province after many years of 

decline, and knowing, Mr. Speaker, that this government 

invested significant dollars in the last five years on a surgical 

initiative to see the longest waits in Canada for surgery, which 

was driving specialists and surgeons out of this province to be 

sure, Mr. Speaker, to the point where we have the lowest waits 

in this country for surgery, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In this particular case though, we take this very seriously. And I 

will be following up both with Tony’s mother as well as the 

health region to find out when this surgery will be scheduled, 

Mr. Speaker, and my hope is that it will be as soon as possible. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the minister says he takes this 

seriously, but the actions of this government show a very 

different story. The minister’s office was contacted by Tony’s 

mom. The MLA was contacted, but assistance wasn’t provided, 

Mr. Speaker. How is it that emergency surgery takes two weeks 

to be done? My question to the Premier: is it a written policy 

that organs need to be compromised before a doctor’s orders for 



March 5, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6457 

emergency surgery are followed? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Again thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it is the policy of the health regions in this province to 

take advice, Mr. Speaker, from the specialists. I don’t know, in 

terms of what the Leader of the Opposition is referring to, 

where an administrator within the health region will overrule a 

specialist, Mr. Speaker. Obviously there needs to be the 

availability of surgery time, the availability for the proper . . . a 

bed to be available, Mr. Speaker, and the recommendation of 

the surgeon, Mr. Speaker, for the surgery. 

 

So again not knowing all the details of this, I understand that 

the family has contacted my office in the last day or so, Mr. 

Speaker. We will be following up. I would be happy to meet 

with Tony’s mother afterwards and with the health region to 

find out how soon the surgery will be scheduled. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Patient Care and the Lean Initiative 

 

Ms. Chartier: — This government’s approach to our health 

care system is so frustrating — so many misplaced priorities, so 

little focus on what really matters. Earlier this week we learned 

that John Black has this government tracking everything nurses 

do right down to the second. But it gets worse, because this 

government’s $40 million American consultant also has this 

government tracking surgical patients right down to the second. 

According to John Black’s standard work process, patients 

getting ready for orthopedic surgery are given 30 seconds to 

change and go to the bathroom. To the Health minister: does 

this government actually expect orthopedic surgical patients to 

change and go to the bathroom in just 30 seconds? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, certainly the Government 

of Saskatchewan doesn’t put a time limit on how long it will 

take a patient to change and use a washroom, Mr. Speaker. But 

through quality improvement what we want to do, find out, is 

what our patients and our providers, where they’re spending 

their time, Mr. Speaker, determine which of that process is of 

value, which of that is, Mr. Speaker, inefficient or a waste, and 

we want to improve that process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I can point out, Mr. Speaker, as an example, and you know 

we had a discussion, Mr. Speaker, on ambulances in the last 

day. In Regina Qu’Appelle they found when a technician was 

. . . an ambulance was at the emergency room, in order to 

change over for using that for another patient, Mr. Speaker, it 

took 21 minutes to check an ambulance to make sure it was 

supplied, had the appropriate stock, Mr. Speaker. Through a 

process, they got rid of more than 1,000 duplicate items, in 

unused items. They spend today 90 per cent less time, from 21 

minutes down to 2 minutes, to get that ambulance back on the 

road, Mr. Speaker, so that it can serve patients in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

Ms. Chartier: — Oh it gets worse, Mr. Speaker. The John 

Black standard work form says if patients need to go to the 

bathroom a second time before their orthopedic surgery, they 

are given just 15 seconds. Just 15 seconds for a patient, getting 

ready for orthopedic surgery to go to the bathroom. 

 

To the minister: does this government actually expect 

orthopedic surgical patients to go to the bathroom in just 15 

seconds? Is this government actually timing orthopedic surgery 

patients when they go to the bathroom before surgery? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s . . . Mr. 

Speaker, I appreciate the question from the member opposite. 

Again what we’re looking to do is ensure that we’re providing 

efficient service for the people of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the past . . . And I can give another example, 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes to some of the improvements that 

have been made, Mr. Speaker, in terms of reducing wait times 

— which I think the members opposite are aware that this 

government is focusing on reducing wait times. In Five Hills 

Health Region, the time for a mental health appointment was 

made for clients that receive service, it was reduced by more 

than 90 per cent, Mr. Speaker, so that that client can get an 

appointment more quickly, have the services that they need 

more quickly, Mr. Speaker. That’s the quality improvement 

work that we’re working on, Mr. Speaker. And I can go over 

countless examples of whether it’s babies getting the shots that 

they need, ensuring that ambulances are better equipped, more 

equipped sooner, Mr. Speaker, or the surgical wait times 

reductions that have been unheard of, Mr. Speaker, across this 

country that are happening in this province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — With a $40 million American consultant on 

retainer with 18 kaizen promotion offices throughout the 

province, and with a lean go-team, you’d think the minister 

would have some better answers to these questions. 

 

So to the minister: what exactly is the purpose of this John 

Black standard work process that outlines a 15-second trip to 

the bathroom? Why did this government and its $40 million 

American lean consultant go to all the trouble to specifying the 

amount of time allotted for patients to go to the bathroom? Why 

is this needed? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I will work on 

improving my answers for the member opposite. In fact maybe 

I’ll . . . Well I’ll try this one again, Mr. Speaker, if she missed 

this. 

 

In southern Saskatchewan, 24 per cent of babies at risk of 

complications to a highly contagious respiratory virus were not 

getting their full shots, Mr. Speaker, after discharge from 

hospital. I find that unacceptable and I hope the member 

opposite does too. Through lean improvements, Mr. Speaker, 

we are . . . not only save over $200,000 in doses of that 



6458 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2015 

medication that were thrown away, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to 

save over $1 million dollars in hospitalization and 

complications as a result of 24 per cent of babies not getting 

their shots. And I can say in this year, in ’15-16, every single 

baby in southern Saskatchewan, as happens in northern 

Saskatchewan, will get their full set of shots to avoid this 

respiratory virus, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we’re doing this 

work. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, instead of 

standing outside of patient bathrooms with stopwatches and 

instead of writing up standard work process documents that 

allot how much time each patient has to go to the bathroom, 

instead of wasting time and money on that, this government 

should be focused on situations like Tony’s, in which his 

neurosurgeon says he desperately needs emergency surgery, but 

he can’t get it because there’s no bed available. 

 

To the minister: when can we expect the wasteful and silly pet 

projects to end? And when can we expect this government to 

finally get serious about fixing the basics in our hospitals like 

making sure people like Tony get the emergency surgery he 

needs? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the basics in 

health care that we have been fixing was the fact that people in 

this province waited 18 to 24 months for surgery, Mr. Speaker, 

for a hip or a knee or other orthopedic surgery. Surgery in this 

province, Mr. Speaker, at a time in 1999 when they promised to 

reduce surgeries by 30 per cent. And what happened over the 

next four years? Surgical waits went up in this province 61 per 

cent, Mr. Speaker. That’s the work that we’ve been doing in 

this province — $230 million in five years on top of what 

regions were already spending in surgeries, Mr. Speaker, to go 

from the longest wait for surgical care in this country to the 

lowest waits, Mr. Speaker. That’s the work that we’re doing. 

That’s the work that we’re doing in improving our access to 

services, in improving access all across this province, whether it 

be to doctors, nurses, health facilities, Mr. Speaker, and 

surgeries. That’s the commitment of this government. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Occupational Health and Safety Inspections 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the former OHS [occupational health and safety] 

inspector who spoke out publicly yesterday said, and I quote, 

“We no longer do . . . proactive inspections. We wait for 

something to happen and then we go.” 

 

After being embarrassed by this public criticism, the minister 

said he is going to reverse his policy and have some 

unannounced inspections, but he provided no details. 

 

We know that the overall number of inspections have been cut 

from 380 per month to just 120 per month, and the former 

safety officer says none of those inspections are unannounced. 

So to the minister: how many unannounced inspections will be 

reinstated? What exactly is the plan to reverse this 

government’s cuts to occupational health and safety? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you for the question, Mr. 

Speaker. There have been no cuts to OHS, nor will there be. 

This is something that’s very important. We have an 

unacceptably high injury rate in our province. In fact, we are 

getting better on it, but we still have a long ways to go. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will continue the focus on employers with the 

highest injury rate. The initial results show a decrease in the 

injury rate of about 22 per cent. In my view that’s not good 

enough, but it is a step in the right direction. Mr. Speaker, I can 

tell you this as well — random inspections are important and 

effective. They raise public awareness and public safety in a 

general sense while ensuring compliance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to do both random 

inspections and targeted inspections. We’re going to leave it to 

the deputy minister and his officials to try and determine best 

how they are going to do that. We have faith and confidence in 

those people. They are driving the injury rate down. We still 

have more work to do. We will continue to do that, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[10:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Talk about continuing. Mr. Speaker, we’ve 

obtained inspection records . . . It’s a laughing matter to the 

folks over there. We’ve obtained inspection records for the 

Vanscoy mine and they clearly show a disturbing pattern. Not 

one, not one unannounced inspection since April of 2012. Not 

one scheduled inspection since August 2013. Just five visits to 

the Vanscoy mine since then and always in response to a 

specific complaint. 

 

To the minister: how can he possibly justify this kind of broken 

system, and how exactly will it change going forward? Mr. 

Speaker, to the minister: what’s the specific plan to reverse the 

changes this government has made to occupational health and 

safety in Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s the intention of this 

government to put resources where they’re most needed, to 

target the employers that have a high injury rate, to work with 

those employers to get a plan, have them sign that plan, and 

accept that there’s an issue that they’re there. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have through workers’ compensation, we have 

Mission: Zero, a plan to try and reduce injury rate to zero. Mr. 

Speaker, the opposition critic and member for Saskatoon Centre 

said in the Leader-Post, October 22, 2014, “I think it may be 

time to review Mission: Zero and ask if it’s really getting . . . at 

the offenders.” And that’s what we’re trying to do with this, Mr. 

Speaker, is try and focus on what the offenders are doing and 

try and deal with things like that. 



March 5, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6459 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP as far back as 2006 said the OHS 

division targets inspections to those employers with the highest 

percentage of time loss injuries in the province. It was started 

under the NDP. It’s continued. It’s producing results, and we’re 

going to continue to do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Creative Saskatchewan Expenditures 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Culture minister 

claimed that the province of Alberta doesn’t have a film tax 

credit. Mr. Speaker, that kind of silly obfuscation does not befit 

this House and Saskatchewan people. The Alberta Production 

Grant was $25 million last year and is an all-spend credit. 

Currently 24 feature films and TV series are being produced in 

Alberta as a result of that grant. Calgary is now building a new 

sound stage while ours sits unused. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when will this minister wake up, smell the coffee, 

and actually start fixing the colossal mistake this government 

made when they killed our film industry? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Alberta does 

have a grant system. We also have a grant system. Alberta has 

more money invested into their grant system and we’ve got 

almost exactly the same system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we ended the film tax credit and then we did 

consultations with the creative industries. All of the creative 

industries told us they wanted something like a Creative 

Saskatchewan model. SMPIA [Saskatchewan Media Production 

Industry Association] supports the need to market outside of the 

province. 

 

Does the member from Nutana support film and Creative 

Saskatchewan and their mandate or not? Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — The Culture minister has really struggled to 

answer the most basic questions about his portfolio and about 

this government’s misplaced priorities and wasteful spending. 

And yesterday the minister was repeatedly asked what benefits 

Saskatchewan received as a result of the big after-party at a 

Toronto film event. Yet again the Culture minister had no 

answer. 

 

To the minister: does he have an answer yet? What benefit did 

Saskatchewan get from a taxpayer-funded after-party at a 

Toronto film event? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 

Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

Creative Saskatchewan co-sponsored one of the Canadian 

Screen Awards events to build more opportunities for the 

Saskatchewan creative industries. In this particular case, the 

Jack Semple Band was the entertainment there, and because of 

their performance they were able to book a couple of festival 

events on the spot. Those are immediate results for 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Creative Saskatchewan, since its inception, has provided $7 

million in direct grant support to the creative industries sector 

and $2.1 million to designated creative industry associations. 

That includes sectors such as music, film, books, fine art, and 

crafts. One of those associations, the Saskatchewan Interactive 

Media Association, never received funding before the inception 

of Creative Saskatchewan. Now they do. 

 

We will continue to tell the Saskatchewan story, and I will 

remind the members opposite of what their former leader said: 

“It’s our job to be out promoting the province every time you 

can and not to miss an opportunity which is national and 

international.” Mr. Speaker, we couldn’t agree more. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — We’ve heard of other disturbing expenditures 

by Creative Saskatchewan, expenditures that have nothing to do 

with supporting artists. We’ve heard that Creative 

Saskatchewan spent $10,000 to print up fake gold records for 

Jess Moskaluke. No jury, no competition, just the CEO [chief 

executive officer] writing a cheque. Now I love Jess 

Moskaluke, but there’s nothing creative about printing up fake 

gold records. This is not how Creative Saskatchewan should be 

spending taxpayers’ money. 

 

So to the minister: how can he justify this? Will he commit to a 

full review of Creative Saskatchewan spending to ensure that it 

starts going to the right places? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Parks, Culture 

and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re in the 

process. It’s coming up to a year, Mr. Speaker. It’s coming up 

to a year of Creative Saskatchewan being in operation, so we 

are in discussions about having a review. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the reason Creative Saskatchewan goes on 

these trips is to promote Saskatchewan, telling Saskatchewan’s 

story to the world. We do that when we promote our 

agricultural products outside of Saskatchewan. We do that with 

our resource industries and our manufacturers. We do that with 

our creative industries, our artists and our musicians, because 

we have some very talented people with a great story to tell. 

 

That’s why we sponsor events. That’s why we make 

connections with people around the world. Because of those 

events and connections, that’s why Saskatchewan musical act 

Zachary Lucky signed with UK [United Kingdom] booking 

agent The Local. That’s why the Canadian embassy purchased a 

piece, a large piece of Saskatchewan sculptor Joe Fafard for the 

Saskatchewan Room at Canada House in London. Mr. Speaker, 

we make no apologies for telling Saskatchewan’s story to the 

world. 



6460 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2015 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Increasing the Number of Members of the Legislative 

Assembly 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 

pleased to stand in my place. The emergency debate that we 

wish to speak about today, Mr. Speaker, is the great plan of the 

Saskatchewan Party government to add three more MLAs, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I want to say at the outset that when we first heard in 2007, 

which is a long eight years ago, Mr. Speaker, when the Premier 

got up at the time, he told the people of Saskatchewan when he 

became Premier that the cupboard was bare. That was his exact 

words, Mr. Speaker, when he said the cupboard was bare, Mr. 

Speaker. Six months later, the same Premier announced with 

great fanfare, and there was all kinds of billboards all 

throughout Saskatchewan, that he reduced the debt of the 

province of Saskatchewan by 40 per cent. That’s what exactly 

was the advertisement, Mr. Speaker. So how is it that you’re 

able to say on one hand that the cupboard is bare, and then a 

mere six months later you’re able to pay 40 per cent down on 

your debt, Mr. Speaker? 

 

And the reason why I make that point, Mr. Speaker, is because 

the cupboard was not bare. The cupboard was in fact full, Mr. 

Speaker, and the people of Saskatchewan knew it. The people 

that knew what is going on within government knew it. And yet 

the Premier, and yet the Premier came along and said that the 

cupboard was bare. 

 

So from that day forward, we in the New Democratic Party 

understood that the Premier really was simply trying to 

hoodwink the people of Saskatchewan by his very first 

statement, and that kind of activity has occurred on a regular 

basis, Mr. Speaker. It says a lot about the character of his 

government, Mr. Speaker, by saying things to the people of 

Saskatchewan that were simply not the facts. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, what we see also from this particular 

government is the fact that they also are working on kicking out 

working families from their homes. We’ve seen that evidence in 

particular of northern Saskatchewan. And they’re forcing many 

of these working families that have worked over the years to get 

training, to get educated, to finally get some jobs, they’re now 

telling these working families, you’re going to pay more rent. 

You’re not going to own these homes, and you’re going to pay 

these elevated rents for the rest of your lives, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You look at some of the examples in the health care system. 

Look at the wasteful spending project with John Black, $40 

million, the consultant from the States to tell us how to run 

health care when he continued to ignore many of the front-line 

health care personnel and the staff that are able to give good, 

sage advice to this government on how we can . . . and able to 

afford to present a good, solid, top-notch health care system for 

the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So you look at all these examples of misplaced priorities. Look 

at all the examples of how the past has been trying to be 

rewritten by the current Saskatchewan Party government. And, 

Mr. Speaker, what we also see evidence of now when we talk 

about wasteful spending, Mr. Speaker, again is the fact that they 

now want to add three more MLAs, Mr. Speaker. In this day 

and age when people are losing their jobs, when services are 

being cut, when tuition, Mr. Speaker, is going up, when we see 

the health care costs like prescription drugs are going up for 

many of our families and our senior citizens, when government 

again is simply not doing anything to really stimulate a lot of 

people’s imagination — the people of Saskatchewan — and you 

look at the cost of education and health care, Mr. Speaker, and 

what did they do? 

 

What did they do in front of all those particular challenges, Mr. 

Speaker? They want to add three more MLAs, Mr. Speaker. 

Who in the world gave them that advice? Nobody in 

Saskatchewan. Nobody in Saskatchewan asked the 

Saskatchewan Party government. In the long list of things that 

they needed, they asked for better health care. They asked that 

you manage the resources and the opportunity given to you, 

what you inherited, to manage it well. That’s what our constant 

message on this side of the Assembly is: manage the 

opportunity that you inherited well so that future generations 

could be served well. That’s been our advice from day one, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And what does this government do, Mr. Speaker? They come 

along and they fire a whole bunch of workers. They reduce a 

whole bunch of services, Mr. Speaker, and now we’re hearing 

that there may be further cuts and further austerity measures in 

place so that this government can finally be able to once again 

say that they balanced the books. And we on this side of the 

Assembly, Mr. Speaker, we smile whenever they say that 

because we know the fact of the matter is that many of these 

lost revenues won’t show up within the government coffers for 

another maybe six months to 18 months, Mr. Speaker — well 

past the next election, Mr. Speaker. And that’s exactly what 

we’re advising people today. 

 

So what the whole message is today, is why on earth did the 

Saskatchewan Party, despite all these challenges, despite all 

these issues in front of them, their single most important thing 

of the day was to hire three more MLAs, Mr. Speaker? They 

want to put three more MLAs in this Assembly, and we think 

that is an absolutely silly notion, Mr. Speaker. It is something 

that should not simply have been done. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan never asked for more politicians. 

They asked for better care in health care, Mr. Speaker. They 

asked for less crowded classrooms. They certainly didn’t ask 

for wasteful projects like the John Black lean contract, an 

American-based consultant telling us how to run our health care 

system and billing us a tremendous amount. The people of 

Saskatchewan have had enough of that, Mr. Speaker, and I 

think the Saskatchewan Party government is slowly but surely 

getting that particular message. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I look at some of the issues that we raised, 

and I talk about the Saskatchewan Party government in general. 

We see and we know. Like today’s a good example, that the 

member from Prince Albert Carlton, his last day today. He’s 



March 5, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6461 

done today, Mr. Speaker. So when I look at this particular bill, 

and I ask myself, why would the Saskatchewan Party want to 

include more MLAs in this Assembly when they have difficulty 

keeping their current MLAs? That’s the biggest argument that 

we have, Mr. Speaker. And as you look at them laughing from 

their seats, Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is, the people of 

Saskatchewan didn’t want more MLAs. If you guys need a 

handwritten memo to send to you, I can do that. 

 

Now look at some of the seats across the way, Mr. Speaker. I 

look at a couple of them that are gone because they got traded 

to Ottawa. They know which ones are leaving, Mr. Speaker. A 

couple of them got pushed out of their nominations because 

they’re no longer wanted, Mr. Speaker. Now we’re seeing 

evidence that more of them are going to quit. You look at the 

Deputy Premier is done. You look at the member from 

Kelvington is also done, Mr. Speaker. The member from 

Saltcoats is done. And as I look down the list and I see all these 

people are leaving and some of them are being replaced; some 

of them are going to lose their seats, Mr. Speaker. At the end of 

the day, I’m saying, how could they justify asking for more 

MLAs when they can’t even keep the current MLAs they have, 

Mr. Speaker? 

 

[11:00] 

 

And all the spending that is required in the province of 

Saskatchewan, how does the cost of covering three more MLAs 

really add up against making sure that you keep the ambulance 

fees low, making sure that the health care system is running as 

efficiently and as effectively as it possibly can with the people 

of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? Why don’t they invest in the 

homelessness effort, Mr. Speaker, to really begin to address the 

fact that there is poverty in the province of Saskatchewan, that 

we have to do what we can, what we can, Mr. Speaker, to 

ensure that everyone in Saskatchewan benefits from this great 

economy? 

 

And that’s one of the clear messages that we get as MLAs, and 

I think they also get it. But their answer, Mr. Speaker? They’re 

going to add three more politicians. The Saskatchewan Party is 

going to add three more politicians. And not one person that 

I’ve spoken to ever in the whole process since this Sask Party 

has been in power, Mr. Speaker, have ever asked me, we need 

more politicians. I’ve never, ever heard that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We need more nurses. We need more doctors. We need more 

teachers. We need more space in our classrooms. The list is 

huge, Mr. Speaker. We’re hearing about the cost of replacing 

and ensuring that our schools are safe, are structurally safe. 

We’ve heard that in the Assembly today, and the minister 

doesn’t even want to talk about that. But what he wants to talk 

about is three more MLAs, three more MLAs. I’d like to see the 

amount of calls that this particular government got, asking them 

to add more politicians. Not one of them can stand in their seat 

today saying that we need more MLAs. Not one of them, 

because not one of them ever got a call to do that and neither 

did any member on our side of the Assembly ever get a phone 

call saying, yes, we need more politicians. Because, Mr. 

Speaker, the clear message I’ll be giving to the Saskatchewan 

Party government is, you could have spent that money wisely 

and much more effectively for the people of Saskatchewan 

instead of adding three more politicians. 

Shame on them, Mr. Speaker. That was not asked for in any 

discussion that I’ve ever had as an MLA, and today now we’re 

seeing evidence of that, that this is what they want to do. And 

why do they want to do that, Mr. Speaker? Why do they want to 

add three more politicians? It’s all about gerrymandering the 

election, Mr. Speaker. That’s exactly what it is and that’s the 

reason why they’re including more politicians. It’s to try and 

gerrymander the electoral process to their benefit, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see evidence of that not only in their tactics to suppress the 

vote by asking for a photo ID [identification] from people going 

to vote. We see that process as clear as day. And I can 

remember the discussions we had around the three more MLAs 

argument, Mr. Speaker, and we told them we don’t need more 

politicians and we don’t need to have more stringent, restrictive 

rules around voting. We want to encourage people to vote, Mr. 

Speaker. That’s the whole argument behind democracy. 

 

As I mentioned numerous times in this Assembly, my father 

was a World War II vet. He fought for democracy. And when I 

see efforts of this nature, whether it’s to pad more MLAs for 

their purposes, Mr. Speaker, in their safe ridings, or to try and 

gerrymander electoral process or to try and thwart people from 

voting that don’t have photo ID, Mr. Speaker, I sometimes sit 

here and shake my head. And I say, shame on the Saskatchewan 

Party because this is not what democracy was meant to be. And 

this is not what democracy should look like because many 

people sacrificed a great deal to ensure we have the freedom 

and the democracy we have here in Saskatchewan and in 

Canada, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So it’s really important, the message I think that many, many 

people would say that have served their country: democracy and 

freedom is something that we should cherish, something that we 

should respect, and something that we should be very thankful 

for. That’s what the whole notion of sacrifice is all about is to 

ensure that we do respect democracy. 

 

And when we sit in the Assembly today and we see the voter 

suppression tactics that is being taught to the Saskatchewan 

Party by the Republicans of the US [United States] on how to 

suppress people’s votes by putting unnecessary rules in place, 

unnecessary rules in place, Mr. Speaker, once again we’re 

seeing that that democracy is being thwarted for pure political 

gain. 

 

And now we go back to the other point of adding more MLAs, 

Mr. Speaker, adding more MLAs when they can’t even keep the 

current MLAs that they have. Many of them are retiring. Some 

of them are leaving. Many of them are just simply quitting 

politics, Mr. Speaker. So why is it that you want to leave a 

certain place and add more politicians when nobody in 

Saskatchewan has asked that to be a priority of the 

Saskatchewan Party nor the New Democratic Party? That’s why 

on this side of the Assembly we think, we think it’s very, very 

important that we continue working hard to build a strong 

economy to make sure that we have health care and education 

for our children and that we don’t thwart democracy in any 

way, shape, or form. And this is exactly what I see by the 

Saskatchewan Party adding three more politicians when people 

in Saskatchewan say we don’t need any more. We don’t need 

any more. 

 



6462 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2015 

And you look at the comparisons from the different 

jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker. We have enough representation here. 

We have enough opportunity here to do the politics that is 

necessary, Mr. Speaker. And now the Saskatchewan Party want 

to add three more MLAs. And I say to those MLAs that are 

standing up today trying to rebut what we’re saying here, and I 

would say to them, you have the opportunity and you have the 

mandate to change your mind and to not proceed with adding 

more politicians to this place. That is totally unnecessary. It is a 

cost that we do not have to have as a province. 

 

And perhaps they need to get a memo as to where that money 

would be better spent, Mr. Speaker. It would be better spent on 

highways, health care, education, reducing the debt, whatever 

the case may be. We don’t need more politicians. We need 

more people out in Saskatchewan to continue to work and to 

build this economy. That’s what we’re asking for and this is the 

reason why we continually on this side of the House ask them 

to not add more politicians. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party government want to 

do it. And this is the opportunity, this is the opportunity and you 

will watch as they get up to speak, Mr. Speaker, they will not 

answer the question.  

 

The question I would ask them on their opportunity to speak: 

will you change your mind and not proceed with adding more 

politicians to this Assembly? Instead use that money to improve 

health care. Use that money to reduce debt. Use that money to 

reduce crowded classrooms, Mr. Speaker. And the simple . . . 

There’s two simple reasons why they should do that is, number 

one, nobody asked you to add more politicians. Not one single 

constituent ever called anybody. And I challenge them: if 

there’s even one, one of their constituents that said, we need 

more politicians, I want to see that letter, Mr. Speaker. They 

will not provide that letter. 

 

And finally, Mr. Speaker, I move: 

 

That this Assembly call on the Saskatchewan Party 

government to scrap its plans to add three more MLAs to 

the Legislative Assembly, which is yet another example of 

this government’s misplaced priorities and wasteful 

spending. 

 

I so move. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 

Athabasca: 

 

That this Assembly call on the Sask Party government to 

scrap its plan to add three more MLAs to the Legislative 

Assembly, which is yet another example of this 

government’s misplaced priorities and wasteful spending. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 

for Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I take 

the question from the member from Athabasca seriously. Our 

plan is not to add three more Sask Party MLAs. We’re going to 

add 12 more Sask Party MLAs in the next election. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Athabasca talks about, where 

are the people that have been asking or commenting on adding 

more MLAs? Mr. Speaker, I do have a letter. Actually it’s a 

quote from a member from Athabasca, Mr. Speaker, when this 

was announced. This is a resident, a resident of Athabasca, “. . . 

that there’s a rowing population and we need more seats. We 

agree with that, that there is a growing population and more 

seats are necessary. We . . . applaud that.” Mr. Speaker, this is a 

quote from the member from Athabasca when he was for it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And why was he for it, Mr. Speaker? Well we’re lucky in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. The province is growing again, which is 

a great thing. Mr. Speaker, we’re at an all-time high of 

1,129,899 people, Mr. Speaker. That’s the fastest growing 

province in Canada, with 20,000 people added in the past year. 

Saskatchewan’s maintained the lowest unemployment rate. So 

it’s not just that more people are voting with their feet that 

Saskatchewan’s a great place to live, they’re coming here for 

the opportunity to work. Mr. Speaker, we didn’t have that under 

the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with Saskatchewan hitting the highest population 

ever on October 1st of 2014, that per cent increase was 1.63 per 

cent, the second-highest growth rate in all of Canada. Mr. 

Speaker, there’s new stats are going to be coming out shortly, 

and I have to reflect, just on a personal note, that there’s going 

to be an additional person reflected in that. And it’s Danielle 

and myself actually welcomed our second son into the world on 

February 23rd. James Michael Tochor was born on the 23rd, 

and we’re very proud of him. I’m very lucky that Danielle is at 

home right now watching, and I love her dearly. And I thank 

her for having to deal with me being away for this week, and I 

thank her nana for helping out as much as she has done. 

 

So that’s fabulous that we get to celebrate the birth of our 

second child, but I’d like to compare that to what it was like 

under the NDP, Mr. Speaker. Under the NDP in the last 10 

years of their government, they lost 22,000 people on 

population out-migration, dismal growth. This goes back to the 

province of Saskatchewan from 1930s to 2007, so 77 years the 

province grew by 100,000. Since the ’07 election, the province 

has grown by over 100,000 in six years, Mr. Speaker. 

Something’s working, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Athabasca in his speech on this 

debate referenced that it was the government’s job to stimulate 

the imagination of the province. Mr. Speaker, this is a problem 

with the NDP. They think that it’s the job of the government to 

do everything. I’m not sure if it’s the job of the government to 

stimulate the people of Saskatchewan. The member from 

Athabasca believes so. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we talk about . . . He referenced that we’ve added 

seats in safe ridings. Well, Mr. Speaker, actually what was 

created was seats in Saskatoon and in Regina. This is the only 

two communities that the NDP hold any seats at all. So, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s not like this is gerrymandering to benefit us in 

some fashion. These seats are added in the growing 

communities of Saskatoon and Regina which need the 

representation that this will provide, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It goes back to the idea that growth is a good thing in the 



March 5, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6463 

province. And that’s what’s changed, which is very positive for, 

I think, everyone in the province except the NDP. Mr. Speaker, 

we’re seeing more and more people moving back to 

Saskatchewan, starting businesses, growing businesses. This is 

a good thing. And what it’s allowed to do is with a growing tax 

base we’re able to put money back into the important programs 

and affect the well-being of this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, it’s ludicrous that he would 

put forward this debate when . . . in the timing. First off, this is 

something that has been settled a couple years ago, so the NDP 

are running out of ideas if this is the best material that they can 

debate in this Assembly. And this is also kind of ridiculous that 

the member that put this forward is the one that I quote. This is 

what his thoughts on it was: “I think the overall thrust of this 

Bill in terms of more MLAs, and . . . [I] think it’s a great idea 

. . .” That’s the member that moved this motion, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Here’s another one from him. “The obvious answer is yes, as 

the population grows. And you should have more MLAs as the 

population should reflect that the number of seats that we have 

in the Assembly.” That’s the quote from the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re so lucky in this province that we are 

growing again. And really this is probably the smartest member 

in the Saskatchewan NDP caucus, is the member from 

Athabasca, and this is his quotes on how it’s a smart idea. In his 

words, obviously the answer is, “. . . yes, as the population 

grows. And you should have more MLAs . . .” That was the 

member from Athabasca. Why has that changed? Mr. Speaker, I 

think this is reflective of the NDP mindset. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we should cut them a little bit of slack, 

maybe a little bit. They’ve had to release some of their staff 

members, key members in their management. And they’re now 

kind of looking for new ideas and they’re going back to what I 

would say is the smartest member in the Saskatchewan NDP 

caucus, being the member from Athabasca. Which, you know 

what? I can see him probably putting, I would hope, his name 

forward for the leadership of the NDP that’s somewhat 

scheduled a leadership contest probably in 2016, 2017. I would 

encourage him to seriously consider it because I think the 

leadership on that side of the House is questionable, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

[11:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked about decisions that are made by this 

government. We have to talk a little bit about decisions made 

by the former NDP government. We talk about dollars invested 

or lost. And that’s what we did lots in the bad, old NDP reign of 

terror, is we lost a lot of money. It would add up to $329 

million the NDP decided to spend on things such as Big Sky 

Farms, $26 million lost; SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility 

Development Company], $35 million lost. They invested in 

anything and everything to hope for a chance that there would 

be growth in population and a growing economy. Everything 

from bingo to pawnshops — that is the record of the NDP, and 

lost population. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the current NDP are proposing the question, 

where did the money go? This is in their ads that are running 

right now, and it’s kind of a ludicrous question when you look 

at it. Our response is, if you look at the $3 billion that has been 

repaid in debt . . . You know, every month we pay off our credit 

card in our house. And you know what? My wife never asks me 

the following day, you know what? Where’d the money go? 

Oh, yes, it was in the account, and I paid off the Visa. That’s 

what we’ve done, Mr. Speaker. 

 

If you look at where the priorities of this government has been, 

is a record investment in health care. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

something that is important, a service that we provide to the 

province of Saskatchewan. And you’ve seen some of the results 

of this record investment, which has lowered wait times for 

surgical care in the province. We have more work to be done in 

this area but, Mr. Speaker, when I talk to the good people of 

Saskatoon Eastview, they’ve seen the difference. They’ve seen 

what record nurses working in the province has done. They’ve 

seen the benefits of having a record number of doctors in the 

province. 

 

So as we go through this debate on the following year and a bit, 

we’re leading up into the election. And we’re going to put out 

actual concrete plans of what we’re going to do if we get the 

honour to represent the province again in government. But I’d 

like to ask the NDP, where is their plan? Where’s the plan, 

concrete numbers on what they would do, concrete plan on 

actual proposals that a NDP government would do if they get 

the honour — heaven forbid — the honour to form government 

again, Mr. Speaker? 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to conclude that it is questionable that 

they decided to put up that member with this debate, knowing 

that his position has flip-flopped back and forth, once for it, 

now against it, and maybe after next election, for it again. Mr. 

Speaker, that is a questionable decision, but that is what we see 

from the . . . 

 

The Speaker: — Time has expired. I recognize the member for 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a sad day in the 

Assembly when the quality of the heckling is better than the 

quality of the speeches. But anyways, I’m not sure what we’re 

coming to. The 75-minute debate is supposed to be a debate 

about a topic, and when we hear someone ragging on about 

how, you know, looking at the past instead of looking forward 

to the future, I think that’s really unfortunate.  

 

And I do think that in the next election with those kinds of 

speeches, we’re going to see a lot of different faces, and we’re 

going to see a lot more faces on this side of the House, Mr. 

Speaker, and maybe even a turnover. And so I think they’d 

better be careful about their speech writing. I’m not sure what 

all the staff are doing over there, but that’s pretty questionable. 

 

Anyways, one of the things we want to talk about today is, you 

know, Mr. Speaker, it’s almost four years since I entered the 

Assembly as an elected representative for the constituency of 

Saskatoon Nutana, and we’ve been talking about these 

misplaced priorities now since . . . It’s kind of like déjà vu all 

over again. 

 

And we talk about that in terms of the number of bills that this 



6464 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2015 

government brings forward to correct mistakes. So that’s a huge 

waste and expense of the taxpayers’ time and the whole idea of 

austerity that we’re living in now. If this Premier was really, 

truly, honest about austerity, he would take a second look at this 

grandiose scheme to add three more MLAs because we know it 

will cost millions of dollars for the taxpayers. But he’s not even 

looking at that. All we see instead is a bunch of misplaced 

priorities and wild spending on some very, very strange kind of 

projects. 

 

So what is it? Is it austerity or not? Is there essential travel or 

not? Is there any reason, has anyone asked for the addition of 

three more MLAs? No. As far as we know this is just an idea 

that the Premier cooked up because he wanted to enlarge the 

government. And really one has to question what his motives 

are to do that. 

 

We know that all sectors of government are supposed to be 

facing austerity. And yet the growth in MLAs has not been 

scrapped. It is a very interesting definition of austerity. The 

government, they’ve increased the number of MLAs but 

they’ve decreased the size of the civil service. Where are the 

priorities here? More politicians and less public servants? I’m 

not sure if that’s serving the people of Saskatchewan very well, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And then we know that, you know, we’re willing to cut and 

make all these cuts to services that the public deserves and is 

entitled to, especially in times of record revenues. We have a 

government that has received the benefit of the resource sector 

in spades, Mr. Speaker. You know, when oil drops to $50 a 

barrel, all of a sudden they’re panicking. Well, Mr. Speaker, 

this is really interesting when we see that when they’re 

spending like drunken sailors, and yet they can’t even rein in 

their own spending when it comes to politicians. It just doesn’t 

make any sense. 

 

We know that at least it’s going to cost the taxpayers more than 

$775,000. Now that is not chump change, Mr. Speaker, and 

we’re just wondering what it is in the Premier’s head that he has 

decided that this is something that’s absolutely necessary. Even 

the pundits in the press have noted that there’s nobody 

complaining about there not being enough MLAs. I mean it’s 

kind of like, I was going to say, you know, it’s like putting on 

your tombstone, I didn’t work hard enough or something like 

that. I mean it’s just ridiculous to think that this is something 

that the public wanted. 

 

We never saw it in the platform four years ago of this 

government. We never saw it in any Throne Speech. It just was 

like, oh the Premier had an idea and he made it happen one day. 

And that’s really not the process I think that people want to see 

from a government. They want to see these ideas put out there 

as part of their platform so that we know what exactly we’re 

going to get when we form a government. 

 

I think the minister, or the Premier, again didn’t do his 

homework. If he would have looked at the ratio, the population 

ratios for MLAs to constituents, we already had one of the 

highest in Canada, or the highest ratio of MLAs to residents in 

all of Canada. So again we have no sort of rationale, no sort of 

logical reason for this extravagant expense. 

 

And then we get, you know some things the Premier has done 

make sense when we’re looking at these tough times that he 

says we’re in, despite the fact that there’s still record revenues. 

But his tough times are that he doesn’t know how to budget. 

And I think that’s the real part and problem of what we see with 

the current budget coming up is that this government simply 

does not know how to manage its resources. And record 

expenditures, record revenues, 80 per cent increase in revenues, 

and that they’re crying that they don’t have enough money, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

It’s not very prudent spending. It’s not wise spending. And this 

kind of example, where they’re announcing three more MLAs 

which were not needed, not asked for, and are expensive, that’s 

just another example of why this Premier is crying tough budget 

at a time when there still is record revenues. And they just 

haven’t been able to manage their own money, when people are 

losing their jobs, services are being cut, tuitions going up, 

health care costs like prescription drugs are going up, and we 

don’t see any priority on those items, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We heard today about a failure to provide essential emergency 

surgery to a young man who’s in incredible pain and terrified 

what’s going to happen to him if he doesn’t get in to see a 

surgeon soon. These kinds of stories don’t make any sense and 

they certainly fly in the face of this kind of grandiose spending 

by this government to add three more MLAs. We know that this 

government is cutting where it hurts people, and yet they have 

all these vanity projects. The Premier’s library project? Really? 

At a time like this? When the former Usher of the Black Rod 

needed something to do, that’s what he came up with? Like 

really, Mr. Speaker, you have to wonder what’s going on over 

there. 

 

We also have wasteful entitlement behaviour like unnecessary 

trips to Ghana, London, chauffeured limousines. We see Oscar 

parties in Hollywood. I mean where is the end of the wasteful 

spending? And again today we see more wasteful spending. So 

I’m not sure why this government isn’t paying attention to what 

really matters to Saskatchewan people. 

 

We see right now . . . Here’s another story that the Provincial 

Auditor brought out last December. And this is one that really 

concerns me: there’s a 228 per cent increase in the number of 

paid consultants that this government has hired. I know there’s 

one consulting firm from Regina here that has received up to 

$35 million in contracts — $35 million in contracts in the last 

five years. And when we did a freedom of information request, 

we couldn’t even get a description of the work that they’re 

providing. 

 

So you’ve got to really wonder why we’re not building those 

resources within our own public service, having experienced 

professional public servants sharing their knowledge and wealth 

rather than paying exorbitant fees to outside consultants who 

then take the money and go to Mexico, Mr. Speaker. I mean it 

doesn’t make any sense. We need to build a strong, vibrant 

public service to have those resources within our government so 

that we can carry on and do the work for the Saskatchewan 

people. 

 

We see more than $100 million for the toxic John Black version 

of lean, including a $40 million payday for an American 



March 5, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6465 

consultant. Mr. Speaker, these kinds of expenses and 

extravagances, this wasteful spending, and these misplaced 

priorities are something that this government should be 

ashamed of. 

 

And again we bring up, revisit this idea of adding three MLAs 

as just again another example of the performance this 

government has proved over the last four years or since the last 

election. None of this was promised in their platform, and 

you’ve got to really wonder what it is that’s driving them. Is it 

just a sense of entitlement? Is it a sense that they don’t need to 

listen to people anymore, that they know best or that their 

consultants know best? You know, at least they finally saw 

reason with John Black, but now we see that they’re scared to 

stand up to him and they’re still doing one and a quarter million 

dollars of travel in this quarter alone just to meet the 

requirements of the contract. Like come on, Mr. Speaker, 

there’s got to be an end to this wasteful spending. 

 

And I think, like I said, we’re raising the issue of three more 

MLAs. It’s just another example of where this government has 

gone awry. It’s gone amok. It’s spending way too much money. 

And when we see, you know, an 80 per cent increase in the 

amount of revenues and not one penny being put away for a 

rainy day . . . In fact they raid the rainy day fund every time 

there’s a flood. And that’s a whole different discussion, when 

we talk about the mismanagement of the way they’re funding 

the disaster assistance program, the crop insurance program. I 

mean farmers are very upset out there, Mr. Speaker, and this is 

something I hear about regularly, is the concerns farmers have 

about the way this government is managing the flooding 

program. 

 

So you know, I really wish that this government would take 

another look. I mean take a pause; it’s not too late. We’re not in 

the writ session at all yet, and so we know that there is time. 

There’s still time to go back and say, oops. And I mean this 

government says oops all the time. They say oops in terms of 

the school year. They say oops in terms of some of the bills, 

like The Traffic Safety Act. They missed something so they’re 

saying oops. There’s no problem with saying oops. They’re 

good at it. 

 

But there are some where they’re really stubbornly not 

admitting their mistakes. The removal of the film employment 

tax credit is one, and here right before us we have another 

example of this government refusing to accept the fact that this 

is an oops. They should just get rid of it. We don’t need it, and 

that it’s time for them to wake up and start spending money 

wisely. So, Mr. Speaker, I do support this motion. 

 

The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 

Prince Albert Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is an honour to 

participate in this debate. It’s easy for the members opposite to 

talk. And the member from Athabasca does truly have the gift 

of gab. Since 1995, when he was first elected, he’s been talking. 

 

In fact the NDP and their leader do a whole lot of talking, but 

what we see is zero action. What we see is a whole lot of doom 

and gloom and a scenario that is always looking into the past. 

It’s time for the NDP to stop just talking doom and gloom. Give 

the people of the province a scenario, a plan, a project for what 

they’re going to do for the future of their province, instead of 

always looking backwards. 

 

The NDP continue to pretend that they do not know where the 

money of the government has went. Well maybe they should 

start listening in the Legislative Assembly here. Maybe they 

should listen to the last six budgets that were presented, and if 

they would have been listening, Mr. Speaker, they would have 

realized that we have balanced budgets. We have $3.3 billion of 

reduced . . . in tax reductions. We have a provincial debt that 

was reduced by $3 billion dollars, and we have $6.6 billion of 

infrastructure investment since ’07.  

 

[11:30] 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we did more than that. We presented six 

balanced budgets. The people of our province asked our 

government to be fiscally prudent. We listened, then we took 

action. We invested in our people and in our infrastructure. 

Think about it. Six balanced budgets in a row. For those of us 

living in the new Saskatchewan, we know where that money 

went. It went right into our pockets. With tax season fast 

approaching for the deadlines, we are very happy to see that we 

have $3.3 billion in our pockets. This year alone we will save 

over $490 million due to tax cuts. But we didn’t stop there, Mr. 

Speaker. We put a plan in place to grow the population of this 

province. What did the NDP do? Mr. Speaker, they dismissed 

that plan. 

 

In fact, on October 31st, 2003, the CBC Saskatchewan Votes 

features “Economic policy: . . . the hot button issue,” pointed 

out the views of U of S [University of Saskatchewan] 

economist, Eric Howe. And I quote: 

 

Howe didn’t believe the Sask Party’s plan would provide 

the promised population growth of 100,000 people in 10 

years. From his perspective, the province has hovered 

around a million people for 70 years and that may well be 

the natural population level. 

 

No wonder the NDP do not want to talk more MLAs. Inherent 

in their belief is the idea that Sask will always be a wee 

province. Our province will always be wee? Wrong, Mr. 

Speaker. As of February of this year, 2015, our population has 

reached an all-time high of 1,129,899 people. Imagine, Mr. 

Speaker, 1,129,899 people — 100,000 people in less than seven 

years, compared to the 77 years from 1930 to 2007 that it took 

to grow the population by 100,000 people. 

 

That’s what setting goals does, Mr. Speaker. We will continue 

to set goals and then take action to achieve those goals into the 

future. I’m proud to be on a team that is working towards a 

bright future to help Saskatchewan reach its full potential. It is 

clear the NDP and their leader have not changed. In fact in 

2005, the former NDP Economic Development minister, Eldon 

Lautermilch, who was the MLA for P.A. [Prince Albert] 

Northcote weighed in on the topic of population out-migration. 

What did he do? He dismissed any concerns saying, and I 

quote, that we ought not to worry because when people leave 

there is “more left for the rest of us,” as quoted in the Saskatoon 

StarPhoenix, April 27th edition. 

 



6466 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2015 

Now let’s review what the NDP did and their dismissive 

backwards thinking. In 2003 when the Diefenbaker bridge 

needed repairs, the members opposite refused to even pay for 

50 per cent of those costs. In fact former minister Mark 

Wartman had this to say about it: “The bridge isn’t an integral 

part of Highway 2, but merely an urban connector road 

exclusively within the municipal jurisdiction.” Who’s ignoring 

Prince Albert? Wartman also claimed that it isn’t the 

government’s responsibility, then went on to say no, I don’t 

think it’s something we are comfortable for at this point. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s fast-forward to 2011 when our 

Diefenbaker bridge needed repairs. We stepped in on the spot, 

and we put $4.2 million into that infrastructure of that bridge 

because we know the importance of Prince Albert. 

 

Let’s also look at that 2011 election, since we’re talking about 

it. What did the NDP promise? They promised that they would 

build a second bridge. Now, Mr. Speaker, the interesting point 

about that is they didn’t do any homework. They didn’t even 

have the $50 million from the federal government. They didn’t 

secure any of that. They just made empty promises — all talk, 

no action. 

 

As I pointed out earlier, the MLA from Athabasca has been an 

MLA since 1995. Let’s see what they’ve done since that time. 

He served as Northern Affairs, Environment, Community 

Resources, and Highways and Transportation ministers. But I 

guess talk is cheap. Here’s the record: no second bridge, no 

twinned highway between Saskatoon and Prince Albert, and no 

St. Louis bridge. It is clear the NDP are all talk and no action. 

 

I want to thank the people of Prince Albert Northcote for 

electing me in 2011. Let’s look at what the Saskatchewan Party 

record is for Prince Albert and area since that time. We have a 

twinned highway between Saskatoon and Prince Albert. We 

have a brand new St. Louis bridge and our government, the 

Saskatchewan Party government has agreed to partner with the 

federal government, with the city of Prince Albert to fund a 

second bridge. To date, Mr. Speaker, the city has not put in a 

proposal for the second bridge. 

 

What have we done since 2007 when the people of 

Saskatchewan asked our government to govern this province? 

Mr. Speaker, in Prince Albert alone we’ve put money into 

Corrections and Policing, Highways, Education, Health. And 

we didn’t stop there, Mr. Speaker. We put money into the 

people of this province. We invest in our people. We invest in 

our seniors. 

 

For example, the NDP for 16 long years left that seniors’ 

income plan at the same rate. I guess in 16 years, if you’re 

chasing everybody out of the province there’s no need to worry 

about increasing income plans. Well, Mr. Speaker, in this year 

alone that income plan for the seniors will have increased by 

nearly three times. That is what we do with our money. 

 

Another thing that we do with the money is we invest in health. 

For example, Prince Albert Parkland Health Region has 

increased their operating funding. Since ’07-08 we’ve put in 

59.7 per cent more dollars. We’ve built the family addiction 

treatment centre. We built . . . helped to build the Valley Hill 

Youth Treatment Centre and we’ve replaced the Pineview 

Terrace Lodge with an increase in beds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is clear. If the members opposite would stop and 

listen for even two minutes, they would know in this legislature 

what we’ve been doing with our money. We invest in people, in 

seniors, in families. We’ve increased the funds for policing and 

corrections. We’ve increased the funds for safe communities. 

We’ve put in more beds into the Pineview, Pine Grove 

Correctional Centre. We’ve put in a 144-bed expansion at the 

P.A. Correctional Centre. Mr. Speaker, there’s 12 more police 

officers in Prince Albert alone. We’ve invested in innovative 

projects like the Hub and COR [centre of responsibility]. We 

have supported that project by $1.8 million, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Our city of Prince Albert took action and we are now a leader in 

a community mobilization project that has went across more 

than a dozen communities across the province. We’ve 

implemented the COR, which is an analytical tool for backing 

up all the work that we’ve been doing, and it is going across the 

world, Mr. Speaker. That’s how interesting that project has 

been. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we invested in education. We’ve invested in terms 

of St. Anne elementary school, new gymnasium at Carlton 

Comprehensive High School, 28 reno projects since November 

of 2007 in P.A. 

 

Mr. Speaker, 10 minutes is hardly enough time to talk about all 

the projects that we’ve invested in Prince Albert alone, much 

less the whole province. Mr. Speaker, the NDP talk a big game 

and strike out every inning. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

to enter into the 75-minute debate here this afternoon. I think 

anyone who’d be observing this discussion here today would be 

awfully disappointed in what they’ve heard here today. I think 

that anyone who’s sent any one of us to this Assembly would 

expect us to come forward with an approach of common sense, 

an approach that has some regard for the current conditions that 

we’re facing, and certainly some regard to the current 

conditions that so many Saskatchewan people are facing. 

 

And to hear two speeches from the governing Sask Party again 

here today, get up and to grandstand and to brag and to sort of 

shout down common sense voices from across Saskatchewan, is 

disappointing. 

 

The issue at hand is a really common sense matter. I mean it’s 

astounding that this government thinks that a priority for 

Saskatchewan people is to increase the number of MLAs at a 

significant cost, almost $1 million a year, every year moving 

forward, with additional costs as you build inflation into that. 

How is that a priority, Mr. Speaker? This is something that we 

stood opposed to as government rammed forward this addition, 

Mr. Speaker, that was really more about their own political 

self-interests and certainly nothing to do with the interests of 

Saskatchewan people. And we stand opposed here today. 

 

And if you look at the current context, we have a more 

constrained financial environment, a tighter fiscal environment, 

an oil price that’s causing some fiscal pressures, and 



March 5, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6467 

Saskatchewan people are bearing the brunt for that. Yet that 

Premier and this government thinks they should just ram 

forward with this wrong-headed priority, this misplaced priority 

of jacking up the number of MLAs and the cost to go with it. 

 

The reality is in Saskatchewan the ratio of a number of 

constituents to us as an MLA is a much lower number than 

really the rest of Canada. So it’s not as though that there’s best 

practice or examples out in the rest of Canada that suggest that 

somehow we need to have more MLAs. In fact we are on the 

very low side of the number of constituents that we represent. 

 

So this is really an example of a government that has sort of lost 

their way through a period of decade-long prosperity, where it’s 

been sort of an opportunity for a Premier and a government to 

surf an economic tide but do very little to deliver for 

Saskatchewan people. And through that process, we note that so 

many are frustrated that we’ve come through a 10 . . . a 

decade-long run of prosperity, yet this government struggled 

through that period to even balance the books, Mr. Speaker. 

They’ve actually added debt through a decade-long run of 

record prosperity and revenues and have actually added to the 

debt, Mr. Speaker, because they couldn’t manage their fiscal 

house, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Or you know, this whole concept that the Premier said a couple 

of years ago that he was then going to support this whole 

common sense notion that maybe we should put a few dollars 

away for the long term, whether you call it a bright futures fund 

or a heritage fund, whether you model it after something like 

Norway or something like Alaska, Mr. Speaker, or some 

variation that’s a built-in-Saskatchewan fund. The reality is the 

Premier’s now scrapped that promise, because he couldn’t get 

his finances in order or couldn’t make decisions during periods 

of windfall revenues to make sure that there’s some dollars put 

to work for a lasting benefit for future generations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see a decade-long run of prosperity, yet a government that 

couldn’t get the job done when it came to public infrastructure 

in this province, which is in disarray, Mr. Speaker. And we see 

a decade-long run where it was just far too simple for this 

Premier and this government to surf an economic tide and, sure, 

give good speeches but not get the job done and deliver for 

Saskatchewan people in areas like diversifying our economy, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

In fact we’ve seen this government do the opposite thing, where 

they went and canned the film industry in Saskatchewan, Mr. 

Speaker, and are now out with a whole host of misplaced 

priorities, wining and dining around the world, in Hollywood 

and other places, Mr. Speaker, but don’t have a structure for 

which they can sell to rebuild the film industry here in 

Saskatchewan, something that New Democrats will certainly 

make a focus and a priority in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We see a weak procurement policy of this government, who are 

continuing to sell out the interests of Saskatchewan businesses 

and not allow us to be as strong as we can be, Mr. Speaker. And 

instead of focusing in on all these areas — the crisis in seniors’ 

care, the emergency rooms that are rammed up with long waits, 

Mr. Speaker, the inadequate access to primary health care, the 

cuts in education and the inadequate access to the needed 

supports and the one-on-one time that students deserve — we 

see a government focusing in on something that’s really all 

about them, Mr. Speaker, and their own political interests. 

 

And I think it speaks to a government maybe that’s been in 

power for some time, Mr. Speaker. Maybe they got caught up in 

their own press releases, Mr. Speaker. But they’ve certainly lost 

track, Mr. Speaker, when you see a government that’s unwilling 

to consider the wasteful spending we see in so many areas of 

this government and the waste of adding the number of three 

more MLAs to this very Assembly, at a cost, Mr. Speaker, of 

almost $1 million a year. And if you can imagine, this is a 

priority of course that’s motivated out of political self-interest 

of the Premier and this governing party, but not of the interests 

of Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. And it should be the 

public interest and the interest of Saskatchewan people for 

which should be motivating our actions. 

 

And in some ways this is a symbolic measure, but it’s important 

as well. This is a time where civil servants have been asked to 

pay a heavy price, where in fact, Mr. Speaker, some of the 

increases they’ve received have been yanked back by this 

Premier, Mr. Speaker. Yet this guy is unwilling to reduce the 

number of MLAs, Mr. Speaker, in the fact that he’s jacking up 

the cost and jacking up the number of MLAs. And you know, 

the reality is, we have real people and Saskatchewan families 

that are being impacted right now on so many fronts: not getting 

the services they deserve in health care, not getting the dignity 

they deserve in seniors’ care, young people not getting the 

opportunities they deserve, where we see affordability and the 

cost of living that’s been through the roof, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[11:45] 

 

So it might be, you know, a pretty good news story through that 

decade run period, decade-long run of prosperity for, you know, 

the governing party if you will, Mr. Speaker, but there’s a 

disconnect with the reality of most households across 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And I think this is why, when 

people are losing jobs, when services are being cut, when 

tuition is being put through the roof, Mr. Speaker, when we see 

costs of health care and prescription costs that are going up, Mr. 

Speaker. When we see the government failing to get the job 

done with the next generation in classrooms across 

Saskatchewan. It’s why it’s so easy to recognize the increase to 

the number of MLAs as a misplaced priority. 

 

We’ve seen this government misplace dollars on many other 

projects. We’ve seen them waste millions and millions and 

millions of dollars through its smart metre debacle, Mr. Speaker 

— something that should’ve never occurred, something that’s 

now being added directly to the power bills of Saskatchewan 

people, Mr. Speaker, who are being asked to pay more once 

again, Mr. Speaker, for the mistakes and misplaced priorities of 

this government, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You can look at the questionable economics and the huge cost 

to the costly carbon experiment, Mr. Speaker, almost $1.4 

billion that’s being added directly to the power bills of 

Saskatchewan families and Saskatchewan businesses, Mr. 

Speaker, at a time where the economics just don’t support it, 

Mr. Speaker. It’s really disappointing to see a government lose 

its way on these kind of fronts. 

 



6468 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2015 

Or you know, there’s the example where this government was 

pretending that they were going to cut the number of civil 

servants, sort of playing political games with it, but then all they 

did was jack up the spending on private consultants, Mr. 

Speaker. Over 220 per cent, Mr. Speaker, well over $100 

million a year to private consultants. And then the auditor came 

in and took a look at the processes and recognized that in more 

than 70 per cent of those circumstances, there wasn’t actual 

documentation about what was supposed to be achieved, what 

the purpose of the contract was, what was supposed to be 

accomplished through that process, Mr. Speaker. This is the 

kind of waste and misplaced priorities that we’ve seen under 

this government. 

 

And of course we see it now through the creative accounting of 

this government with its costly lean project where they’re 

forking over tens and tens of millions of dollars to American 

contractors — or one American contractor — to come to 

Saskatchewan and really make a whole host of problems in 

health care here in Saskatchewan, spending tens and tens of 

millions of dollars for John Black and these American 

contractors and these Japanese senseis instead of focusing on 

where it matters for Saskatchewan people. 

 

So we see misplaced priorities, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to 

focus on what matters to Saskatchewan people. On matters like 

this, Mr. Speaker, it’s becoming clear to Saskatchewan people 

that government has changed and they’re focused more on their 

own self-interest, their partisan interest, Mr. Speaker, and less 

so and not focused on the public interest, Mr. Speaker, or what 

really matters to Saskatchewan people. So we should be doing 

the right thing and not increasing the number of MLAs by three, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Dewdney. 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — My pleasure to join the debate today, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. There’s a few things I heard from over there. 

Two years ago, but also just recently, the member from 

Athabasca during his speech, the first thing he said, I think he 

called this an emergency debate, emergency debate about 

something that happened, a thing that was proposed or passed 

two years ago. The debate was two years ago. 

 

Now in the political world, I would say that is ancient history. I 

mean there’s constant press releases about all the good things 

that governments are doing. And I thought maybe in their first 

debate of the spring session, the first one before a potential 

election maybe, depending on when the next election is, they 

might go on one of their best issues. But they decided to go on 

an issue a couple of years old that’s been debated. Didn’t really 

stir any interest, but fair enough. We’ll look at it again. 

 

He also mentioned something about gerrymandering. 

Gerrymandering, now that’s the process I think happens in the 

United States where congressional districts are sort of made 

based on who’s voted for you in the past, so it’s very difficult to 

knock out an incumbent. So you know, that process is 

controlled by an independent body that it happens every 10 

years. This is part of legislation. So it happens every 10 years 

but we’re not . . . It’s not the government that chooses the 

boundaries. It’s an independent commission. I believe there’s a 

member from a three-person commission: one from the 

government side, one from the opposition side, and a judge. 

 

So the member from Athabasca is really saying that there is 

some . . . They’re impugning the reputation of, I believe, a 

member that sat on that side. Mr. Van Mulligen was part of that 

process, so he’s really saying that that member had something 

nefarious going on, or the judge. Now if he believes that, he can 

maybe step out these doors and mention that in the rotunda 

there if he really does believe that. So I’d suggest maybe he 

calm down the gerrymandering talk. Again it’s not done by the 

government. It’s done by an independent commission, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So this idea is really nothing new. This happens, as I 

mentioned, every 10 years. It’s part of legislation after a census. 

There’s a census based on the population. And of course my 

colleagues mentioned eloquently that there is more people in 

Saskatchewan, around 150,000 more people. So as population 

increases, even the member has been well said . . . the member 

from Athabasca said four times on his feet, four times in his 

speech something to the effect that, and I quote, “There is no 

question that as our population growth continues that the 

question has to be asked when . . . [are we] getting more seats.” 

He said that on March 5th in 2012. So again a long time ago, 

but he agrees with it. He wanted that. Now he’s flip-flopping 

after talking to his leader and the whip probably. So I guess this 

is a best two out of three, today, another attempt at that. 

 

But in our province, we’ve had a high of 66, 66 MLAs before. 

We’ve had as low as in the mid-50’s, I believe. So this brings 

up time in the middle of where we’ve been, with record 

population, record population. Again it’s based on population. 

 

Federally this year, in the next election there will be 30 more 

MPs [Member of Parliament], 30 more MPs federally. And 

what’s that based on again? Population. Based on population. 

So as the population goes up, the number of MPs will go up. 

 

Now I’m not a religious follower of federal politics, but I do 

watch the afternoon programs, Power Play, you know, Power 

& Politics, those sorts of shows. And the increased number of 

MPs, I haven’t heard that once. That’s probably not even in the 

top 50 issues that MPs are talking about. I would suggest it’s 

probably not in our province, but again, here we are. It’s 

interesting that they brought this up. So again based on higher 

population. 

 

Now I know in the northern seats, the northern seats in 

Saskatchewan, those boundaries are fixed. They’re frozen. And 

the reason for that I believe is it’s a sparsely populated area, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. So as recognition of that, there’s huge land 

masses that those MLAs would have to cover, and so that’s 

written in it. Those are frozen because there’s large swaths of 

land for constituents to come meet their MLA or vice versa. If it 

went perfectly based on population there might be only one, one 

northern constituency, but there’s two. Now they don’t want 

that. 

 

Now when we talk about rural MLAs here, the ancillary part of 

this, of course based on population, there’s a few more MLAs. 

That makes some sense. But the part of it, the good part of it is 

. . . Now there’s the member from Cypress Hills, the member 



March 5, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6469 

from Arm River, their constituencies are over 5,000 square 

miles. Now if this didn’t happen, those constituencies would be 

even larger. Those constituencies, a lot of those rural . . . the 

member from Wood River as well. They’d be much larger 

constituencies. 

 

So it’s fine for the members of Cumberland and Athabasca, but 

for the member from Cypress Hills, well who cares? That’s 

what they think. So rural MLAs . . . Of course we know a lot 

about rural politics on this side. I understand. I give them a 

break for not knowing anything about rural Saskatchewan on 

that side. That makes some sense. And I notice federally now 

either . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . What would have 

happened, Mr. Speaker? Either the constituencies, rural 

constituencies would have grown had this not happened, they 

would have grown massively, or there would have been split 

rural and urban seats. There would have been split . . . There 

would have been pie-shaped constituencies carved out of cities. 

 

So what party railed against that federally? What party thought 

that was patently unfair, that there’s split rural and urban 

constituencies federally? The NDP, the federal NDP. They have 

a big problem with it federally. But if that were to happen, if 

this legislation didn’t happen, if that would have happened 

provincially, well it’s great. 

 

So it’s really, it’s really just about politics all the time, what’s 

best for them in this moment in time, Mr. Speaker. So that’s 

certainly too bad. So again this motion, it really speaks to me 

about it’s a yesterday motion from a yesterday party. That’s 

what it is. There’s nothing new, nothing better to talk about than 

a two-year-old motion that didn’t really interest anybody at the 

time. So it’s really no surprise since they’re out of ideas for 

motions already at the beginning part of the session. They’re 

really out of ideas in total, Mr. Speaker. They seem to be simply 

reactionary to whatever the Saskatchewan Party does. Sask 

Party government side does this; NDP reacts. Again it seems 

there’s no plan. There’s no plan going forward. 

 

I was going get into some of the good old NDP ideas, the 

classics: SPUDCO, talking about misplaced priorities and 

wasteful spending; Channel Lake; tappedinto. I’m not sure if 

that’s a beer company or what it is. Clickabid. The good old 

classics. 

 

But again, Mr. Speaker, I realize that if someone was paying 

attention there might be some irony about me talking about this 

being an old motion and talking about the old NDP’s ideas. But 

that’s just the point, Mr. Speaker. There are no new ideas from 

over there. They’re just the same old NDP. All they worry 

about is what happened. So that’s the point, Mr. Speaker. We’re 

moving this province forward. I wish I had more time to talk 

about the tree booklet and Dwain Lingenfelter and the $5 

billion hole in the last election and those sorts of things. Again I 

realize I’m talking about the past, but there really is no now 

with the NDP. Let’s hear some positive ideas, what they would 

do better, and more importantly, how they would pay for it. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time for debate has expired. 

Questions. I recognize the member from Cut Knife-Turtleford. I 

recognize the member. 

 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In typical NDP 

fashion, the member from Athabasca is flip-flopping on his 

position again. The member previously stood in this House and 

said, “The obvious answer is yes, as the population grows. 

[Then there should be] . . . more MLAs as the population should 

reflect that in the number of seats that we have in this 

Assembly.” Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty clear that the members over 

there have no idea what their own policies are. To the member 

from Athabasca: we know your leader is too afraid to actually 

propose any policy. Will the new policy of the NDP be to stand 

firmly on both sides of every issue? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 

we began, once we saw the evidence of how the Saskatchewan 

Party was not only suppressing the vote but gerrymandering the 

electoral cycle, Mr. Speaker, we obviously saw the true nature 

of the bill. However, my challenge back to that member, to the 

Premier, and to the Saskatchewan Party: we can do away with 

the bill that’s talking about adding more politicians, adding 

more politicians that’ll cost $800,000 a year. And if the 

members opposite and the Saskatchewan Party Government, 

including the Premier, want to do this today, let’s do it. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, in the month of January I had the 

opportunity to visit some schools in Prince Albert. And what I 

heard there was how devastated they were at the loss of their 

community school funding. There are now children that are 

going without lunch because of these cuts, and the teachers 

there and the programmers are incredibly disappointed at these 

short-sighted cuts. So I want to ask the member from P.A. 

Northcote how she can justify adding three MLAs for $775,000, 

but yet her government cuts food to children in schools in 

Prince Albert. 

 

[12:00] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you for the question. In Prince Albert 

alone we increased the funding to the Saskatchewan Rivers 

School Division by 18.9 per cent. We increased the P.A. 

Catholic school funding by 31.6 per cent. Prince Albert 

constituencies have received $37,280,259 that went towards the 

new St. Anne elementary school, a new gymnasium at Carlton 

Comprehensive High School, and 28 reno projects since 

November 2007. In Prince Albert alone we have 338 new child 

care spaces. We have 14 new pre-K [pre-kindergarten] 

kindergarten programs. 

 

That is in education alone, Mr. Speaker. We also can go on to 

Health where we increased funding for family addiction 

treatment centre, Valley Hill Youth Treatment Centre, the 

Pineview Terrace Lodge, and we can go on and on, Mr. 

Speaker. I hope they ask me more questions. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Lloydminster. 



6470 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2015 

Ms. Young: — Mr. Speaker, it is no shock to anyone in 

Saskatchewan that our population has grown significantly since 

the NDP were kicked out of government. In fact, our population 

has grown by over 120,000 people since the NDP left. Yet 

when the member from Athabasca spoke to this issue in 2011, 

he stated: “. . . there’s a growing population and we need more 

seats. We agree with that, that there’s a growing population and 

more seats are necessary. We would applaud that . . .” 

 

To the member from Athabasca: we know that you seem to be 

the only one on your side with the courage to speak your mind. 

Will you stand by your words today that our province is indeed 

growing, or have you now been gagged by your leader? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Speaking of 

flip-flops, Mr. Speaker, the member from Lloydminster very 

well knows that her predecessor actually left the Saskatchewan 

Party government, left the province of Saskatchewan, and went 

on to greener pastures. So again that goes back to my argument 

that the commitment towards public service, Mr. Speaker, is to 

ensure that we have enough representation that’ll stay the 

course, that’ll stay the course and keep the commitments that 

they made for their constituents, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I challenge any member across the way to present to me an 

email, a phone call, or any kind of text message that asks any 

Saskatchewan Party MLA that they needed more politicians. 

Any one of them can send me any form of communication from 

any one of their constituents. And I say today that not one 

single constituent wrote them about adding more politicians at a 

cost of $800,000, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

We’ve heard a lot of gnashing of teeth and hand-wringing from 

this government about how tough this budget is going to be. 

And you’d think that if this is going to be indeed a tough 

budget, that they’d be examining every option to save money 

for the people of Saskatchewan. And when they look to straiten 

the finances for health care, for education, for seniors’ care, for 

programs, cuts to services that people rely on, where they’re not 

looking, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to their misguided plan to 

introduce three more MLAs. 

 

Now it was a bad choice at the time, Mr. Speaker, but you’d 

think that the bad nature of it would be particularly underlined 

at this time. 

 

To the member from Saskatoon Eastview: three more MLAs. 

Why now? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Eastview. 

 

Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

NDP know a lot about bad times. Mr. Speaker, when they 

formed government, when they were faced with a tough budget, 

what would they do, Mr. Speaker? Jack taxes up. That’s the 

record of the NDP. Whenever they experienced any downturn 

in their economy, and there was a lot of downturn under those 

16 years of NDP rule, that’s the first thing they would go to, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the budget is coming out on March 18th, and I 

encourage the opposition to stay tuned to see what gets 

communicated on that day. But we’re pretty proud on this side 

of the House with the record of repayment of debt, record 

investment in infrastructure, the record decreases in taxes that 

alone since 2007 have saved the Saskatchewan taxpayer $5 

billion. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Estevan. 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in this 

House the member from Athabasca said, and I quote from 

Hansard, “There is no question that as our population growth 

continues that the question has to be asked when we’re getting 

more seats.” Now, Mr. Speaker, he’s saying the government 

shouldn’t be adding MLAs to appropriately represent 

Saskatchewan citizens. Not only do they have no plan for 

Saskatchewan, they can’t even agree on a single policy. 

 

To the member from Athabasca . . . The only member opposite 

who has a vision is the member from Athabasca. When is the 

next leadership race? 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Athabasca is 

saying today that it is obviously not what the people of 

Saskatchewan want. I challenge the Premier sitting in his chair 

today, I challenge him today, let’s take care of the bill that is 

requiring or that’s asking . . . The Sask Party government is 

asking to add three more politicians in this time of austerity. I 

say, let’s get rid of that notion. The people of Saskatchewan 

don’t want it. I’m challenging the Premier today, let’s get rid of 

this notion of adding more politicians to the public cost, Mr. 

Speaker. Let’s do it today. Let’s get ’er done, Mr. Speaker. 

Let’s give ’er snoose, Bruce. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We 

see a lot of waste under this government, and certainly we’ve 

seen misplaced priorities. We see that with the three more 

MLAs that this government’s bringing forward when no one 

needs three more MLAs at a cost of $1 million. We see all sorts 

of waste in a whole bunch of other areas. 

 

My question to the member from P.A. Northcote: we know that 

there’s unmet needs in the school divisions up in Prince Albert. 

We’ve talked about the cuts to community school coordinators. 

There’s a whole bunch of other needs and supports for learning 

funding. Why does that MLA think it should be a priority to 

jack up the number of MLAs and the cost of such instead of 

supporting students in Prince Albert? 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote. 

 

Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you for the question. Mr. Speaker, the 



March 5, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6471 

member from Athabasca indicated that there was a full 

cupboard when they left office, and the people of the province 

kicked them out. So why did they not spend anything in Prince 

Albert alone, much less across the province? Why were they 

chasing people out of the province? 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have spent $15.7 million in provincial funding 

for northern spruce west housing, Prince Albert Community 

Housing. We have over 227 housing units with 70 under 

construction. We have 550 K that we spent on 11 homes 

through Habitat for Humanity. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I am so pleased with the record of our 

government. I could go on and on, but I’m afraid my time is 

going to run out. So if the members opposite would just tune in 

March 18th to the budget, they will see our priorities for the 

government, for the province of Saskatchewan, and moving 

forward into the future. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The 75-minute debate has expired. 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 

Motion No. 1 — Boundary Dam Integrated Carbon Capture 

and Sequestration Project 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by Ms. Eagles.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Walsh Acres. 

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And it’s a honour for me to join into the discussion on the 

private members’ motion today. So a little bit of recap on what 

the private member motion is, and it’s: 

 

That this Assembly supports this government’s 

commitment to the Boundary dam integrated carbon 

capture and sequestration project. This innovative facility 

is the first of its kind and is a tangible step in addressing 

the production of greenhouse gases worldwide. Further its 

innovative technology supports Saskatchewan’s resource 

industry which is vital to the prosperity of our province. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that this is a world-leading 

project that Saskatchewan should be very proud of. And I think 

that we should go over and rehash a little bit about exactly what 

carbon capture and sequestration is, what it’s going to do for 

our province, how it’s going to help the environment in our 

province, and what the benefits are going to be for our 

government supporting this initiative. 

 

I’m not sure what the opposition feels like about this initiative, 

but I think when it comes to vote on this particular motion a 

couple weeks from now, it’s going to be interesting how a few 

of them vote, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So what is carbon capture and storage? Carbon capture and 

storage is a process where carbon dioxide is captured from large 

industrial plants. This prevents the carbon dioxide from entering 

the atmosphere. The gas is then compressed and either stored 

deep underground at a carefully selected site or used elsewhere, 

most notably injected into oil fields to enhance oil recovery. 

 

The Boundary dam carbon capture and sequestration project 

also captures other gases that can have an impact on our 

environment such as sulphur dioxide. This gas is then 

transformed into sulphuric acid, a tradable commodity that is 

then sold on the market to offset some of the costs of the carbon 

capture facility. 

 

Another question that comes to mind is, why do we need carbon 

capture and storage, and why is SaskPower committed to this 

technology? 

 

As the world’s population increases and developing countries 

continue to industrialize and increase their standard of living, 

CO2 emissions will continue to grow. Reducing emissions is an 

important way to develop a vibrantly sustainable industry in 

power generation. The Government of Canada is among the 

first in the world to actually legislate an emission reduction for 

coal-fired plants. While others like the United States and 

Europe are discussing targets, SaskPower continues to develop 

renewable power options and encourages conservation as a way 

to reduce emissions at the source. 

 

The Boundary dam CCS [carbon capture and storage] project 

will capture 1 million tonnes of carbon dioxide every year. Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, that’s the equivalent of taking 250,000 

vehicles off our roads, and that’s a fantastic thing to help 

combat climate issues in our communities, and I think that 

shows our commitment to the environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, how does carbon capture and storage fit into 

SaskPower’s future supply options? Because some of the 

opposition members will say, well, you shouldn’t have spent the 

money on carbon capture and sequestration. You should have 

spent it on renewable energy and a few other options which, 

Mr. Speaker, they should know better because we are already 

looking into renewable energy options as well. 

 

It’s essential for SaskPower to develop environmentally 

sustainable power generation options for Saskatchewan’s 

future. We are researching the best balance of options to 

produce affordable, reliable, and sustainable power that 

includes carbon capture and storage, cogeneration, geothermal, 

nuclear power from small modular reactors, natural gas, hydro, 

wind, solar, and biomass. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is a large 

range of options that we’re looking at to ensure that the people 

of Saskatchewan have reliable, safe, environmentally 

sustainable options for power into the future and to support our 

growing economy and our growing province. SaskPower is also 

developing energy efficiency and conservation programs. Mr. 

Speaker, we know that conservation and energy efficiency will 

be big things going into the future for us. 

 

Another question is, what if we don’t bother storing our 

man-made carbon dioxide? Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 

world will continue to rely on fossil fuels in decades to come, 

whether we like it or not. With the growing population and 

industry of developing countries, several scientific studies 



6472 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2015 

forecast climate change as a result of increasing greenhouse gas 

into our atmosphere. Changing temperatures, sea levels, and 

agriculture patterns are all possible. Carbon capture and storage 

is one of many initiatives taking place around the world to 

reduce emissions and the scale of climate change. 

 

The Government of Canada now legislates how much carbon 

dioxide can come from coal-fired power plants. If carbon 

capture is not applied to Saskatchewan’s co-production, we’ll 

have to eventually shut down a third of the province’s power 

generation. The result would be more expensive generation and 

much higher power bills. 

 

Another question that the opposition posing in the future . . . I 

don’t think they have that option now. Is carbon capture and 

storage an experimental, unproven technology? Well the answer 

is no. The first carbon storage project dates back to 1979, and 

many more since then have successfully stored carbon dioxide 

underground for more than 30 years. This includes 

Saskatchewan’s own Weyburn-Midale project in the early 

2000s under the former government. 

 

SaskPower’s Boundary dam 3 project is the first of its kind due 

to the scale and the many parts involved. It is not the first or the 

last project that will successfully use carbon capture, 

transportation, and storage technology. Research continues to 

make it more efficient with new breakthroughs leading to lower 

cost and small scales in the future. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s a 

little bit of an outline of what carbon capture and sequestration 

is, some of the reasons why we’ve chosen to pursue this 

world-first initiative. 

 

And I want to talk a little bit about, first and foremost, on 

October 2nd, 2004 it was announced that we had the grand 

opening of the carbon capture and sequestration storage 

initiative as part of Boundary dam 3. “Over the past six years 

Saskatchewan has become a global hub of innovation, 

especially in agriculture, mining, oil and gas, and now carbon 

capture . . .” is one of the quotes that comes from the grand 

opening, Mr. Deputy Speaker. “This is the world’s first 

commercial-scale carbon capture and storage . . . in Estevan, 

Saskatchewan.” Today it was officially opened by Premier Brad 

Wall . . . quoting: Premier Wall, Canada’s Minister of Natural 

Resources Greg Rickford, Saskatchewan Economy Minister, 

and SaskPower CEO. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, at first there was a little bit of doubt I 

would say from the members across. I know that the member 

from Nutana asked a lot of questions about the costs involved 

with carbon capture and sequestration, asked about, was it 

going to be successful? As usual, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when 

anything new comes forward in our province on the innovation 

scale, be it some new targets hit that we put in place for health 

care, the members opposite are always doubtful that it can be 

done. They are always scared of something new coming to our 

province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I really think that in 

February, this February, we’re able to answer some of the 

questions that the member opposite’s had. 

 

So for Boundary dam unit 3, there’s performance metrics. And 

for power generation output, the expected pre-launch of the 

grand opening is 110 megawatts. The actual power generated at 

Boundary dam 3 right now is 120 megawatts. Expected at 

launch, before launch, the purity of CO2 was 95.5 per cent. The 

actual post-launch in February 2015, 99.99 per cent pure, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker.  

 

CO2 capture is expected pre-launch of 1 million tons, and then 

we’re on target to hit that 1 million tonnes, taking 250,000 

vehicles off the roads in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

CO2 emissions per year, 1.1 million tonnes, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and I think there’s 100 tonnes approximate after CCS. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re reaching all the targets that were put 

in place for Boundary dam 3 and the project that we think was 

well worth the investment, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We know that 

it was a big investment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I think a 

government that was scared of making targets, scared of trying 

something new, probably would not have followed through with 

this. 

 

And January 12th, “Boundary dam CCS project wins 

international award.” Mr. Deputy Speaker, this isn’t a project 

that’s just going to affect Saskatchewan. This project’s going to 

be basically, to take a word from the opposition, a 

game-changer for coal-fired power plants all across North 

America and the world, Mr. Deputy Speaker.  

 

We know that there’s 100 coal power plants coming on line in 

China every year, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I think that for us 

to continue . . . Coal is one of the most available resources to 

produce power, and to think that we’re not going to be using 

coal to produce power in the next decades to come I think 

would be foolhardy. I think what we need to do is find ways 

and invest in ways that we can produce electricity with coal 

more environmentally friendly. And I think this project shows 

that that can be done. 

 

And I think the fact that Saskatchewan was a leader on this 

front and was able to put this project together, follow it through 

to completion, and not meet but exceed the targets that were put 

forward for the carbon capture and sequestration, shows that 

Saskatchewan is a leader in innovation and is able to be first in 

line in many, many innovative projects. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, SaskPower’s Boundary dam carbon 

capture and storage project was named project of the year in the 

coal category by Power Engineering and Renewable Energy 

World magazine. Mr. Speaker, this shows that they’re . . . I’m 

going to go through a couple of accolades, not only from our 

province, but throughout North America. And it says carbon 

capture is one of the best technologies that people are going to 

see for a reliable source of power, for a baseload source of 

power. 

 

And I think that’s important to remember in this whole 

conversation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that coal is our base 

power. It is supplemented by wind, biomass, geothermal, hydro, 

but those options are not available for base power, to make sure 

that our businesses, our large mining projects, our households, 

have a reliable power source. And going into the future, the 

people of Saskatchewan want to know, when they turn on the 

light, they have that reliable source of baseload power so the 

lights come on.  

 

And if, as a government you don’t look into the future to ensure 

the basics that people are expecting from you, you’re not doing 



March 5, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6473 

your job properly. In a time where Saskatchewan is doing well 

and they’re looking forward to growth and we’re having more 

people come to our province and more business and industry 

come to our province, having that reliable power is one of the 

things that’s going to make sure that it draws people to 

Saskatchewan. But not only draws them to Saskatchewan, it 

makes sure they stay in Saskatchewan and continue to do 

business here. 

 

And I, along with the member from Cut Knife-Turtleford, had 

the opportunity to travel to a conference — it’s called LEHI, the 

Legislative Energy Horizon Institute — to look at power 

options into the future. And everyone that came up to myself, 

and I believe the member from Cut Knife-Turtleford, wanted to 

talk about carbon capture and sequestration because they’re 

going to look at putting regulations on coal-fired power plants 

in the States. And to meet these regulations, they all want to 

know if what we’re doing here in southeastern Saskatchewan is 

a viable option to ensure that we can continue to use coal-fired 

power plants. The representatives of Virginia were particularly 

interested because obviously coal is a very big industry in 

Virginia. And if you’re going to move away from coal-fired 

power plants — and Pennsylvania — that’s going to be a very 

big hit to their economy, so they want to make sure that they 

have the availability to continue to use coal-fired power plants. 

 

It’s very interesting when you talk about the opposition, and I 

got this off one of their press releases, and I’ll quote, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. And it’s the member from Nutana, and she 

says about: 

 

This government needs to stop cutting funding for climate 

change, environmental assessment and environmental 

protection. It needs to increase our use of clean, renewable 

power and have a much better energy conservation target. 

It needs to implement the Technology Fund it promised. It 

needs to protect . . . prairie . . . pastures. And it needs to 

ensure that resource development is done responsibly, 

with stringent triple-bottom line . . . 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are very, very interesting quotes from the 

member from Nutana. 

 

And I was reading actually an article from Bruce Johnstone 

about the “CCS best bet to stop climate change” is the title of 

this project. 

 

And coming from the director, Sierra Club director, John 

Bennett: 

 

“It’s a waste of vital capital that should be invested in 

conservation efficiency and renewable (energy),” Bennett 

said of the $1.4 billion invested in CCS. “[If we don’t] . . . 

get us off fossil fuels.” 

 

While that’s true . . . 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that the member from Nutana 

would rather quote the director of the Sierra Club instead of 

actually putting the ideas and concerns of the people of 

Saskatchewan first before parroting the quotes from the 

member of the Sierra Club, an international company. And I 

think it really speaks to the fact that the NDP have lost their 

way. They seem to be parroting comments from people that 

really don’t have a lot to do with Saskatchewan right now. And 

for the member from Nutana to be concerned about the director 

of the Sierra Club and what he’s saying, instead of her 

constituents, it’s a little concerning, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And I think another take in our step, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

that when the members opposite come in this House day after 

day after day, they’re not bringing forward any new ideas. 

They’ll talk about how the new initiatives we’re doing, and the 

member from Rosemont did it this afternoon saying, well was 

the $1.4 billion investment worth it in carbon capture and 

sequestration? Well the question would be if you’re not going 

to invest money in that, what would they invest it in? 

 

And I believe that actually the carbon capture and sequestration 

started before, before we formed government. I think they 

started it. And interesting just to note is that prior to 2007, and I 

think the member from Martensville has a very good quote, and 

I’m probably going to quote her, Mr. Speaker, again from their 

2002 discussion paper on page 3, and I quote, invest in “. . . 

clean coal technology will reduce emissions, generate real 

environmental gains and provide Canada with significant 

economic development and employment . . .” 

 

Mr. Speaker, it goes on to say and by it she means the NDP 

policy, which is nice if they’d have that again, and I quote: 

 

Enhanced investment in the research related to clean coal 

technology, carbon dioxide separation techniques and 

geological sequestration of carbon dioxide would enable 

Saskatchewan to reduce the environmental impact of 

utilizing its coal and oil resources and would develop 

valuable technologies for use throughout the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and I’ll go on to quote the member from 

Martensville again: 

 

That was from 2002, and apparently they held that position 

until 2007 when [and I like it when she says this] in their 

glossy brochure it says, and I quote their [glossy brochure 

she used all the time] Saskatchewan’s opportunity to 

advance technologies for using coal in a environmentally 

advanced way can make a difference on a global scale. 

This world-leading technology could prove clean energy 

for future generations in Saskatchewan and has the 

potential to be applied throughout the world. 

 

In 2007, which wasn’t that long ago, the NDP were praising 

clean coal technology saying it could be a game changer on the 

environmental front. It could ensure that we could use our 

utilize coal and oil resources. And now the member from 

Nutana, apparently I’m pretty sure, I’m not sure how she’ll vote 

in this motion, but I’m thinking she’s going to vote against it 

because she thinks that money could have been invested some 

place else. And now they’re against it. So they flip-flop on a 

few issues weekly, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Like there’s just a wonderful debate on, brought forward by the 

member of Athabasca who probably is the best flip-flopper on 

that side, Mr. Deputy Speaker. He stands firmly on both sides 

of most things. And I think that their not being able to take a 

position on almost anything, has really resulted in their election 



6474 Saskatchewan Hansard March 5, 2015 

outcomes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I’m very much looking 

forward to the day when we can stand in this Assembly and 

have debates on policies because both of us will have policies 

and both of us will have positions and both of us will have a 

platform to be able to debate issues, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Yes, right now, right now when we kind of have these 

conversations in the House, it’s a little unfair for the members 

on this side of the House because we do have a record and we 

do have policies. And we have a growth plan and we have ideas 

put in place on what our priorities are right now, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

Right now they have no priorities. Their priority is to try and 

get re-elected in their nine seats. I think that’s their priority, and 

right now they have no positions put forward. And I’m hoping 

that soon they’ll be able to have some positions put forward so 

we can debate. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a couple of media articles that I 

want to talk about with the carbon capture and sequestration 

project that we had. It’s come to completion, and I would be 

remiss, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I didn’t thank the hard work put 

forth by the men and women at SaskPower that worked on the 

Boundary dam project. They worked hard. And I know my 

neighbour was one of the guys that, he spent months and 

months and months down in Estevan away from their families. 

And I know it’s hard on them when there’s deadlines set. And 

they worked very hard and put in a lot of extra hours to make 

sure that the carbon capture and sequestration project, the 

Boundary dam 3, came in on time, and they made sure that 

everything was working properly. And it’s fantastic when they 

switched the switch at Boundary dam 3, that that project 

worked out fantastically and not only met but exceeded the 

expectations and the performance measures that were put forth, 

I believe. 

 

The members on this side think that the investment put forward 

in the carbon capture and sequestration project was well worth 

it. It’s the first of its kind. It’s a game changer for coal-powered 

fire generation plants everywhere. And I really think that it’s 

something that the people of Saskatchewan can be proud of 

because it’s an innovative project that was done right here and 

done by the hard-working people, men and women of this 

province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And with that, I’ll adjourn 

debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Walsh 

Acres has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 

House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 

moved that this House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 

the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House is adjourned 

until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 12:28.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6451 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6451 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6451 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6451 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6452 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6452 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6452 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6452 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6452 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6453 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6453 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Social Justice Week at the University of Saskatchewan 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6453 

 Renewed Commitment to Relationship with Ukraine 

  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6454 

 Opposition to Nuclear Waste Storage in Saskatchewan 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6454 

 Lymphedema Awareness Day 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6454 

 Successful Initiatives at Pinehouse 

  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6454 

 Basic Military Qualification Co-op Training Program 

  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6455 

 New Health Centre to Open in Radville 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6455 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Cancellation of Urgent Surgery 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6455 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6455 

 Patient Care and the Lean Initiative 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6457 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6457 

 Occupational Health and Safety Inspections 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6458 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6458 

 Creative Saskatchewan Expenditures 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6459 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6459 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 

 Increasing the Number of Members of the Legislative Assembly 

  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 6460, 6469 

  Tochor ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6462, 6470 

  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6463, 6469 

  Jurgens ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6465, 6469 

  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 6466, 6470 

  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 6468 

  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6469 

  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6470 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6470 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6470 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 

 Motion No. 1 — Boundary Dam Integrated Carbon Capture and Sequestration Project 

  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6471 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


