
























































Hansard: May 05, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 59A  TUESDAY, MAY 5, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7093 
 May 5, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
Clerk: — Members, Mr. Speaker will not be present today to 
open today’s sitting. 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and 
Remote Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’m not sure where they’re seated in the Assembly 
exactly, but I know we have a contingent of midwives in the 
Assembly today. So I’d ask all members to welcome these 
valuable members of the health care team in the province to our 
Legislative Assembly and their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To you and 
through you, I would like to introduce a bunch of students from 
northern Saskatchewan. We had a chance today to meet with 
them. They went through a practice round of question period 
and bills and stuff. 
 
And I just want to welcome those individuals to their 
Legislative Assembly, to let them know that this is their place, 
and we represent them, and government has an obligation to all 
our residents to look after us. So I just want to welcome you to 
your Legislative Assembly, to let you know this is your gallery. 
We’re here on behalf of citizens of northern Saskatchewan as 
well as you students. I wish you well, a safe journey home. 
Welcome to your Legislative Assembly. I ask all members to 
join me please. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, 
Culture and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 
leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for 
an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To 
you and through you it is my pleasure to introduce, sitting in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker, some special guests who joined us 
today from northern Saskatchewan. Seated in the Speaker’s 
gallery are 32 high school students from nine different northern 
communities. They’ve travelled a long way to take part in the 
Charles Knight Youth Mentorship program hosted by the 
Provincial Capital Commission. I’m thrilled that they could join 
us in the legislature today. 

Today is the second day of the youth mentorship program. 
Already this group has toured the University of Regina, First 
Nations University of Canada, Government House, the RCMP 
[Royal Canadian Mounted Police] Training Academy, and the 
Royal Saskatchewan Museum. They are at the Legislative 
Building today meeting with MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] and government officials to learn about our 
province’s history, the democratic process, and jobs with the 
public service. 
 
One of the purposes of this program is to expose students to 
some of the post-secondary and career opportunities in our 
growing province. We want them to know that they can set high 
goals for themselves and achieve them right here in 
Saskatchewan. Participating in this program are students from 
the communities of Dillon, Cumberland House, La Ronge, 
Wollaston Lake, Ile-a-la-Crosse, La Loche, Stanley Mission, 
Pelican Narrows, and Hall Lake. Thanks to the teachers who 
have accompanied them to their capital city and to the staff of 
the Provincial Capital Commission for organizing this program 
for them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in welcoming these 
guests to their Legislative Assembly, and thank you. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, sitting in the west 
gallery, it’s my pleasure to introduce a group of 40 grade 4 and 
5 students from Dr. L.M. Hanna School. Give everybody a 
wave here. Mr. Speaker, accompanying them today are their 
teachers Jennifer Huber, Lisa Jones, and parent chaperone is 
Tasha Balkwill. It’s my pleasure to have them in the gallery 
today, Mr. Speaker, the legislature. And I look forward to 
getting stumped by their questions a little later today, but all 
members if you could join me in welcoming the students from 
Dr. Hanna to their legislature. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 
pleased today to welcome Joanne Havelock, Kim Smith, and 
Julian Wotherspoon here today. They are midwifery advocates, 
consumer advocates for increasing the number of midwives we 
have here in Saskatchewan. They’re with the organization, 
Where’s My Midwife? Saskatchewan. I’d like to welcome these 
women to their legislature and thank them for all the work that 
they do in trying to increase the number of midwives we have 
across this province. So with that I’d ask all members to join me 
in welcoming these women to their legislature. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with 
leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave for 
an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 



7094 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2015 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to you and through you I would like to 
recognize this year’s Saskatchewan Agriculture Student 
Scholarship recipients. The Saskatchewan Agriculture Student 
Scholarship is an important part of the Ministry of Agriculture’s 
ThinkAg initiative. Through this initiative we are able to 
maintain a positive, accurate perception of agriculture among 
our province’s youth. 
 
Each year the Government of Saskatchewan recognizes four 
young people for their passion and dedication to agriculture. 
They’ve spent countless hours completing school work, taking 
part in extracurricular activities, and getting first-hand 
experience in the agriculture industry. 
 
Winning this scholarship is not easy. This year we received 18 
outstanding applications. Choosing our top four proved 
difficult, and choosing a grand prize recipient was even more 
so. These four individuals represent the future of the agriculture 
industry in the province. They are bright, innovative, and 
dedicated. 
 
Seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, are the scholarship 
winners, and I ask them to wave as I announce their names: 
Morgan Heidecker of Middle Lake has been chosen as the 
grand prize scholarship winner. Morgan submitted a video 
explaining that she wants to work in agriculture because it is a 
timeless industry with global possibilities. Morgan will begin 
studies at the College of Agriculture and Bioresources at the 
University of Saskatchewan this coming fall. As the winner of 
the grand prize scholarship, she has earned $4,000 to help pay 
for her studies. 
 
Our three runner-up winners were each awarded $2,000 to be 
used in the same manner. In no particular order, our three 
runner-up winners are Shelby Evans of Kenaston who will be 
attending the College of Agriculture and Bioresources at the 
University of Saskatchewan. Shelby grew up on a cattle ranch. 
In her application video, she explained that it is her dream to 
manage her family ranch and purebred cattle business. 
 
Cassandra Maurer of Grenfell will be taking the agricultural 
machinery technician program at Parkland College. Cassandra 
is attracted to the agriculture industry because of how dynamic 
and technologically advanced it is. Her application showed us 
how truly appreciative she is of the accomplishments every 
member of our agriculture industry works to achieve. 
 
Alyxandria Harland of Lloydminster, who was not able to join 
us today, will also be attending the College of Agriculture and 
Bioresources at the University of Saskatchewan. Alyxandria’s 
dream is to become a veterinarian. In her essay she says she 
looks forward to building working relationships with cattle 
producers as their veterinarian. 
 
Each of our four recipients are eager to showcase their pride in 
the agriculture industry. I’d like to thank all of the scholarship 
recipients for their dedication and passion for agriculture. I look 
forward to seeing what you each achieve. 
 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming this year’s winners 
of the Saskatchewan Agriculture Student Scholarship to their 
legislature. 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
On behalf of the official opposition, I too would like to 
welcome these three students to their legislature. As the official 
opposition critic for Agriculture, I want to say welcome to your 
legislature and congratulations on the award. 
 
Also, two of you will be going to school with my son this fall. 
He’s also going into animal sciences at the U of S [University 
of Saskatchewan]. So I think that’s Morgan and Shelby, we 
heard. Keep an eye on him. He’s a city kid. He doesn’t know 
much about farming, but he is definitely interested in becoming 
a vet himself. 
 
And so I think I certainly am excited for you for entering into 
agriculture at this point in our province’s history. It’s a very 
exciting time in agriculture, and the opportunities are endless. I 
actually forwarded the press release to my son today, saying, 
look at what you’re getting into; this is an exciting field. So 
congratulations all of you. All the best in your future careers, 
and we look forward to great things from you. So welcome to 
your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 
join with my esteemed colleague from Coronation Park in 
welcoming the teachers, students, and chaperones from Dr. 
L.M. Hanna school, in particular, Ms. Huber, Jennifer Huber, 
who is a long-time personal friend of our family and colleague 
with my wife, Karen, at . . . I forget where that was, Jennifer, 
thanks. Anyway, it wasn’t with me. It was with my wife. 
Anyways . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . A senior’s moment, 
thank you, Mr. Speaker. A long-time friend of our family’s and 
colleague with my wife, and thank them for bringing their 
students to their Legislative Assembly. Mr. Speaker, thanks. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, to ask 
for extended leave . . . or an extended introduction, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s asked for leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to stand again today in my place to recognize the northern 
students and to say that it’s very, very inspirational for us to 
have northern students come from across northern 
Saskatchewan to travel all this distance to take advantage of 
some of the opportunities and touring some of the great 
facilities of our province, including this Assembly. 
 
And I want to thank the people within the Capital Commission 



May 5, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7095 

that organized this important visit. I want to thank the 
chaperones that are also here. And one of the chaperones I want 
to especially recognize is Corrine Favel, who is the wife of the 
famous Butch Favel of Ile-a-la-Crosse who’s a great friend. 
And of course I also want to recognize my wife’s cousin, 
Rhonda. We used to call her Rhonda Wait, and I know she’s 
married, but I forgot her married name. But I want to thank her 
for coming in as well, as well as all the other teachers that are 
here today. But, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to them in Cree: 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
And for translation: I’m very pleased that they’re here, is what I 
said in Cree, and that this is their home and that they have nothing 
here to fear. 
 
And I also want to recognize the Dene students that are here. And 
my Dene isn’t of course as good as theirs, but I want to say very 
quickly in Dene: 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Dene.] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in Dene the quick translation is that I’m very 
pleased that they’re here today, to welcome them to their 
House, and that I’m originally from Patuanak. 
 
So I wanted to point out that it’s always an extreme pleasure of 
getting students coming here from all the way from northern 
Saskatchewan and to simply say to them that you’re the best. 
Thanks so much for coming. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Today I rise to present a petition in support of better schools 
here in Saskatchewan. We know that far too many of our 
classrooms are overcrowded and under-resourced, and that the 
Sask Party government has eliminated hundreds of educational 
assistant positions and that students often do not get the 
one-on-one attention they need. The condition of many of our 
schools is rundown, unsafe, or uninspected, and this 
government refuses to release information on the $1.5 billion of 
known repairs that are needed in our schools. This 
government’s plan to rent schools from private corporations is 
expensive and reckless. And none of this is acceptable given the 
record revenues this government has had over the last eight 
years. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
call on this government to immediately stop ignoring 
schools and start prioritizing students by capping 
classroom sizes, increasing support for students, and 
developing a transparent plan to build and repair our 
schools. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise today 
to present a petition. Homelessness is a major problem in La 
Ronge and other parts of the North, and it’s getting worse. 
Shelter is a basic need for everyone, but under this government 
it’s getting harder and harder for people to find adequate 
housing, especially families, seniors, women and children who 
face abusive situations. The problem is getting worse because 
of the rising level of poverty and skyrocketing home ownership 
costs. The prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the Saskatchewan 
government to build a homeless shelter in the Lac la 
Ronge area to meet the needs of addressing homelessness 
in the Lac la Ronge area. 

 
And it’s signed by many good people of northern 
Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again I rise in my place today to present a petition in support of 
greater accountability by the provincial government and it 
relates to the P3 [public-private partnership] projects, Mr. 
Speaker. And the petitioners . . . The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately pass The Public-Private Partnership 
Transparency and Accountability Act. 

 
And as in duty bound, these petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, and these petitioners have come from Canora, 
Moose Jaw, and from all throughout the land. And I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise again 
today to present a petition in support of maintaining hyperbaric 
services at the Moose Jaw Hospital. 
 
The petitioners point out that the people of Moose Jaw worked 
hard for many years through fundraising and community 
activism in order to procure a hyperbaric chamber for the 
Moose Jaw Hospital. They point out that hyperbaric treatments 
are essential for the proper treatment for many people living 
with diabetes, cancer, and other conditions. The petitioners 
point out that the existing hyperbaric chamber is the only unit of 
its kind currently in operation between Edmonton and Toronto, 
and they point out that hyperbaric services will no longer be 
offered in the new design for the Moose Jaw Hospital because 
of the changes to the hospital design initiated through the John 
Black version of lean. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly require the Sask 



7096 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2015 

Party government to reverse its decision to scrap the 
hyperbaric chamber and to instead ensure that this service 
continues to be provided in the new Moose Jaw Hospital. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of 
Moose Jaw. I so submit. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am rising today to 
present a petition in support of retaining Yarrow Youth Farm. 
We know that the government has closed Yarrow Youth Farm 
and they’ve created an open-custody wing in Kilburn Hall, 
which is a secure custody unit for youth considered a greater 
risk to their communities, and this is to accommodate the 
Yarrow residents. 
 
The provincial Advocate for Children and Youth has declared 
he cannot endorse such a rationalization because low-risk teens 
could be influenced and pressured by close proximity to 
high-risk youth who may be involved in serious crimes or 
gangs, and Kilburn Hall is a more institutional environment that 
could intimidate and alienate teens that have committed minor 
offences. And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the government to keep 
Yarrow Youth Farm open, to ensure a caring home 
environment for youth who have committed minor 
offences, and provide support to help these young people 
redirect their lives by setting more positive goals. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Saskatoon. I so 
present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 

International Day of the Midwife 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Today is the 
International Day of the Midwife. More and more women in our 
province would like to choose to be supported through their 
pregnancies, the births of their children, and the postpartum 
period by a midwife. Unfortunately, access to this important 
service for women and families in Saskatchewan remains 
elusive. In almost eight years this government has not managed 
to expand midwifery beyond three health regions despite the 
benefits it can provide to mothers, babies, and the health care 
system. 
 
Currently there are only 13 midwives practising in all of 
Saskatchewan, with demand where it is offered far outstripping 
supply. This year’s International Day of the Midwife theme is 
The World Needs Midwives Now More Than Ever, and that 
certainly holds true here in our province. The global need for 

midwifery services has been recognized by the World Health 
Organization and many leaders in public health, and this 
government needs to do more to ensure that every woman who 
wants to use a midwife can have that option regardless of where 
they live in this province. 
 
One group that is advocating to the government to fix the 
shortage of midwives and the disparity of services is Where’s 
My Midwife? Saskatchewan. They have been circulating 
petitions and raising awareness about the state of midwifery in 
our province, and they hope their work will not fall on deaf 
ears. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing 
International Day of the Midwife today and celebrating the 
work midwives do to keep mothers and their children healthy, 
here in Saskatchewan and around the world. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Today 
is International Day of the Midwife. Midwives offer a valuable 
service to mothers and their babies. Our province has been 
offering midwifery services since 2009 when the first clinic 
opened in Saskatoon, and since then midwives have participated 
in the delivery of more than 1,800 babies. 
 
Midwifery services have expanded in our province since we 
first began offering them. There are currently 15 midwifery 
positions in three health regions in Saskatchewan. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, our government provides annual funding of 2.2 
million to support midwifery services. We also offer 
return-in-service bursaries for training and recruitment, and 
clinical placements for students. 
 
We continue to support the growth of midwifery and we’re 
looking at ways to expand access to these very important 
services. In 2015-16 we’ll begin providing funding that will 
increase the capacity of midwifery programs in our province. 
This funding will allow a qualified nurse or paramedic to be the 
second attendant at home births instead of another midwife. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, this will help increase client access to home 
births and will improve work-life balance for midwives. 
 
Today I want to thank midwives in our province for the great 
work they do. They bring a valuable contribution to the health 
and well-being of our residents. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 

Teacher Shapes Lives of Northern Youth 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise in 
my place today to recognize a teacher from my hometown that 
has been doing an outstanding job developing young leaders in 
Ile-a-la-Crosse and area. Dave Dalton is the math and science 
teacher at Rossignol High School in Ile-a-la-Crosse and he also 
teaches robotics. It was for this work in robotics that he was 
recently named one of CBC [Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation] Saskatchewan’s top 40 under 40. And every year 



May 5, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7097 

Dave Dalton has been taking his students to Saskatoon to 
compete in the annual robotics competition, and this year he’ll 
be taking his students to a Skills Canada competition. 
 
This is Dave Dalton’s third year teaching in Ile-a-la-Crosse and 
he’s been doing a remarkable job. He moved to Ile-a-la-Crosse 
from Nova Scotia and his East Coast friendliness is obvious to 
everyone who meets him. 
 
By coming to Ile-a-la-Crosse, he has also had the opportunity to 
shape the lives of many young people and has made a real 
difference for students in the North. He is also committed to 
professional development and spends many hours after classes 
to improve his teaching methods and also to ensure that his 
students are getting the best education possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Dave Dalton on his well-deserved award and to thank him for 
all the work that he does in working with our northern youth in 
Ile-a-la-Crosse, like many other students do throughout all parts 
of Saskatchewan, including northern Saskatchewan. I thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress 
Hills. 
 

Souls Harbour Rescue Mission Celebrates Anniversary 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Last night the 
member from Moosomin and I attended the 25th anniversary 
banquet for Souls Harbour Rescue Mission here in Regina. 
With 25 years of serving meals, 25 years of offering 
encouragement and, most importantly, 25 years of changing 
lives, it’s amazing to see the impact an organization can have 
on an entire community. 
 
Souls Harbour aims to rescue people from poverty and 
addiction by offering the gospel message through practical and 
emergency help such as food, clothing, shelter, and 
life-changing recovery programs. Since 1990 Souls Harbour 
Rescue Mission has served more than 1.5 million meals. 
They’ve given away 300,000 pieces of clothing and have 
provided over 55,000 nights of emergency shelter to people 
who need it most. People participating in addictions 
programming have received over 50,000 hours of class time and 
1,800 counselling sessions have been offered. This means 
making a difference in thousands of people’s lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even though Souls Harbour celebrated 25 years of 
operation last night, this was only the 12th year of the Love 
Your Neighbour fundraising banquet, and I would like to give 
special thank yous to the Regina Symphony Chamber Players 
for providing the entertainment for the evening, as well as 
executive director, Joe Miller, and his team. Without much of 
Joe’s work, Souls Harbour would not be the safe haven that it is 
for so many people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like us to add our congratulations to this 
fine organization on this momentous event. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 

Emergency Services Dispatchers Receive Sask911 
Excellence in Teamwork Awards 

 
Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am pleased 
to rise today to recognize three exceptional emergency services 
dispatchers from the Prince Albert area. Betty Lussier, Dakota 
Marino, and Jill Stefanick were recently awarded the Sask911 
Excellence in Teamwork provincial award. They were 
nominated by Parkland Ambulance communications manager, 
Brenda Dutchak, for taking extraordinary measures to save a 
man’s life last December. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, on December 6th a man called 911 and 
told the operator that he was suffering from a heart attack. Then 
he hung up the phone before providing full details of his 
location. Lussier, Marino, and Stefanick then jumped into 
action to quickly determine the man’s location. The trio worked 
with the RCMP, SaskTel, Shaw Cable, and the reeve of Blaine 
Lake to try to track the man by his phone. After many phone 
calls, Lussier, Marino, and Stefanick were able to determine 
where the call for help came from and then dispatch an 
ambulance which reached the man in time to save his life. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, emergency dispatchers are unsung heroes 
who play an unseen but vitally important role in saving the lives 
of people experiencing emergencies. I ask all members to join 
me in thanking these three women for their dedicated public 
service and in congratulating them on receiving the Sask911 
Excellence in Teamwork Award. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Twelfth Year Gallery Show 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
This past Friday I had the pleasure of attending an open 
reception for Twelfth Year’s class, the 2014-15 gallery show, 
where I brought greetings on behalf of the Government of 
Saskatchewan. Twelfth Year is a program designed to 
acknowledge four exemplary students from each of Regina’s 17 
high schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this program, portraits are taken of the students 
in which they have a chance to display their passions, interests, 
and community involvements. These portraits give viewers a 
glimpse of what truly remarkable youth we have right here in 
our Queen City. It was clear to see that these model citizens are 
truly the future leaders of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to recognize the great work done by Erin 
Ball and Andrea Norberg, the individuals responsible for 
rebranding of the former Youth Salute program into the Twelfth 
Year program. It was great to see so many members of the 
community come together to recognize so many of Regina’s 
exceptional youth. 
 
I’d like to ask that all members join me in thanking Erin and 
Andrea for organizing this event as well as congratulating all 
the students recognized by Twelfth Year. Mr. Speaker, on 
evenings like this, it’s easy to see that the future of 
Saskatchewan is in great hands. Thank you very much. 



7098 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2015 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Veselka Spring Festival Celebrates Anniversary 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. One of the 
great pleasures of living in Saskatchewan is the strength of our 
communities and celebrating all the cultures that make our 
province strong. I recently had the opportunity to attend the 
20th anniversary of the Veselka Spring Festival in Foam Lake. 
This year’s theme was the Spirit of Ukraine. The day included a 
parade in the morning, a variety of vendors at the community 
hall, a traditional Ukrainian supper, and entertainment 
throughout the evening. 
 
The supper included the traditional Ukrainian delicious meal of 
perogies, three different kinds of cabbage rolls, cornmeal, 
sausage, ham, headcheese, buns, and a variety of salads that 
Joan Malinowski and her crew spent hours the previous week 
making. Mr. Speaker, although this was the 20th year of the 
festival in Foam Lake, Veselka is still running strong and 
remains a strong annual fundraiser for the community hall. 
 
I’d like to recognize at this time the perogy ladies of Foam 
Lake, who in a large part have made the community hall 
possible. They’ve made a total of nearly 1 million perogies. The 
official count is 58,000 dozen perogies in 20 years to help build 
this community hall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask all members to join me in thanking 
all the board members for the Veselka, the local cooks who 
prepared the food, all the dancers and entertainers who came 
out to enjoy another sold-out Veselka in Foam Lake. Thank 
you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Expenditures Prior to and During Government 
Trade Missions 

 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, when the Premier disclosed the 
costs of his trip to India last fall, why did he leave out 15 per 
cent of the costs? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
corporations. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, in the absence of the Premier and as Minister 
Responsible for the Public Service Commission, I’ll be glad to 
answer some of these questions regarding travel and especially 
issues regarding the Premier and his travel across Canada and 
especially internationally. 
 
It was kind of implied yesterday that there is a comparison 
between our Premier and Alison Redford, Mr. Speaker, and I 
can tell you that there is absolutely nothing that could be further 
from the truth, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, he was certainly 

talking about a sense of entitlement. I will tell you, and every 
member on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, would tell you 
that our Premier has more integrity when it comes to the dollars 
that the taxpayers put into this province, Mr. Speaker, than any 
premier that this province has ever seen. Mr. Speaker, some 
may even say he’s frugal or maybe even tight. I’m not going 
that far, Mr. Speaker, but I will guarantee you that he takes very 
seriously the expenditure of taxpayers’ dollars, Mr. Speaker. I 
think that might be one reason why he is so popular in this 
province and the most popular premier in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ll stand by his record any time when he’s travelling around 
the world. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, there is a difference between 
Alison Redford and our Premier, Mr. Speaker. Alison Redford 
had one travel scout and this Premier, Mr. Speaker, has two. 
That’s where we see a difference. Mr. Speaker, my question to 
the minister, my question to the Premier: why did he not 
disclose the cost, the true cost of his trip to India? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the people that went 
prior to the Premier going on these trips were people that were 
looking at accommodations, absolutely. They also do a number 
of other jobs. They’re not just travel scouts. They work within 
the public service, Mr. Speaker, and carry out a number of 
activities. Mr. Speaker, but it wasn’t very long ago that the 
members opposite were on this side and would have nothing to 
with that market, Mr. Speaker, have nothing to do with the Asia 
region, have nothing to do with India. 
 
When you look at the exports that have grown in our province 
because of the great work of the Ag minister, the Minister of the 
Economy, the Premier, Mr. Speaker, that trade into India would 
not be happening today. Our producers here in Saskatchewan 
would not be reaping the benefits if it wasn’t for the great work 
of the ministers and the Premier travelling to India, Mr. 
Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, we have got a great product to sell, 
absolutely, in this province, but we’ve got the best salesman in 
Canada doing it for us. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, these high-paid travel scouts that 
were sent by the Premier — two of them, Mr. Speaker — 
they’re doing things like asking for room upgrades, Mr. 
Speaker. They were not hammering out trade deals. They were 
just ensuring that the Premier would have the best VIP [very 
important person] posh treatment possible. Now the 15 per cent 
cost, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier did not disclose, if he had 
included the cost of the travel scouts for his trip to India, the 
total bill would have been 15 per cent higher. But, Mr. Speaker, 
he chose not to include that figure. 
 
And we saw yesterday when he calculates the travel spending 
of previous governments, oh, he adds everything in, Mr. 
Speaker, including the cost of non-government agencies like the 



May 5, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7099 

Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership. But when he 
calculates his own government expenses, Mr. Speaker, of 
course he leaves that out of the math. Mr. Speaker, so he’s in no 
way, the Premier is in no way comparing apples to apples. 
 
But it gets worse. This Premier has been leaving out the cost of 
his travel scouts and significantly under-reporting the costs, the 
true costs, of his travel. So again, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: 
why has the Premier not been reporting the full costs of his 
travel? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, the full costs are 
included, Mr. Speaker. But even more importantly, let’s look at 
the number of trips that the NDP [New Democratic Party] made 
when they were in government, in the last year of their 
government, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in their last year of 
government, last full year, you know, you can talk about costs; 
they travelled out of the province 131 times under the NDP, Mr. 
Speaker. A 72 per cent reduction by our government. Less than 
94 . . . 94 trips less, Mr. Speaker, only 37 trips by our 
government, and produced 100 per cent more production than 
any trip by the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it costs money to travel out of the province. It 
costs money to travel internationally, Mr. Speaker. We’ve got a 
great product to sell and a great person to sell it, Mr. Speaker. 
And the rest of the world is learning that. From India to Asia to 
Washington, Mr. Speaker, our province is known for its 
products, Mr. Speaker, and the great leadership that we’re 
blessed with in this province. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister: is he 
saying that the travel scout information, that those costs were 
disclosed? Because yesterday the Premier said that they were 
not. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we again, we know that 
the Premier has travelled extensively, Mr. Speaker, and sold the 
province well. We also know, Mr. Speaker, that the former 
premier, Premier Calvert, went on one trip to China, Mr. 
Speaker. What did that cost the taxpayers? $204,000, Mr. 
Speaker. That one trip cost the taxpayers more than all the trips 
the Premier took in the last . . . past year, Mr. Speaker. Talk 
about a sense of entitlement and talk about a reason why there’s 
nine on that side and 49 on this side, Mr. Speaker. It’s because 
of the actions of that previous government. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Leader. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we clearly saw yesterday in the 
information that the staffers were circulating in the rotunda that 
they are not comparing apples to apples in any way, Mr. 
Speaker. That is evident very, very clearly. 
 

You know, Mr. Speaker, money for trade missions, that’s good. 
We support that. Money to ensure that the Premier gets the 
most posh and VIP treatment possible, Mr. Speaker, that is 
inappropriate and that is not good, but that is exactly what this 
Premier is directing his travel scouts to do. 
 
You know it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, because Alison Redford 
didn’t disclose the full cost of her trip either, and we have two 
stories coming from the minister here. The Premier said 
yesterday there was no disclosure of that information. Now we 
have a new story today from this minister. But this Premier has 
been doing the exact same thing — not disclosing the true cost. 
Mr. Speaker, he’s been under-reporting the actual costs of his 
travel. 
 
Now this Premier, we have seen him not hesitate, not pause for 
one second to release confidential information about a private 
citizen and he bizarrely suggests that this is somehow in the 
public interest. But for some reason he doesn’t think that it’s in 
the public interest to disclose the full and accurate costs of his 
travel, the real number, Mr. Speaker. My question to the 
Premier: how can he justify that? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I can guarantee you that 
the travel costs of the Premier on past trips since, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re disclosing full information on the last trip, Mr. Speaker. 
But the policy that we use is the same policy that was in place 
under the NDP, Mr. Speaker, including, Mr. Speaker, a trip to 
China that cost $204,000. Did they include everything? I don’t 
think so, Mr. Speaker, because the same policy that was being 
used back when we reported those trips, Mr. Speaker, is the 
same policy that the NDP used. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I cannot believe that that member would come 
into this House and question the integrity . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — There seems to be a lot of discussions 
across the way. I recognize the Minister of Crown Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I can guarantee you and 
I can guarantee this House, and I’ll guarantee the people of this 
province that there is no person, Mr. Speaker, that’s sat in the 
premier’s chair that has been more cautious and more conscious 
about the taxpayers’ dollars, Mr. Speaker, than the Premier of 
this province, Mr. Speaker, and that exists into international 
travel, national travel, and even travel back and forth to his 
constituency, Mr. Speaker. He is a model for all of us to follow. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, what a farce. This is the Premier, 
Mr. Speaker, who sent two travel scouts to compare five-star 
hotels to simply see which one was more comfortable and 
which was more to his liking, Mr. Speaker. The minister’s 
explanation is not credible in any way. My question, Mr. 
Speaker, to the Premier: will the Premier at least tell us how 
many other times he or his cabinet ministers have used travel 
scouts and what is the total cost of those advance trips for 
Saskatchewan taxpayers? Simple question. What is the answer? 



7100 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2015 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve mentioned, the 
Premier has travelled, you know, extensively nationally and 
internationally and sold this province very well. What happens 
previous to those trips will be dependent on where those trips 
are. If the Premier and entourage, Mr. Speaker, or delegation, is 
going into countries where there needs to be . . . where there’s 
certainly security, Mr. Speaker, when there’s security that needs 
to be taken into consideration, there may be two travel scouts, 
Mr. Speaker. There’s other advance trips, Mr. Speaker, that 
don’t take as many personnel, Mr. Speaker, going down into the 
States or whatever, Mr. Speaker. So it will vary according to the 
trip. It’ll vary according to the country. It’ll vary according to 
the size, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that the opposition did the same thing, 
Mr. Speaker, when they were in the government. All the 
member . . . Oh they’re mooing and groaning but, Mr. Speaker, 
I would just ask the member opposite to turn around behind him 
and ask the member from Lakeview, when he was the minister 
of Health, how many scouts he had going before him to the 
attorney generals’ conferences across Canada, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
sure he’s pretty depressed this year, Mr. Speaker, because the 
attorney generals’ conference this year is in Hawaii. Wouldn’t it 
have been nice for the minister of Health to go to Hawaii for an 
attorney generals’ conference? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s good to see we have our very 
own Paul Calandra here in the Assembly of Saskatchewan here 
this afternoon. But these numbers and this defence simply is not 
believable and credible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier of the province of Saskatchewan 
should travel and should promote our province. That’s what 
every premier of every political stripe should do. I fully agree 
with that. What the Premier should not do, Mr. Speaker, is to 
have highly paid travel scouts — not one but two of them — go 
months in advance, Mr. Speaker, simply to scope out the best 
hotels, get the best upgrades, arrange the motorcades, Mr. 
Speaker, and the best possible VIP treatment. That is 
inappropriate, but that is exactly what this Premier is doing. 
 
Yesterday we learned, Mr. Speaker, that the travel scouts’ visit 
to India last fall cost $14,000. The trip to Singapore, Japan, and 
the Philippines in 2013 cost Saskatchewan taxpayers $23,500. 
And now we know the Premier also sent travel scouts to China, 
Indonesia, Hong Kong, and Singapore in 2012 for a cost of 
nearly $20,000. So just for those three advance trips, Mr. 
Speaker, just those three, that’s nearly $60,000. 
 
So my question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker: for how many trips 
for the Premier and his ministers, for how many — because we 
know about three right now — for how many were travel scouts 
sent and what is the total cost? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we’re certainly not the 
only province that uses advance people, Mr. Speaker. Alberta 
obviously has. BC [British Columbia], Ontario, and even NDP 
Manitoba has used advance scouts, Mr. Speaker, advance 
people, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that the trip goes smoothly, 
to make sure that the logistics are set up properly. 
 
But it’s interesting that the member opposite, the leader 
opposite, named and added up a number of different missions to 
international trips, Mr. Speaker. You can add that up. It comes 
nowhere close to the one trip that the former premier, Lorne 
Calvert, took for $204,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other reason why, you know, we would like to 
dig back more into the NDP records, but they didn’t disclose 
any of that information, Mr. Speaker, on pre-approved . . . on 
their scouts, Mr. Speaker, on pre-trip and advance trip, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the difference is, today we have a 
province that’s growing. We have people that are looking at this 
province to buy from. We have people looking at this province 
to put money into, Mr. Speaker, to invest in. That certainly 
wasn’t happening under the NDP and it’s a large part because 
of the work that our Premier and government has done 
internationally. Mr. Speaker, I can guarantee that members on 
this side of the House and at least 60 per cent of the rest of the 
people in this province never want to go back to the old days. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Alberta ended the practice of 
travel scouts because it is wasteful and it is inappropriate. Mr. 
Speaker, this practice of sending high-paid travel scouts to sort 
out the posh details for a Premier is wrong in any jurisdiction 
by any party of any political stripe. It needs to stop, and this 
Premier needs to realize that. 
 
It defies, it defies good Saskatchewan common sense to send 
two travel scouts in advance to view the Premier’s room, to 
demand an upgrade, to demand that hotel staff are available 
24-7 with a cellphone number, to demand to see menus, to 
demand special motorcades, to find the best possible VIP 
lounges, to get additional tickets for cocktail parties, Mr. 
Speaker. All of that, all of that defies good Saskatchewan 
common sense for people throughout the province, but that is 
exactly, that is exactly what this Premier is directing his two 
travel scouts to do. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier. Why won’t he just 
put an end to this wasteful and unnecessary practice? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I find it really 
interesting when the Leader of the Opposition that serves over 
nine members, that has been in here when there was 20 and now 
nine, would say that it is unacceptable for any province or any 
government to have advance people go before the Premier of a 
province. So obviously he knows more than Ontario, far more 
than Ontario. He knows more than Alberta. We know that. He 
knows more than British Columbia. But it’s interesting, Mr. 
Speaker. He even knows more than the NDP — the only 



May 5, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7101 

province, let’s hope, that has an NDP government by tomorrow 
in this country — but he even knows more than the NDP 
Manitoba under Mr. Selinger. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all those provinces have advance people. I’m not 
sure they work in the public service like ours do. They work in 
the public service here. They have advance people that go and 
ensure that the logistics are proper when the Premier and 
delegation, Mr. Speaker, arrive. Heaven forbid he ever gets into 
the opportunity of sitting in the Premier’s chair but, if he ever 
did, I’d love to see him go on his first trip and not have a clue 
where he’s going, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll call a spade a spade any time. 
This practice is wasteful. It is bad spending, Mr. Speaker, and it 
is not respecting taxpayers’ dollars here in Saskatchewan. In all 
of the advance trip information that we’ve learned so far, the 
travel scouts, the highly paid travel scouts sent by the Premier, 
they have not been negotiating deals or hammering out trade 
arrangements, Mr. Speaker. They were simply making sure that 
the Premier would be as comfortable as possible. 
 
Look at their itineraries, Mr. Speaker: one week in Hiroshima, 
seven and a half hours of mostly touring hotels. Mr. Speaker, 
they spent time, these travel scouts, evaluating multiple hotels 
in every city. These are five-star luxury hotels. Five-star luxury 
hotels. I don’t know why they have to evaluate one five-star 
hotel to another. For better pools, better king-size beds? I don’t 
know, Mr. Speaker. Better lounges? But that’s the kind of stuff 
that this Premier has directed these scouts to do. 
 
In all of the documents, in all the documents that we’ve seen so 
far, the travel scouts ask two questions about the Premier’s 
hotel rooms that are blacked out. It’s very strange why they’re 
blacked out. The government says it’s personal information but 
he has travel scouts in the civil service asking this information. 
 
To the Premier: what is it that the travel scouts are asking about 
his hotel rooms that he doesn’t want Saskatchewan people to 
know? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve answered in 
my previous questions the benefit certainly that this province 
has seen by the Premier travelling out of province and selling 
our province, Mr. Speaker. And having said that, you can add 
up all the costs that we’ve incurred on those trips, Mr. Speaker, 
and it doesn’t come anywhere close to what the NDP has spent, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it’d be very interesting. In 2006 and ’07 . . . The travel of our 
government in this past year has gone down by 63 per cent. The 
travel under the NDP in that last year was $975,000, Mr. 
Speaker. Under this government it was 355,000. That’s a huge, 
huge decrease, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Now the member opposite doesn’t like the way this government 
has been spending the money, Mr. Speaker. I’d sure like to 
know, if we’ve cut the cost by 62 per cent and we’ve seen the 
results that we’ve seen in this province, what in the world were 
they doing when their costs were 63 per cent higher and still 
showed nothing for those travel costs? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, those numbers that the minister is 
spinning do not reflect the reality of the information that is 
disclosed. And we’ve also covered in question period, Mr. 
Speaker, that there’s information that has not been disclosed by 
the Premier with respect to the true costs of the travel. We 
know, Mr. Speaker, that this Premier has a very, very skewed 
sense of what is in the public interest and what should be kept 
confidential. 
 
Saskatchewan taxpayers have spent a lot of money sending the 
Premier’s two travel scouts all around the globe, and we 
deserve to know what exactly they’re working on, Mr. Speaker. 
We already know that the travel scouts, they ask for upgrades 
for hotel rooms. They inspect the Premier’s hotel room. They 
demand that a staff person be available 24-7 with a cellphone 
number. 
 
But there are two questions, there are two questions, Mr. 
Speaker, that have been blacked out. It’s very puzzling. What 
else are the Premier’s travel scouts demanding when it comes to 
his hotel rooms that he won’t reveal to the Saskatchewan 
public? What else? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, again, we’ve seen 
increased sales of potash. We’ve seen increased sales of our 
agricultural goods — lentils into India, Mr. Speaker, mustard 
around the world, canola around the world. We’ve seen increase 
in all of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, we’ve even seen a great initiative really 
started by the Premier and the Prime Minister of Canada with 
India, Mr. Speaker, that will see uranium sold into India, 
whereas, Mr. Speaker, in years past the former government 
wouldn’t even entertain discussions like that, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve seen huge increases in export into all of that Asian 
region, Mr. Speaker, and I can tell you that it does come with a 
cost and there are results showing. 
 
In 2001, let’s look at what the NDP . . . They spent $187,000. 
Get this, Mr. Speaker, and before . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . They’re yelling from the seats. I understand that. They spent 
$187,000, Mr. Speaker, travelling internationally to sell the 
goods of ISC [Information Services Corporation of 
Saskatchewan]. How much did they sell? Not a cent, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s the travel costs of the former government. I can 
guarantee the people of Saskatchewan never want to go back to 
the days of the NDP. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 



7102 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2015 

Release of Information Concerning Worker 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, long response, no answer. No 
light being shone on what it is that they’re blacking out, what it 
is, Mr. Speaker, that they’re claiming is private information, 
even though the fact you’ve highly paid civil servants asking 
this information to the hotels. It’s very strange. They could just 
expose that information and clear up the matter. But we haven’t 
seen a whole lot of disclosure from this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not only the Premier’s travel expenses that 
aren’t adding up. It’s also his story about the leak of 
confidential information. Now yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier claimed that he only learned, he only learned of the 
second email with very specific details late last week. But we 
know, we know for a fact that second email was brought to his 
attention by reporters on Monday. It was publicly reported on 
on Tuesday, and the Deputy Leader of the Opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, asked about that on Tuesday as well. 
 
So how are we supposed to believe? How does this claim have 
any credibility whatsoever, that the Premier only learned about 
the true nature of the leak late last week? The story does not add 
up. What is the answer? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the Leader of the Opposition likes to talk about due process, 
and that’s precisely what we’re engaging in, Mr. Speaker. The 
Office of the Information and Privacy Commissioner will be 
conducting . . . doing his work, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll get the 
results of that work and we’ll be informed by the results of that 
work, Mr. Speaker. So in the meantime I think . . . And that’s 
exactly what the Leader of the Opposition said yesterday, Mr. 
Speaker, that we should wait for the work of the Office of the 
Information and Privacy Commissioner. We will be informed 
by his work, Mr. Speaker, and we’re fully prepared to 
co-operate with that. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the catch here is the Premier’s 
story is not adding up. He claimed, Mr. Speaker, yesterday that 
he only learned about the specific nature of the additional 
information that was leaked at the end of the week, Mr. 
Speaker. But we know, we know for a fact, Mr. Speaker, that he 
was asked about it by reporters on Monday. We know that it 
was reported in the press on Tuesday and we know he was 
questioned in question period on Tuesday about it as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So the Premier and his chief of communications, Mr. Speaker, 
and operations, the Premier has claimed that this individual just 
had a lapse of judgment. But everything about this mess, Mr. 
Speaker, speaks to the Premier’s poor . . . lack of judgment and 
his confusing story that is not adding up one single bit. My 
question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker: how can this government 
claim that the Premier did not know the true nature of the leak 
when it was raised directly with him on Monday and Tuesday 
of last week? 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of the 
Premier, I’ll take that question. Again, Mr. Speaker, I’ll repeat 
the answer that I gave to the last question. We are going to be 
informed by the work of the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner, Mr. Speaker. We should let him do his work. 
He will be conducting that work over the next short period of 
time, Mr. Speaker. And I think . . . And it’s exactly, Mr. 
Speaker, what the Leader of the Opposition suggested yesterday 
to the media. He said, let the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner do his work, and we’ll be informed by that work, 
Mr. Speaker. So I think we should continue to wait for that 
work to be completed, Mr. Speaker. We have full and complete 
confidence in the Information and Privacy Commissioner to 
complete that work. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 149, 
The Health Administration Amendment Act, 2014 without 
amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
request leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole 
on this bill and that the bill be now read the third time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to 
waive consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 
149, The Health Administration Amendment Act, 2014 and that 
the bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 149 — The Health Administration 
Amendment Act, 2014 

 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — I move that this bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister 
that Bill No. 149, The Health Administration Amendment Act, 
2014 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 



May 5, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7103 

adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 164, 
The Health Information Protection Amendment Act, 2014 
without amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 
read the third time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 
164, The Health Information Protection Amendment Act, 2014 
and that it now be read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister may now proceed to 
move third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 164 — The Health Information Protection 
Amendment Act, 2014 

 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I move that this bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Health that Bill No. 164, The Health Information Protection 
Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 172, 
The Naturopathic Medicine Act without amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I request leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and 
that the bill be now read the third time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 
172, The Naturopathic Medicine Act and that it now be read a 
third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 172 — The Naturopathic Medicine Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair . Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I move that this bill be now read the third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Health that Bill No. 172, The Naturopathic Medicine Act be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee of Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 



7104 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2015 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 166, The Local 
Government Election Act, 2014 without amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and that this bill be now 
read the third time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Government 
Relations has requested leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 166, The Local 
Government Election Act, 2014 and that the bill be now read a 
third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. 
 
[14:30] 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 166 — The Local Government Election Act, 2014 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I move that this bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Government 
Relations has moved that Bill No. 166, The Local Government 
Election Act, 2014 be now read a third time and passed under its 
title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs And Justice 

 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice to report — Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a 
bilingual bill — Bill No. 167, The Local Government Election 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 without amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 
read the third time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 
167, The Local Government Election Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2014 and that it now be read a third time. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 167 — The Local Government Election 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 portant 

modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Local 
Government Election Act, 2014 

 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I move that this bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister 
that Bill No. 167, The Local Government Election 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 be now read a third time 
and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Ms. Ross: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
to report Bill No. 168, The Government Relations 
Administration Act without amendment. 
 



May 5, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7105 

The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 
read the third time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 
168, The Government Relations Administration Act. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 168 — The Government Relations Administration Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I move that this bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 168, The Government 
Relations Administration Act be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Ms. Ross: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
to report Bill No. 170, The Fire Safety Act without amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
the Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 
read the third time. 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to 
waive consideration of Committee of the Whole in Bill No. 
170, The Fire Safety Act and the bill be now read for a third 
time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 170 — The Fire Safety Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I move that this bill now be read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Government Relations that Bill No. 170, The Fire Safety Act be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I wish to table 
the answer to question 933. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Answer has been tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 178 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 178 — The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2015 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
As ever, good to join debate on matters before the House, in 



7106 Saskatchewan Hansard May 5, 2015 

this case Bill No. 178, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2015, 
again rising out of certain measures that were included in the 
budget. Certainly a number of my colleagues have had the 
opportunity to weigh in on this. 
 
This is a highly technical bill in many ways, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and will certainly benefit from the committee stage 
hearing of this bill but, in particular, changes that were made to 
the graduate retention program, the active families benefit, and 
the R & D [research and development] tax credit, just to name 
three of the more fundamental changes in this piece of 
legislation, Mr. Speaker. Those stand alongside other measures 
such as the new growth tax incentive for manufacturers. 
 
On the one side, Mr. Speaker, we’re glad to see some of those 
measures come forward, and we await the impact and further 
analysis of what those will accomplish or what has been set out 
for the new growth tax incentives to accomplish. But on the 
other hand, Mr. Speaker, we look with some dismay upon the 
changes that are anticipated for the graduate retention program, 
for the active families benefit, and for the research and 
development tax credit. 
 
In the case of the first, Mr. Speaker, the graduate retention 
program now being converted into a non-refundable tax credit, 
the program going forward will function less as a rebate as it 
had previously, Mr. Speaker. And certainly that is something 
that this government has not campaigned on. They didn’t 
campaign on it in 2007, Mr. Speaker, and they certainly didn’t 
campaign on this in 2011 when they were touting the success of 
the graduate retention program as it was currently configured. 
There wasn’t much of them going around the doorsteps, Mr. 
Speaker, saying, you know, we’re going to change it from 
acting as a rebate into a non-refundable tax credit and what that 
means for individuals being able to access the program. So 
that’s something that we’ll be looking to get more insight from 
the minister as to the impact that will have going forward. 
 
But again, Mr. Speaker, 2007, you know, in terms of a 
non-refundable tax credit, there was a non-refundable tax credit 
in the mix at that time, and that’s certainly not what they ran on. 
That’s not what the record shows, and that’s certainly not any 
thinking person’s recollection of the 2007 election or the 2011. 
And that’s certainly not what students were counting on when it 
came to the promise that this government has made to them and 
subsequently broken with this particular change, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In terms of the active families benefit and now introducing the 
income tax, again this is one where when they’re rolling out the 
fanfare and the parades and the balloons for the active families 
benefit in different campaign settings, Mr. Speaker, there 
wasn’t, they didn’t have a big asterisk up on the pamphlet 
saying that, you know, the day’s going to come when we 
means-tested and everybody above $60,000 for a family income 
is going to be written out of the program. So again, Mr. 
Speaker, the promise being broken in this regard. 
 
And then of course we come to the research and development 
tax credit, where it’s being cut from 15 per cent to 10 per cent. 
We’ll have questions around what the utilization was and what 
the tax expenditure for this involves, Mr. Speaker, but again 
certainly not something that they had up at the front of the 
parade saying, you know, guess what, we’re going to have it at 

15 per cent and we’re going to ballyhoo that, Mr. Speaker, but 
times are going to get tough and over the side a third of it goes, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So we’ve got questions on any number of the measures in this 
piece of legislation. Certainly those have been given good voice 
to by my colleagues in this debate, and certainly we look 
forward to the more technical sort of questions that can be 
answered, we hope, in a more fulsome manner by the officials 
from Finance when this is brought forward in committee 
hearing. 
 
With that being said, Mr. Speaker, we’re ready for it to move to 
the committee stage of the deliberations for Bill No. 178. And 
with that, I would conclude my remarks on Bill No. 178. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
that Bill No. 178 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I designate that the bill be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the 
Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 
that it be referred to the Standing Committee on Crown and 
Central Agencies. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Yes, it has been referred to the 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thanks very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. To facilitate the work of committees later this day, I 
move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until 
tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:42.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7093 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7093 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7093 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7093 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7094 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7094 
  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7094 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7094 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7095 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7095 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7095 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7095 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7096 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 International Day of the Midwife 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7096 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7096 
 Teacher Shapes Lives of Northern Youth 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7096 
 Souls Harbour Rescue Mission Celebrates Anniversary 
  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7097 
 Emergency Services Dispatchers Receive Sask911 Excellence in Teamwork Awards 
  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7097 
 Twelfth Year Gallery Show 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7097 
 Veselka Spring Festival Celebrates Anniversary 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7098 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Expenditures Prior to and During Government Trade Missions 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7098 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7098 
 Release of Information Concerning Worker 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7102 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7102 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7102 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs And Justice 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7104 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 149 — The Health Administration Amendment Act, 2014 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7102 
 Bill No. 164 — The Health Information Protection Amendment Act, 2014 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7103 
 Bill No. 172 — The Naturopathic Medicine Act 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7103 
 Bill No. 166 — The Local Government Election Act, 2014 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7104 
 Bill No. 167 — The Local Government Election Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Local Government Election Act, 2014 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7104 
 Bill No. 168 — The Government Relations Administration Act 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7105 
 Bill No. 170 — The Fire Safety Act 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7105 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7105 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 



 

SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 178 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2015 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7105 
  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 7106 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


