
























































Hansard: March 23, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 38B  MONDAY, MARCH 23, 2015, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6661 
 March 23, 2015 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00]. 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, debate will resume. I 
recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Wotherspoon.] 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
indeed a pleasure to rise and enter into the debate on the budget 
for the 2015-16 fiscal year here in Saskatchewan. It’s an 
important time in our province as we’ve seen such a growth but 
some challenges as well. Yet we are doing well as a province, 
and we see that in terms of the revenues the province is 
gathering. 
 
As I said just moments before 5 o’clock, I do have some 
comments to make. And I think there are really salient points 
about what this government has done to show its priorities and 
where its heart really, really lies. And I feel that, as I was 
talking about just prior to that, and I’ll go into my main speech, 
but I think actually there was an editorial in the Leader-Post on 
the weekend that really summarizes what this term has been and 
how we started out, just three short years ago when we were 
talking about boundaries and redistribution of the new electoral 
districts here in Saskatchewan, and this government rammed 
ahead with three new MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly], bringing our total to 61. 
 
And it was a choice, it was a choice that they had made. And 
they would have known at the time, they would have known 
that, is this a sustainable thing to do? Is this a sustainable thing 
to do? Because when you do this, when you say we’re going to 
move from 58 seats to 61 seats, there are costs involved. And 
you better make sure it’s worth it, that it’s worth it particularly 
in Saskatchewan, because when we talk about Manitoba and 
Alberta, in fact the rest of Canada, we are highly governed, 
over-governed particularly at the provincial level. 
 
And I just want to read parts of this editorial because I think it 
really shows where this government is at with its misplaced 
priorities and its pet projects. And unfortunately for the families 
and seniors of Saskatchewan, they’re paying a price for it. And 
this government won’t back down, won’t back down when they 
know they are dead wrong. They just steam ahead. We see that 
with the John Black consultant getting $40 million in his gravy 
plane. And this government, while it reduced the contract by a 
few short months, essentially plowed ahead no matter what. 
And we have, as an opposition, brought into the House many 
examples in the health area of how it’s really gone off the rails, 

really gone off the rails. 
 
And this government will pour out its stats and pour out its 
speaking points but refuses to acknowledge what’s happening 
to families and seniors and young people in this province. And 
it’s those people who are truly paying the price for this 
government’s obsession with its pet projects. Whether it’s the 
smart meters or whether it’s limousines in London or whether 
it’s 228 per cent increase in consultants, it really doesn’t matter. 
This government just won’t back down. 
 
But this is what this editorial says: 
 

Given the elimination of “non-essential” government 
hiring and a pay freeze for politicians, it’s curious that 
Premier Brad Wall’s government has overlooked an easy 
and completely painless budget cut — axing plans to add 
three MLAs in next year’s provincial election. 
 
At close to $700,000 a year in salaries, benefits and 
expenses, this is not chump change. Indeed, scrapping the 
new MLA plan would have gone a long way toward 
enabling Finance Minister Ken Krawetz to withdraw a 
painful measure in his 2015-16 budget. 

 
It goes on to say, and I quote: 
 

To save just $1 million a year, the Saskatchewan 
Employment Supplement for low-income families will 
only be available to future applicants with children 12 and 
under, instead of up to 18 years of age. 

 
The supplement helps the recipients with the cost of raising 
a family and transitioning from social assistance into the 
labour force. And as some critics have rightly observed, 
children don’t get any cheaper to raise once they become 
teens — indeed the reverse is likely true as their food and 
clothing costs rise . . . 

 
It goes on to remark that we have 58 MLAs already. Manitoba, 
with 157,000 more people, have fewer seats. And clearly right 
across Canada, you can talk about Newfoundland where I think 
they rolled it back by 10. They rolled it back by 10 MLAs. But 
this shows, this demonstrates where this government is at when 
it’s got a pet project it’s going to ram through, and it really 
doesn’t, really doesn’t care. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, obviously this budget is hurting families here 
in Saskatchewan and seniors. And this is only the start. We see 
the list of broken promises, the list of broken promises from this 
government, whether it’s the active family benefit that’s now 
being cut back; the senior drug plan that they’ve now cut twice, 
twice in eight years they’ve rolled that back; the student 
graduate retention program and what they’ve done there.  
 
And of course the rainy day fund, the rainy day fund that had 
one time $1.4 billion in it but now, in spite of record revenues, 
on how this government cannot control its appetite for 
spending, cannot control its appetite for spending, is now down 
to 200 million, $200 million. So it really begs the question of 
where did the money go? And it’s interesting when these folks 
over here talk about that, they like to start to answer that 



6662 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2015 

question but they never can quite finish it. They never can quite 
finish it. 
 
And what’s interesting, and I will say this, Mr. Speaker, it will 
be very interesting in the speeches we hear this week. And 
we’ve heard it so far or I haven’t heard it, and I think this may 
be the cause of the problem over there. These folks have a 
problem counting. They have a problem counting, and it’s a 
problem by counting by tens. Quite often what I’ll hear over 
here is they’ll go 70’s and then somehow they skip the 80’s. 
And then we land at the 90’s. You know they can count by 10: 
10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70. What happened to 80? What 
happened to the ’80s? What happened . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Oh, some of them say they were in high school 
so they’re not, that they don’t remember. What happened to the 
’90s? What happened to the ’90s? But they love to go and talk 
about the ’90s, but they go hand in hand, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I mean, they’ve woken up on this one. They forget all 
about the ’80s. And I will say this: I will be very interested if 
any of them over there talk about the ’80s in their speeches this 
week. They won’t talk about that, and that’s why we have a 
problem with this borrowed balanced budget because they can’t 
get their math quite right. They have forgotten all of it. It’s like 
they have collective amnesia, Mr. Speaker, collective amnesia. 
Nobody over there remembers the ’80s. You know, and I just 
find that passing strange. 
 
They will remember the ’70s. I heard the member from 
Lloydminster going on quite eloquently about the ’70s and then 
went on about the ’90s. But what happened to the ’80s? I want 
to know, what about the ’80s? 
 
So I’ll be listening. And I know the Minister of Education is 
getting warmed up here, and maybe he’s on tonight. He will tell 
us about the ’80s. Because you know what’s really odd? Some 
of them will say, I was in high school, but I know at least two of 
them were involved in the government in the ’80s. Which two 
were they? Now there were at least two, and maybe it’s a bad 
thing to talk about the ’80s, but there’s at least two of them that 
were very intimately connected with the government of the day 
of the ’80s. 
 
I mean, I’ll leave that with the folks over there. And they’ll get 
their speaking notes tomorrow about the ’80s, and then we’ll 
hear about that. But I bet tonight we won’t hear a single thing 
about the ’80s. They will go ’70s, ’90s, and I think that’s a 
reason why we have a problem with the math over there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this really is not a good budget for the people of 
Saskatchewan. As I’ve said, there’s all sorts of cuts. They’ve 
talked about how there hasn’t been a tax increase. I don’t know 
if PotashCorp of Saskatchewan would agree with that 
interpretation, and their stakeholders. And we saw that Friday 
morning they didn’t come back with a vote of confidence in the 
budget of the day. In fact they know over there what happened 
with the stocks on Friday morning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when they talk about balancing their budget, but 
yet they have to borrow to balance the budget, this is really 
something that leaves a lot of questions in people’s minds. But I 
really want to talk about a couple of areas that are very 
important to me, because as critic I have to raise those issues, 

and one is about the disability strategy. And we were hoping 
that to see in the budget some placeholder of the money that’s 
been set aside for the disability strategy, some recognition that 
there was going to be a significant investment in that strategy 
for folks who are living with disabilities because the 
government has made a lot of press about how they’re doing the 
right thing. But we haven’t heard a thing about that. 
 
I am also really worried about what’s happening in income 
assistance programs. And I’m really talking about social 
assistance; TEA [transitional employment allowance], the 
employment program, and SAID [Saskatchewan assured 
income for disability]. And, Mr. Speaker, you know it’s 
interesting, it’s interesting what’s happening. And I do want to 
thank the minister for actually answering the questions. Last fall 
they didn’t answer the questions, and we did get answers to this 
set of questions. Today I didn’t get an answer to some of my 
written questions, and I’ll talk more about that. 
 
But interesting, interesting here, Mr. Speaker, the caseload for 
SAP [Saskatchewan assistance plan], TEA, and SAID at the end 
of February was 30,431 — over 30,000 almost 30,400 over, 
over that. When they took office, the caseload for income 
security programs was 25,998. That’s 26,000. What we’ve seen 
since they’ve taken over in government is an increase of over 
4,443 cases when it comes to SAP, SAID, and TEA. That’s an 
increase, Mr. Speaker, of 17 per cent, a 17 per cent increase in 
families who are on SAID, SAP, or TEA. How can that be? 
How can that be when we’ve seen such a strong economy in our 
province in the last eight years? How can that be, a 17 per cent 
increase? 
 
Well I have to say that we were pleasantly surprised in the 
Throne Speech when this government announced that they were 
looking at and they announced a poverty reduction strategy, that 
they were going to be taking a look at that. After many, many 
years of denying that that would help, they are now thinking of 
that. 
 
But interestingly, and I would like to hear more about this from 
the members opposite when they get up to speak, what is 
happening with that strategy? Was there money set aside in the 
budget for that? We’ve not heard one thing about that, not one 
thing. The Minister of Finance didn’t talk about it. The 
Premier’s not talked about it. None of the people so far have 
talked about it. No one has talked about their hopes and fears. 
And yet we’ve seen, if the numbers they’ve given me are 
correct, a 17 per cent increase in the caseload for the Ministry 
of Social Services since the fall of 2007. That’s not a small 
increase. Seventeen per cent is a significant increase. 
 
So we need that strategy, and we need that strategy to have 
teeth. We need that strategy to have resources. And we can’t 
wait a year from now to hear more about it, so I am really 
concerned about that. 
 
Now the other thing I’m very concerned about is in fact around 
housing. Now of course this government, especially in Sask 
Housing, some of their announcements just don’t make any 
sense over the last couple of years. And we’re getting calls to 
the office. What does this mean? What does this mean? In their 
last announcement in January, they were going to do away with 
affordable housing in the cities, in 12 of the cities in 



March 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6663 

Saskatchewan. And of course this led to a lot of alarm in the 
tenants, 18,000 tenants who live in Sask Housing units across 
this province. 
 
Sask Housing has such a great history of meeting the needs of 
seniors and those people, especially women, who are fleeing 
from abuse. And those sort of circumstances, social housing 
really was there to meet the needs of those who really need did 
the need. But there was also another group, another group about 
4,500, 4,000 to 4,500 tenants, using a program called affordable 
housing which bridged the very low-income people, but usually 
families, to a situation where they might be able to save some 
money to either buy a house or get their lives in order so that 
they could rent a more affordable, private market situation. But 
now we hear this program is being cancelled, and it really is all 
social housing now. 
 
[19:15] 
 
And seniors are saying, well what does that mean for us? What 
does that mean for us? We’re seniors. And there’s some 11,000 
seniors in Sask Housing units. And I really can’t wait for 
estimates here because the Sask Housing folks will really have 
to justify why they are making this so convoluted for people 
who really need supports in their housing. 
 
And yet we saw in this budget, in this budget we saw a 
reduction, a reduction of some $5.4 million in programming for 
Sask Housing. You know, it went from 14.6 million down to 
9.2 million. How can that be? How can that be? You know, 
we’d be very curious. The portfolio of Sask Housing at the very 
least deserves to be kept up, but we see a situation where we 
have a government here last fall in September walked away 
from a fixed-price contract with Deveraux. And interestingly 
Deveraux had just been awarded a project in Prince Albert that 
had a lot of questions about it, but here we had a situation last 
September where they were allowed to walk away from a 
fixed-price contract, you know. 
 
And we’ve talked about this and how this does not give us any 
comfort about what’s going to happen with P3 [public-private 
partnership] schools. If they can let Deveraux walk away from a 
$10 million contract over $400,000, what’s going to happen 
with these schools, the P3 schools when they, if they get into a 
situation of difficulty? So we have some real, real issues with 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also have questions about what’s happening with 
child care spaces, but I also have questions about the child care 
subsidy. Here’s a situation, the child care-parent subsidies is 
now at $14 million — the lowest it’s been since 2006. Now my 
chart doesn’t go before . . . It could be even beyond that. In 
2007 it was $16 million for parents to have subsidies for child 
care spaces. And in fact this government took it up to 17.5 
million, 18 million in 2012-13, and they’ve cut $4 million over 
the last four years out of child care parent subsidies. What’s 
happening there? We know, we know families need this. These 
are the same families that are counting on the employment 
supplements, the same families, the 4,500 families who really 
need support. 
 
So when I say, when I raise the issue around these new MLAs, 
these three new MLAs and what does that mean for families 

who are looking at cutbacks, we should be supporting families 
more with child care subsidies, not less. Not less. And here we 
are instead going to pet projects. Whether they be limousines in 
London, whether they be the smart meters, or whether they be 
John Black and his gravy plane coming up from Washington 
State or whether they be the new MLAs, we’ve got a real 
problem with priorities over there. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I also want to talk about, I want to talk about 
my other area of concern is labour and occupational health and 
safety. And we were shocked, but we have seen this trend, we 
have seen this trend going with occupational health and safety 
— the decrease in inspections. And we raised those questions 
just awhile ago. We saw a 69 per cent decrease in inspections. 
So on an average of . . . In 2012 there was an average of 385 
inspections. Now we’re down to 120, and 94 per cent fewer 
violation notices. And the minister took notice of that and we’re 
looking forward and we hope to hear about this new business 
plan. 
 
But we are really concerned when we look at the numbers that 
back this up, that in fact there has been no increase in 
occupational health and safety inspectors. And if you think that 
the workforce . . . And this is a good news story in terms of the 
workforce has grown, and that’s great. More and more people 
are working in Saskatchewan, but you would think that that 
would be the time to have more and more inspectors, more and 
more inspectors. It would only make sense. It would only make 
sense. But this government is actually having fewer inspectors 
and a plan that calls for fewer inspections. That doesn’t make 
sense when we have the kind of sad record we have in terms of 
injury rates here in Saskatchewan. We’re the second-worst in 
Canada. We’ve got to do better. 
 
And I think one thing, if I could say to the minister right now, is 
go to WCB [Workers’ Compensation Board], ask them for 
more funds for occupational health and safety. And this is the 
thing, this is the thing, that it actually doesn’t cost the General 
Revenue Fund. It doesn’t cost taxpayers any more money for 
occupational health and safety because it is funded, as the 
minister knows, by workers’ comp. It’s funded by WCB. And 
so that is a straight correlation between the two. It has no 
impact on taxes or any other source of revenue. It would have 
no impact. 
 
So it would only be reasonable to say, we have more workers. 
More premiums are being paid for workers. Those workers 
deserve to have more inspectors. It only makes sense. I don’t 
have the number with me, but I think — and the minister can 
correct me; I know his staff will review my notes tonight or 
tomorrow — but I think the workforce has grown by about 20 
per cent. If it’s fewer, they can correct me. But I think we need 
more occupational health and safety inspectors, and that’s 
something that we’ll be talking about in estimates. It’s just got 
to be addressed. It’s just simply got to be addressed. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that we see a slippery slope when we 
see the ministry focusing on, and we raised this in estimates last 
year, about the fact that now you don’t have to file minutes. It’s 
a slippery slope when you start to not having to file minutes. 
You start not having to have meetings and, before you know it, 
it’s not nearly as good a shape as it should be. 
 



6664 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2015 

Mr. Speaker, our time goes by very quickly, and I want to say 
that it is a pleasure to hear and I want to hear from all sides 
about what’s really happening in Saskatchewan. But I’ve got to 
tell you, this doesn’t make sense for Saskatchewan families. It’s 
not family friendly. I see the things and, you know, we are very 
proud of some of the initiatives that we’ve talked about, 
whether it’s buy local, and we were happy to see the House 
fully endorse that, and we’ve talked about that in committee. 
Transparency and procurement, we have to wait and see where 
this government goes with that. Hopefully they’ll endorse that 
plan. We know with buy local, they came in and in one of our 
debates, they were full dead against it, full dead against it. And 
I’m glad to see that they came on board with that. 
 
I do want to say this. It’s why I have to make a pitch about 
education funding. It will be interesting when I raise with the 
school boards in Saskatoon that they saw a 4.5 per cent 
increase. That was the number that was given out earlier today 
by folks, that that’s what the school boards could be expecting. 
I don’t know if we’re going to get that in Saskatoon. We’ll see. 
 
The minister will go through a long list of schools that he’s seen 
improvements. One that I am still waiting to hear about is 
asbestos removal in Pleasant Hill. Pleasant Hill School has been 
on that list for a long, long time, and I know the minister is very 
familiar with that school. It’s a shame that a school that’s now 
over 100 years old, very important in the inner city of 
Saskatoon, but it does have an asbestos issue. And I’m looking 
forward to seeing some address with that.  
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment. 
I think this government, while it’s increased spending to record 
levels, full of waste, and failed to deliver opportunities to young 
people, fairness and affordability for families, and dignity and 
security for seniors. So I have to support the amendment; I will 
not be supporting the main motion. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 
my pleasure to join in the budget debate this evening. As is 
custom, there’s a few people I’d like to thank for allowing me 
to have this wonderful opportunity to represent the people of 
Regina Walsh Acres. And first and foremost I’d like to thank 
my beautiful wife, Larissa Steinley, for all the support she’s 
given me the first three years of being elected. Time does fly 
when you’re in this Assembly, and I can’t believe this is our 
third budget that we’re going to be speaking about. And I’m 
very much looking forward to discussing some of the things in 
the budget . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . my fourth budget, 
sorry. I believe the member from Regina Dewdney just 
corrected me; the fourth budget, thank you very much. And I’m 
very much looking forward to talking about some of the good 
things that are in the budget for the people of Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Secondly, I’d like to thank my constituency assistant, Heather 
Howell-Shiplack. She does a lot of work for us in the 
constituency office of Regina Walsh Acres. Obviously we 
spend a lot of time in the Assembly during the session, and it’s 
their hard work that keeps us in tune with what our constituents 

are feeling and what they’re thinking in the constituency. And 
we’re very happy to be able have such as great person as 
Heather, you know, to take those calls and forwarding their 
concerns on to us and then being able to reply to their concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this budget first and foremost is our eighth 
consecutive balanced budget, which we are very proud to be 
able to say that we’ve taken the opportunity to deliver balanced 
budgets based on the priorities we’ve heard from the people 
across Saskatchewan. We’ve had the opportunity to be out on 
the doorsteps of Saskatchewan. I believe this summer we hit 
40,000 doors this summer, Mr. Speaker, and that’s what we 
based our priorities on, the comments that we hear from the 
doorsteps across the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Secondly, I think one of the most important things that we did 
that puts us . . . be able to comparing our record to the record 
from the members across the aisle, Mr. Speaker, is that we 
balanced this budget with no tax increases. These are the 
choices we think are very important and choices, the hard 
choices that we have to make. But I think when the members 
opposite were in government and they had the opportunity to 
make these choices, instead of making the hard choices, trying 
to balance the budget, they decided to balance the budget by 
raising taxes: raising taxes 17 times while they were in 
government, raised the PST [provincial sales tax] three times, 
raised income tax twice, raised business tax four times. And 
that doesn’t even count all the education property tax hikes as a 
result of their failure to properly fund education, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I really think that members across the hall, across the aisle, 
they can heckle, but the member from Cumberland, the one 
thing he always wanted is . . . The member from Indian 
Head-Milestone said, he’s a one-trick pony. And if one thing he 
wanted was a long-term care home, that long-term care home 
was in the last budget. And he voted against the long-term care 
home that was supposed to go into his constituency in La 
Ronge. How is that representing the people of his area, Mr. 
Speaker? And I think instead of heckling, he should maybe get 
on the phone and talk to his constituents and really find out 
what’s important to them. Talk to the mayor. I think the mayor 
of La Ronge may know a little bit more about what the people 
up there want than the current member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a lot about comparing our records 
because this isn’t a referendum on our budget, it’s a choice 
people have to make, a choice between what the current 
government would do or what the opposition would do if they 
had the pleasure, the honour of being in government, Mr. 
Speaker. And I think their record speaks for themselves. 
 
And I think I want to compare some different ministries. We 
made the choice of spending. Our revenue is $14.2 billion, and 
we made a choice to put three-quarters of that revenue into 
health care, social services, and education that includes K to 12 
and advanced education. These are the priorities our 
government has, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and you can see those, 
our priorities, through the commitments we’ve made to those 
three ministries. 
 
And I find it very interesting what the member from Saskatoon 
Centre was talking about how many people are on social 
programming. And I think he should do a little bit more 



March 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6665 

research, Mr. Speaker, because in 1995-96, 40,031 people were 
on social programs. That’s the highest number in two decades. 
And that’s when our province was losing people at an alarming 
rate because those members opposite, some of them that were in 
cabinet, were choosing to make priorities that didn’t fit with the 
people of our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when he gets up there and talks about how many people are 
on social programming and then talks about SAID, that didn’t 
even exist under their government. There was no programming 
for vulnerable people under that government, Mr. Speaker. For 
him to get up and talk about the SAID program, I think is 
disingenuous at best, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think what I want to go on and talk about 
comparing the education records of our government to members 
opposite. Mr. Speaker, our capital investment is over 700 
million in our first seven years. That’s a 268 per cent increase 
compared to the members opposite. 
 
The members opposite who want to talk about education, the 
member from Regina Rosemont gets on his high horse and talks 
about all the investments they would make. When they had the 
opportunity, they only invested $190 million over seven years. 
And the member from Rosemont gets on his feet and talks 
about the capital infrastructure deficit that we have right now. 
Well we have that infrastructure deficit because we’re trying to 
dig out of a hole that they left by not being able to put the 
maintenance money in, the capital money in to education 
facilities across this province. 
 
[19:30] 
 
I remember going to Waldeck School in the ’80s. I’ll talk about 
the ’80s for a little bit because the member opposite wanted me 
to. So I was in grade 2, going to Waldeck School, and I 
remember at recess one of the most enjoyable things that we got 
to do at recess is, when it was raining, we got to go and empty 
all the water pails that were collecting water because there’s 
holes in the roofs all over Waldeck School. So that’s one of the 
things that we are able to do because that government in the 
’80s decided to invest money in schools. I was seven, Mr. 
Speaker, so I think that into the ’90s, I believe, is probably 
when those members became, when those members became in 
government, that investment in education was just forgotten 
about, especially in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Although they did do something in schools in rural 
Saskatchewan. The member from Melville-Saltcoats . . . And I 
actually got his list here because he don’t want to read it all off, 
Mr. Speaker. But I think I’ll read off the investments that the 
NDP [New Democratic Party] made in education in rural 
Saskatchewan. Closed the school in Neville, Admiral, Piapot, 
Lang, Earl Grey, Kronau, Gray, Wilcox, Francis, Odessa, 
Glenavon, Moose Jaw, Willow Bunch, Briercrest, Crane 
Valley, Limerick, Macdowall, Prince Albert, Smeaton, 
Sylvania, Melfort, Uranium City, La Loche, Griffin, Golden 
Prairie, Windthorst, Lintlaw. Mr. Speaker, these are all schools 
in rural Saskatchewan, and there is four or five more pages that 
I think the member from Saltcoats does a much better job 
speaking about those rural schools than I do. 
 
But I think it’s important to know that any time there’s a budget 

that comes down, there is choices. You choose to invest or you 
choose not to. And 9 times out of 10, the members opposite 
chose not to invest in rural Saskatchewan. I might be giving 
them too much credit there, because it’s probably 10 out of 10 
times they chose not to invest in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, but there are some things that they did invest 
in, some things that they decided to invest in. And this is their 
record so I would like speak about it. They decided to invest in 
Big Sky Farms. It was the NDP pig farm, $26 million lost. They 
chose to invest $90.8 million that they lost in Navigata 
Communications. It was a BC [British Columbia] cellphone 
company. They chose to invest $35 million in SPUDCO 
[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company], a failed 
potato company. They chose to invest $15 million in Channel 
Lake, a SaskPower and natural gas subsidy. 
 
Two million dollars lost in Guyana, and I believe the member, 
one of the members talked about that’s probably not the total 
investment they lost in Guyana because they had a lot of people 
fly back and forth from Guyana. And I think some of that 
money wasn’t added into this $2 million. Sixteen million 
dollars lost in NST Chicago, a US [United States] Midwest 
fibre optics company; $9.4 million lost in Persona Inc. 
Newfoundland cable company; $24.7 million lost at Retx.com 
an Atlanta dot-com company, Mr. Speaker. And the list goes on 
and on and on. 
 
My favourite is tappedinto.com, a Nashville dot-com company. 
That cost $6.7 million. Another one that I think is very 
interesting is the $2.42 million lost in Business Watch 
International which was a pawn shop company. So I don’t know 
where else in Canada you can find a government that invested 
in a pawn shop. It’d be very interesting to see. I think they 
probably have a record for that, I’m assuming. 
 
It is the same government that invested in the failed mega 
bingo. Like how do you lose money on bingo? I grew up in 
small town Saskatchewan. Everyone liked to go to a turkey 
bingo. I’m not sure how the captains of business over there 
couldn’t make money on bingo. Rush Lake rec board made a lot 
of money on their turkey bingos, and the NDP government 
couldn’t make a cent on bingo. That’s an interesting priority 
that they had when they were in government. 
 
Our Premier always says that the best indication of future 
behaviour is past behaviour. That’s why the members opposite 
don’t like us talking about their record because their past 
behaviour is something that they’re not very proud of, Mr. 
Speaker. I think the people of Saskatchewan are really looking 
forward to them developing a plan so they can see if their future 
behaviour will mimic their past behaviour. They want to know, 
if you’re going to talk about the government’s investments and 
not having the right priorities, what are your priorities? 
 
The member from Regina Rosemont stands on his feet after the 
Minister of Finance delivered a great budget, who I’d like to 
congratulate. I believe he’ll go down as one of the finest 
Finance ministers in the history of our province. I think it’s 
going to be a very sad day when the member from Canora-Pelly 
has his last day in this Assembly, and I think I speak for all of 
our colleagues in saying that he probably is one member that is 
unreplaceable. He has done an amazing job. His attention to 
detail, his passion for his job is something that inspires us all to 



6666 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2015 

be better MLAs for their constituents. 
 
And while I’m on this subject, I’d like to thank the treasury 
board, the members at treasury board and our caucus that did 
the hard, hard work to make sure that the priorities of the people 
of Saskatchewan are reflected in the budget that was presented 
by the Minister of Finance. And I think that they were able to 
do that. 
 
That’s why I would like to see a plan from the other side. The 
member from Regina Rosemont gets on his feet and says, you 
guys spent $14.2 billion, record spending, and you spent it on 
the wrong things. But he never says what the NDP would spend 
it on, or he never actually puts down how much money he’d 
spend on their priorities either, Mr. Speaker. And I think it’s 
incumbent on an opposition, yes, to be contrarian and talk about 
the things they believe the government is doing wrong, but it is 
also incumbent on them, a year out from an election, to start to 
say what their priorities would be, what they would do 
differently, how they would handle a $700 million shortfall in 
oil revenue. 
 
Wait a minute — that was the broken economics. That was, he 
was going to fill in the shortfall from oil by bringing back the 
film tax credit, right? I think that’s how they figured they were 
going to be able to balance the budget. I’m not sure that’s going 
to be enough to fill the $700 million gap that oil has right now. I 
don’t think so. And some of my colleagues are looking at me 
and looking a little uneasy about the decisions that might be 
made if that member had to do a budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to talk about some of the other feedback we’ve had on 
the budget so far and talk about some of the comments made by 
business leaders, by community leaders across this province 
about the budget that was delivered last Wednesday. And I 
think one of the things that is most important when a budget’s 
delivered is how the most vulnerable in our society are being 
treated, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s how you judge a society is 
by how the less vulnerable are being treated. 
 
And one of the quotes I’d like to read is about some of the 
programs we have for disabilities. And I quote, “This is great. 
We are ecstatic. I felt like crying. We were just hugging each 
other, and we’re very happy about the program (becoming 
permanent).” That’s Janine Shurmer, mom of a six-year-old, 
Judah, who graduated from Lil Tots autism intervention 
program in Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, I think that speaks about 
the commitments this government has, and the current Social 
Services minister and the former social services minister who 
did a fantastic job as minister, and shows how much they care 
about our most vulnerable, our most vulnerable children, and 
how our society as a whole is looking after each other. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about a few of the other comments 
that were made by community leaders, by John Hopkins; he’s 
the Regina Chamber of Commerce CEO [chief executive 
officer]. He said, “We’re very pleasantly surprised and relieved 
there’s no tax increases here.” Mr. Speaker, that is a very 
different approach than the opposition took. The opposition 
believe that when times are tough, you balance the budget on 
the back of people in Saskatchewan. 
 
They always want to talk about where’s the money gone? 

Where’s the money gone? Well I guess on this side of the 
House, we believe that the money does belong to the people of 
Saskatchewan, should go back into their pockets. So $5 billion 
since 2007, because of the tax decreases made by this 
government, have gone back in the pockets of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think that would be one of the biggest differences 
between this side of the House and that side of the House, is 
that a Saskatchewan Party government will always believe the 
people of Saskatchewan know best how to spend their money, 
and a socialist government will always believe that they think 
the government knows better to spend money than the people of 
the province. And I think that’s something that we’ll always run 
on. That’s probably a platform for us, that people always realize 
that we don’t think we should just keep on taking money out of 
people’s pockets and wasting it on failed investments, Mr. 
Speaker, especially failed investments outside of this province. 
 
Like I think we should put more money into the people’s 
pockets instead of investing in Guyana or investing in Channel 
Lake or SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company]. And that’s their past behaviour, and most people 
believe that would be their future behaviour if they ever got the 
ability to govern this province again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another interesting quote on the budget that was delivered on 
Wednesday, Mr. Speaker, is, “Given the fiscal challenges, 
particularly with regard to oil, today the provincial government 
got the fundamentals right in balancing the budget.” That’s the 
Regina Mayor Michael Fougere. “We’re in much better shape 
here in Saskatchewan than almost any other place in the world 
that’s an oil-producing sort of place.” John Hopkins, chamber 
of commerce. 
 

We’re calling it a good news budget, a business-friendly 
budget. As small-business owners, we’re looking for three 
things: a balanced budget, sustainable spending, and no 
tax hikes. They’re going to be pleased the government 
listened to them and their concern about the cancellation 
of the tax hike. They’re also going to be pleased that this 
government didn’t take the easy way out. It made some 
tough decisions. That certainly is . . . They deserve credit 
for that. [Marilyn Braun-Pollon, Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business.] 

 
And Mr. Speaker, I really firmly believe that the people of the 
province . . . and I’m excited because we’re going to go on the 
doorsteps this summer, this spring, summer and fall, and talk to 
the people of Saskatchewan and see exactly how they feel about 
this provincial budget. And I think when we’re talking on the 
doorsteps and people in Regina Walsh Acres and people in 
Saskatoon Centre, they’re going to say that this budget is 
appreciated. This budget reflects the priorities of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to take a few minutes to talk about advanced education 
because there is some misinformation out there, I’m assuming 
being spread by the members opposite, about the graduate 
retention program. And I think it’s a program that this side of 
the House wants to see sustainable, wants to see, you know, run 
in the future. It’s not a walk back to the graduate retention 
program, Mr. Speaker. It’s not a broken promise, as members 



March 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6667 

over there will parrot and talk about. It’s a decision that was 
made to allow this program to be sustainable. People will still 
get their money back, Mr. Speaker, and I think it’s fantastic that 
it’s a program that the people of Saskatchewan, the young 
people of Saskatchewan will still be able to get money back — 
$20,000 back over 10 years. 
 
And they can yell across the hall and heckle and make fun of 
advanced education, but I think it’s something that’s pretty 
important to us. And the member from Regina Elphinstone, 
who was a former Advanced Education minister I believe, 
should know better than to try and commit some, make some 
misleading statements about a program, especially when it’s a 
program that has brought 55,000 young people to the province 
of Saskatchewan. Eighty-three million dollars, 55,000 young 
people are working in this province, and it’s fantastic, Mr. 
Speaker, that the young people in the province find it the place 
that they want it to be. They’re not getting luggage for 
graduation just like they did back in the dark days of the NDP, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they can heckle across the aisle and talk about what their 
plan is, but they haven’t really put anything on paper. If I was 
them, I wouldn’t be heckling; I would be working on a policy to 
make sure that they can keep the nine seats they currently have. 
Because if the people of the province don’t see anything from 
them but being contrarian and opposing everything the 
government does but not putting any policies forward, there are 
going to be a few less seats over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s not being arrogant, that’s just saying, eventually you 
have to stand for something. You have to stand for something. 
You have to actually go out and talk to your constituents. You 
have to door knock. And, Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Saskatoon Centre can heckle. I’ve door knocked my riding 
many times, Mr. Speaker. And I’m pretty happy to take this 
budget out and talk to the people of Regina Walsh Acres. I 
would say that he should probably spend a little more time in 
Saskatoon Centre talking to some of the young people in that 
area to see if they think that a party that has no policy is 
something that young people in Saskatchewan will vote for. 
 
The reason that they don’t like to see a population increase is 
that just means that there’s more people moving to this province 
that will never vote NDP. And they don’t want to see people 
doing better because they’re going to say, well the government 
has to save us, right? That was basically their program in the 
’90s. And one of their high-up ministers, I believe, once said, 
good, the more people that leave, that just leaves more for the 
rest of us. How backwards of a statement could you have from a 
senior minister in a government? They want people to leave the 
province, then there’ll be more left for the rest of us? 
 
That is one of the most backwards statements I’ve ever heard in 
my life. And that’s such an arrogant statement to make, and 
that’s what people still don’t understand from the NDP. There’s 
never been contrition. The member from Massey Place, the 
current leader — and I say current because he may not have his 
job after the next election — and the deputy leader from 
Rosemont made a tree book, policy book promising $5 billion 
in spending, Mr. Speaker, and didn’t mention rural 
Saskatchewan once. They wrote a whole policy book and didn’t 
say one thing about rural Saskatchewan. And they wonder why 

all the seats on this side of the House represent rural 
Saskatchewan and they don’t have one over there. 
 
[19:45] 
 
Maybe they should take a step back and find where . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . The member from Wood River was 
talking about the manifesto. And I think it’s going to be an 
amazing speech when he gets up, and I’m looking forward to it 
because he always delivers a great speech. But, Mr. Speaker, 
I’m very much looking forward to the day when the members 
can do more than heckle across the aisle. They can proudly 
stand up and talk about policy, have a policy debate, because 
I’ll be looking forward to having a debate on what they would 
do when they’re in government. But right now all they’ve said 
is, we’d spend more money, we’d spend more money; you guys 
are spending too much money. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I am so looking forward to talking a little bit 
more about this budget and comparing some more records. In 
health, health care is one of the biggest priorities of people 
across the province, Mr. Speaker, and they see that our 
government keeps that priority, as they do, as the first priority. 
I’d like to talk about the health care budget, Mr. Speaker, and 
kind of the Saskatchewan Party government compared to an 
NDP government. The number of health professionals 
practising now compared to 2007: 423 more doctors or 24 per 
cent increase; 29 per cent increase in specialists; 44 per cent 
increase in pediatricians; 20 per cent increase in family 
practitioners; 2,600 more nurses of all designations, 20 per cent 
increase in RNs [registered nurse], 31 per cent increase in LPNs 
[licensed practical nurse], 74 per cent increase in nurse 
practitioners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the number of health professionals lost in the last 
five years of the NDP government: 173 fewer physicians, 455 
fewer nurses of all designations, 155 fewer pharmacists, 95 
fewer physiotherapists. 
 
The number of people waiting now compared to 2007 for 
surgeries: more than 18 months, down 99 per cent; more than 
one year, down 97 per cent; more than six months, down 90 per 
cent. The NDP’s record on wait lists: promised to cut surgical 
waits by 30 per cent in 1999; they actually increased wait lists 
by 61 per cent. That’s their record. They can talk all they want 
about what they would do, but their record speaks more than 
their shallow words ever will, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan Party record on infrastructure: over $1 billion 
invested over seven years, built or building 15 new long-term 
care facilities, $235 million for a children’s hospital, $100 
million for Moose Jaw Union Hospital, 73 million transferred to 
regional health authorities for population growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and this is something that’s still important to the 
people of Regina. I hear it when I’m door knocking in Walsh 
Acres all the time. The NDP’s record in infrastructure has spent 
only $421 million on health care capital during the last seven 
years in government. They closed 52 hospitals, 53 if you 
include the Plains outside of Regina, which was one of the best 
health care facilities in the province, and they closed it down for 
petty political reasons because they wanted to make sure that 
they kept seats in inner city Regina. I can’t believe the decision 



6668 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2015 

that was made to close that health care facility. And the backlog 
of complaints that they probably got on that is amazing. 
 
And you know what? They always talk about consultations. I 
wonder who you guys consulted when you closed the Plains 
hospital. Who do you think you consulted? I’d love the member 
from Regina Elphinstone to tell me who he consulted when they 
decided to close the Plains hospital. I think that would be an 
excellent conversation to have. They talk about consulting and 
how they like to speak with everyone, but when they were in 
government, which is another thing . . . Future behaviour is 
dictated by past behaviour. 
 
I wonder who they talked to about closing the Plains hospital. 
Did they talk to the residents of rural Saskatchewan, southeast 
Saskatchewan? I wonder if they talked to the people in 
Cannington. I wonder if they talked to people in Estevan or 
Weyburn. I wonder if they talked to people in probably the 
south side of Regina even and said, you know what? I think 
we’re going to close your guys’s hospital. Are you guys okay 
with that? I wonder if that conversation happened. And I 
wonder if they had open houses and went and talked with 
everyone. I’m guessing that probably didn’t happen, Mr. 
Speaker. I wasn’t around at that point in time, but I’ve seen 
some flyers, some flyers that said, don’t worry; your health 
care’s going to get better if we close the Plains hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and long-term care is something that’s very 
important to the Government of Saskatchewan. Our 
commitment to long-term care and our Health minister’s 
commitment to long-term care can be seen by the investment 
that we’re going to continue to put into long-term care homes. 
But they closed 19 long-term care facilities, 19 across the 
province. That former NDP government . . . I guess the former 
NDP government because now they’re not NDP. They’re New 
Democrats because the party’s over, over there I guess because 
they’ve tried to rebrand themselves. They’ve rebranded 
themselves a fair bit, actually: CCF [Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation] to NDP to ND [New Democrats]. I 
wonder where they’re going next, but I guess that’s something 
they should worry about, and not our government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a couple more things I’d like to get on the 
record before my time is over. One is comparing highway 
investments by our government to the former government, the 
NDP, ND now I guess. Mr. Speaker, improved over 8500 
kilometres of provincial highway since 2007. Invested $4.2 
million in the Diefenbaker bridge in Prince Albert. Committed 
to building the southeast Regina bypass, the largest 
infrastructure project in Saskatchewan history. Over the past 
seven years the Saskatchewan Party government’s invested 
$289 million in the North — $63 million, 30 per cent increase 
over the last seven years of the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP left a billion dollar pothole in 
Saskatchewan. And it’s really interesting when we talk about 
leadership and ideas for leadership. When the NDP had their 
leadership nomination ongoing, can you believe the member 
from Massey Place didn’t mention highways once? Not one 
policy on highways. That is unbelievable. So he runs a 
leadership campaign, doesn’t mention highways because that’s 
probably not important, then he’s the author of a tree book, 
signed it, didn’t mention rural Saskatchewan once in the whole 

policy platform book they had. The member from Regina 
Rosemont must be shaking his head some days, I bet you. I 
can’t believe that I lost that one, he’s probably going. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2003 when the Diefenbaker bridge needed 
repairs, NDP refused to even pay 50 per cent of the costs. So 
when the members from Athabasca and Cumberland stand on 
their feet and talk about investments they would make in P.A. 
[Prince Albert] and the North when their record shows virtually 
no investment, their record shows that they really didn’t have 
that much concern about the Prince Albert bridge when they 
were in government, so now their rhetoric’s really not matching 
their actions. And yes, they did want to invest in bingo. I still 
can’t believe that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think my time is coming short but there’s just a 
couple more things I want to speak about, and that would be a 
couple more highlights that I’m going to be proud to take to the 
people of Regina Walsh Acres. And that is — I’m going to 
repeat myself — there is no tax increase in this budget. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s putting, since ’07, putting $5 billion back in the 
pockets of Saskatchewan people. That’s where the money went. 
Paying off $3.3 billion, 40 per cent of the general revenue debt. 
That’s where the money is going, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
saving $300 million a year on interest payments that we’d have 
to pay if that debt was not paid down. $8 billion in 
infrastructure since we formed government, more than double 
the investment of the party, the opposition party. $1.3 billion for 
core infrastructure in 2015-16. That’s the largest investment in 
infrastructure of any government in the history of our province, 
a 50 per cent increase over last year. $248.5 million for K to 12 
schools, up $150 million over last year, and the largest 
investment education capital. 
 
For the member from Regina Rosemont to stand in his place 
and say the Government of Saskatchewan does not take 
education capital infrastructure serious is just something that’s 
factually incorrect and he’s spinning numbers to make up a 
story that’s just false, Mr. Speaker. $256.4 million for health 
capital. I should quote the numbers from the NDP archives to 
see how much money they actually put into education. And I’d 
like to see the NDP archives over at Tommy Douglas House to 
see how much money they put into health care. And then I’d 
love to see the consultation archives they would have of who 
they talked to about closing the Plains hospital, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 74.5 million for municipal infrastructure. And this 
is something I know for sure. I don’t have to go back to the 
archives to see it. They clawed back money from municipalities 
to try and balance the budget. I think they clawed back over 
$600 million actually, Mr. Speaker. $2 billion for Crown 
infrastructure, Crown capital spending, more. 
 
And I know, Mr. Speaker, if you want to go back into the 
archives of the NDP, their history of investing in SaskPower is 
ridiculous. It was held together by baler twine basically, Mr. 
Speaker. And $23 million to continue twinning Highway 16 
from Saskatoon to Clavet. 
 
There’s one thing I know, Mr. Speaker, is that I’ll be proud to 
support this budget. This budget when I’m younger . . . When 
I’m older I’ll be able to let my son Nickson go back into the 
archives and say that his dad supported this budget. And I think 



March 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6669 

it’s something that he’ll be proud of because I’m having . . . 
Actually my son’s 21 months old and I’m having a baby girl in 
July. So when my children are older they can go back and see 
that their father supported a budget that took the people of 
Saskatchewan’s priorities and put them in the forefront. I’ll be 
happy to support the budget. I won’t be supporting the 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to be able to get up and speak this evening to the budget that 
was just brought down. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I guess as everybody, we have to give some 
thanks to some of our people at home. I want to thank my CAs 
[constituency assistant], Shelley Meyer and Cindy Warner. 
They do a fantastic job working back there when I’m not 
around. And as we always say, we have to thank our families 
too, my wife Terry. And of course, I have our two children who 
I’m happy to say are working in this province, which is a lot 
different than what it used to be when, as it’s been said many 
times, when they graduated they were given suitcases so they 
could go out to Alberta or British Columbia to go to work. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I have a little bit of a story to tell about my 
wife. Now my wife had some problems last year and they 
originally thought it might be ovarian cancer, which is very 
serious, but fortunately it was not. But she did have a very large 
tumour. And I will say one thing, and I’ve got to give kudos to 
our Health minister for doing such a great job of moving the 
health forward in this province because from the time that she 
was diagnosed to the time that they had the operation — and it 
was non-cancerous, luckily — it was less than a month. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, can you imagine if it happened in the dark 
days of when the NDP was still in government? When the NDP 
sat on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, she would still be 
waiting for surgery. And, Mr. Speaker, I think my seatmate 
over here said it right: maybe have to go to Alberta. But, Mr. 
Speaker, this was great for our family to see that move forward, 
you know, for a couple of . . . One, she desperately needed the 
surgery. Secondly, she got in there, got it done quickly, and 
now she can look after me a lot better than, you know, like I 
mean rather than waiting around. And Lord knows I need all the 
help I can get. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, you know, you take a look at this budget and 
the things that have happened with our, what is it, the eighth 
consecutive, eighth consecutive budget that is balanced. We 
have a wonderful Finance minister. We have a wonderful 
treasury board that worked very hard on trying to put this all 
together. And I know our Finance minister, we’re really going 
to miss him when he leaves this House after I think it’s 20 years 
in public service. And that’s really going to be a sorry day to 
see him go, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we could talk about lots of various different 
things on the budget. We can talk about quite a few things that 
the NDP has said and actually didn’t do. But anyway, I got a 
flyer and I could actually make this whole budget speech just on 
the flyer that I received in the mail here on the weekend, Mr. 

Speaker. And it says, where did all the money go? Well, Mr. 
Speaker, all you’ve got to do is take a look at the infrastructure 
in Saskatchewan that this province, this government has been 
working on. You just take a look. 
 
We have, you know, while the NDP shut down, what was it, 19 
nursing homes, we have a new nursing home starting up over in 
Tisdale. And also, Mr. Speaker, you know, we’ve got a new 
high school going in over in Hudson Bay. Mr. Speaker, this is 
where the money is going. We are putting stuff into the 
province, into the province of Saskatchewan to be able to move 
the province forward. 
 
[20:00] 
 
Now the whole catch is, Mr. Speaker, that it says in this flyer, it 
says education . . . And I’m going to quote from this flyer that I 
got, Mr. Speaker. “Our kids’ classes are overcrowded and 
underfunded. They don’t get the one-on-one attention they 
deserve, and this government has an expensive scheme to rent 
schools from private corporations.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s just take a look at what our minister, 
what this government has done. Let’s take a look at the 
highlights of the education budget: operating, $1.87 billion, a 
52.8 million increase or 2.9 per cent over last year. Mr. 
Speaker, no school division is going to see a decrease, contrary 
to some of the stories that are out there running around. These 
are facts, Mr. Speaker, and we have to caution, these are facts. 
 
There’s no change in the education property tax. The capital 
spending, $248 million, $152 million increase or 158 per cent 
over last year, it’s the largest budget-day allocation for school 
capital in the history of our province, Mr. Speaker. I for one can 
see some of that because we have got that new school going up 
in Hudson Bay. 
 
Now let’s take a look at the teachers. According to this, they’re 
overcrowded. They’re underfunded. They don’t get the 
attention they deserve. This came in the NDP flyer. Anyways, 
let’s take a look. Now from when we took office, there are 614 
more school teachers. There are 200 more student support 
teachers. The psychologists are up 45 per cent. The speech 
language is up 24 per cent, occupational therapists up 53 per 
cent, social workers up 14 per cent. When it comes to helping 
the immigrant student, the number of the English as an 
additional language teachers is up 8 per cent. 
 
Now this government, we believe not in just doing the talking. 
We believe in doing the walking. So consequently, as you can 
see, there’s been an increase each and every year to the 
operating grant for school divisions, over 31 per cent increase 
since 2007, Mr. Speaker. These are some of the things that are 
coming through from our budget, Mr. Speaker. And this is a 
budget that’s, let’s face it, it’s a tight budget. It was a hard 
budget to be able to make decisions on, but this government is 
committed to helping the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker? We’re continuing, 
continuing to do that without any tax increases. And of course 
where I’m from in northeast Saskatchewan, it’s a large farming 
area. Do you remember, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure you do 



6670 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2015 

because you come from a farming area also, what the taxes used 
to be on land, the education portion of the taxes? That has gone 
down. That has gone down, Mr. Speaker. We decided to leave 
money in the jeans of the people of this province so they can 
invest in this province, and that makes them want to stay in this 
province. It also makes people want to move to this province. 
Why do you think we’ve gone up 122 million people? Mr. 
Speaker, people are seeing Saskatchewan as the place to be, not 
the place to be from. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to talk about a few little odds 
and ends here because we don’t have that much time. But you 
know, Mr. Speaker, we can go on to the health care and in it 
here, in their health care in this pamphlet they had, it says, 
health care, and I’m quoting, Mr. Speaker, “We’re waiting far 
too long in emergency rooms and crammed into hospital 
hallways while this government has actually turned a bunch of 
patient rooms into offices for more managers.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, yes, as my friend from Wood River says, 
they just closed the hospitals. They closed . . . How many 
hospitals was it? Oh I think it was 52, 52 plus the Plains. Now 
let’s just take a look at what we have just in health care alone 
since 2007. We have over 400 more doctors since 2007, 2,600 
more nurses of all designations, 700 more FTEs [full-time 
equivalent] in long-term care and integrated facilities. Yet day 
after day they come in here and they bring in some patients, and 
rightfully so, and I think that’s up to them because some people 
do fall through the cracks. But that being said, they come in 
here and stand there day after day and say, oh just think of your 
grandparents. Just think of all these people that are in there and 
they’re not getting the care they need. They need more staff. 
Well there’s 780 more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we are putting up — what is it? — 15 new 
long-term care facilities and, like I said, one up in my 
constituency. Mr. Speaker, these are things that this 
government, even in tough times, even in tough budgets, in this 
we are moving forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it also says that the seniors, and I am quoting 
again, Mr. senior . . . Mr. Speaker. I guess Mr. senior. Sorry, I 
mean Mr. Speaker. “Seniors are suffering due to short-staffing 
and this government’s removal of minimum care standards.” 
Mr. Speaker, I think I just explained a bunch of that. 
 
The other thing is on the seniors’ income supplement. Just think 
of it. For 16 years, for 16 years the NDP had the grand total of 
$90 going into it, and yet they claim that they’re all for the 
seniors. Mr. Speaker, this government has increased it. It is now 
up to $270 a month. Mr. Speaker, where were the NDP? They 
talk. They talk as if they’re going to go out and help them, but 
what do they really do? What do they really do? 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, on this same — want to hear it? — the 
same pamphlet, it says, “You deserve a government that invests 
in your priorities.” You know, they’re right. They’ve got it. It’s 
called the Saskatchewan Party Government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP have a slogan that they like to use. It’s 
not about the province doing well. It’s about people doing well. 
But there again, their words don’t match their actions. The 
action is done on this side of the House. The words are just . . . 

There’s words on that side, but the action is all done on this 
side. 
 
Because let’s see. Let’s just take a look at this. You know, how 
well were the people doing when the NDP were in office? Well 
not all that well. First off they were paying a whole lot more 
tax. How well were the people doing when the NDP raised your 
taxes 17 times in their 16 years? How well were the people 
doing when the NDP was closing 52 hospitals, 176 schools, and 
telling people to fix their roads? Mr. Speaker, how well were 
seniors doing when the NDP closed 1,200 long-term care beds 
and tried to jack rates up to 90 per cent of their income? How 
well were they doing, Mr. Speaker? How well were young 
people doing when they all had to leave the province to find 
work? Well that wasn’t real great. 
 
Here’s how the people are doing today. There’s 122,000 more 
people living in Saskatchewan today. We’ve got the lowest 
unemployment rate in Canada, and there’s more people working 
in Saskatchewan than there ever were before. They’re earning 
more than they ever were before and keeping more, thanks to 
our lower taxes. More doctors, more nurses, a better health 
system, we’ve gone from the longest wait times in the country 
to one of the shortest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those are just a few, just a few of the odds and 
ends that we can bring out. We’ve done that, and I guess I’m 
not talking actually, specifically to the budget. I’m talking about 
this budget and all the previous budgets we have been putting 
forward, that we’ve been putting forward for the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan. And I can tell you I am very 
honoured and privileged to represent the Carrot River Valley 
constituency. And when I went home on the weekend, our 
mayor from Carrot River, Bob Gagne, came up and he said, 
kudos to you people for keeping up with the revenue sharing of 
our municipalities and our towns. He was ecstatic that we were 
still going to continue on with that. 
 
You know, the NDP sat there and downloaded, downloaded 
onto the rural municipalities, downloaded onto the small towns. 
 
An Hon. Member: — [Inaudible] . . . money for bingo. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — And SPUDCO, money for bingo, money for 
SPUDCO, money for Navigata, all those things, but yet they 
could not help out the people of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
This is a government that believes in helping out the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan. This is a government that will 
continue to help out the people of Saskatchewan. And I think 
that in the end, in the end, come our next election, I think that 
you’ll see the people of Saskatchewan sit there and take a look 
at how things used to be under the NDP, how things are now 
under the Saskatchewan Party government, and unless I’m 
terribly mistaken, Mr. Speaker, I know which way it’s going to 
go. It’s not going to be . . . It’s going to be a sorry day for the 
NDP as far as what I can see, talking to people within my 
constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many, many things that we could talk 
about on the budget but I guess, you know, my time is awfully 
short here. And I could sit here and talk for the whole night on 
it, as far as what the NDP didn’t do and what we are doing and 



March 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6671 

what our plans are to doing. 
 
We actually have a vision, and our vision is moving 
Saskatchewan forward, and our province is going to move 
forward under this particular government, under this Premier. 
This province is moving forward like it never has before. And, 
you know, let’s face it, when you take a look at those 
population numbers, under this government, the short time that 
we’ve been here, we have increased this province more than 
any other time since the days of Walter Scott, when he was the 
first premier, who had a vision, who had a vision to build this 
wonderful building and who had a vision for the province. Our 
Premier and this party has a vision for this province, and we are 
going to move forward on that vision. 
 
The NDP’s vision, well, who knows? We haven’t seen it yet. 
You know, all we know is from the last tree book, and they 
wanted to spend $5 billion, of course not figuring out where 
they’re going to get the money. 
 
But anyway, this government is a responsible, fiscally 
responsible government. The plans are moving everything 
forward. Even in tough times, we will not hesitate to move the 
province forward, and we’re going to do that without raising 
taxes on the hard-working men and women of this province. 
God bless Saskatchewan, and I support this budget. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. “From many 
peoples, strength.” This motto expresses Saskatchewan’s 
multicultural heritage, the combination of First Nations and 
Métis cultures, and the key role of immigration in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for centuries we’ve had people coming to 
Saskatchewan, even though they didn’t know that was the name 
of Saskatchewan, and today we have people coming to 
Saskatchewan. In fact, Mr. Speaker, our newest population 
figures show that we have 1,132,640 people that now call 
Saskatchewan home — that’s Statistics Canada numbers. Mr. 
Speaker, that is Saskatchewan’s growth rate that is the second 
highest in Canada, a growth rate of 1.56 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have a province that is made up of people of all races, all 
cultures, all colours, Mr. Speaker, all ages. We have the very 
young and we have the very wise, Mr. Speaker. In caucus we 
have a team that works together. We relish the good times. We 
pull together through the bad times. In 2007 the Saskatchewan 
people asked the Saskatchewan Party to govern. In 2011 they 
asked us again to continue to govern this province. They like 
what we’re doing, and we do not take that mandate lightly. 
 
[20:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the diversity on this side of the House, from 
north to south, from east to west, we have young and 
not-so-young members. We have members that have many 
years of wisdom and experience and those that can count their 
political experience in months. Mr. Speaker, we have women 
and men, some with many degrees, some with degrees from the 
school of hard knocks. We have rural and urban members. We 

have members with skills in a wide variety of fields and 
professions but like I said, we have a team, Mr. Speaker. That is 
what’s reflected in this budget today that was delivered last 
week. That is what we are debating and discussing. Mr. 
Speaker, I couldn’t be more pleased with the budget that we 
have presented, the eighth balanced budget in a row, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We have many thanks to our constituents, and I’d like to add 
mine at this time. Mr. Speaker, the people of Prince Albert 
Northcote asked me to govern and I take that so seriously, Mr. 
Speaker, and I thank them humbly from the bottom of my heart. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as many here have said, it takes a strong support 
system to help you to deal with the political role that we have 
been asked. Mr. Speaker, my strongest supporter is my 
husband, Allan. My strongest critic is my husband, Allan. Mr. 
Speaker, we have three children. Some of them are married. 
 
We have a daughter that is a teacher of English as a second 
language. I couldn’t be more proud of her, Mr. Speaker. She has 
taken her skills to many countries, taught in Japan, and brought 
those skills back to Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our son and his wife have two of our 
grandchildren. They live out in Ottawa. We’re trying to work 
on getting them back. Cecily and Everett are growing bigger 
every day, Mr. Speaker. I always thought that kids, my kids, 
were really kind of smart, in fact pretty smart. But, Mr. 
Speaker, grandchildren are amazing. They are absolutely 
brilliant. 
 
Our youngest son lives in Calgary along with his wife, Len — 
well that’s the nickname she likes to be called — and our 
youngest granddaughter, Jasmine Victoria Jurgens. Mr. 
Speaker, she is a joy to behold and she already knows a whole 
lot about the IT [information technology] system, Mr. Speaker. 
Being that our son Tyler has an information systems degree, he 
makes sure to Skype with us every week or occasionally a 
couple of days during the week, Mr. Speaker. She knows the 
sound when the computer goes on, and she is waiting to see 
grandpa and grandma, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to just reflect back a little bit on November 6th of 2011. 
Our little granddaughter, Cecily, with the help of her father, 
wished me, “Good luck, Grandma.” Mr. Speaker, that still rings 
in my ears and pulls at my heartstrings. Mr. Speaker, those 
grandchildren are absolutely wonderful. I recommend everyone 
to get some of their own. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have staff in P.A. My constituency assistant, 
Donna Barr, is an incredible woman. She brings so many talents 
to the table that I am pleased to leave the office in good hands 
when I’m down here doing the work that the people have asked 
me to do. Mr. Speaker, I have a casual assistant, Brent Gerlach, 
that also helps with the IT systems so that when I have 
Facebook and website work that needs to be done, he’s right 
there, Mr. Speaker. I have a casual assistant, Pam, that steps in, 
bless her, just occasionally to answer the phones when I’m not 
there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the MLAs in this Assembly on this side of the 
House have been absolutely amazing, Mr. Speaker, whether 



6672 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2015 

they have tons of experience or whether they’re brand new. 
They welcomed me into this Legislative Assembly. They help 
me along with things that I maybe don’t know so much about. I 
like to think that maybe I give them one or two ideas, Mr. 
Speaker, and I couldn’t thank them more than to say, thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have an incredible behind-the-scenes team of 
staff that help us with issues that we need to get together. When 
I go to the ministers’ offices with issues that my constituents 
have brought to me, they are great. They help me out. They give 
us the answers. They help our people out, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have a strong leader, Mr. Speaker, a 
dynamic, energetic Premier. He is a leader with a vision. He is a 
leader that listens. Our leader has a plan. We together are a 
great team and we take our responsibilities seriously, Mr. 
Speaker. A team that listens to the people, but we do more than 
that, Mr. Speaker. We then take action. So we have 49 members 
of the Legislative Assembly with every type of skill set that 
there could be, from farmers and football players, teachers and 
professors, pilots and parliamentarians. We have lawyers and 
leaders, health care workers, dieticians, social worker, lab tech, 
businesswomen, and businessmen. Mr. Speaker, we also have a 
team that moves forward into the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s contrast that with the leader on the opposite 
side of the House, Mr. Speaker: a weak NDP leader; no plan, no 
vision. Constantly says, well we’ll get to it. Mr. Speaker, in fact 
the people that they attract to their party, their candidate in 
Prince Albert Carlton, had this to say: “There is no need for a 
plan. That deflects from the issues.” Mr. Speaker, which team 
do you want to follow? Which team do you want to be a part 
of? Which team do the people of our province want to be a part 
of? I know which team I want to be a part of — the 
Saskatchewan Party team, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert Northcote is a very dynamic 
constituency. We have a little bit of everything there. We have 
the very young and which I like to say are exuberant. We have 
the wise, which some people call seniors, Mr. Speaker. We 
have every level of education there is, from pre-K to 
post-secondary. In fact, Mr. Speaker, we have every level of 
university, every type of university. We have programs from the 
University of Regina. We have programs from the University of 
Saskatchewan. We have a campus of the First Nations 
University. Mr. Speaker, we have SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian 
Institute of Technologies]; we have GDI [Gabriel Dumont 
Institute]. Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on. 
 
In Prince Albert alone, we have a microcosm of our population, 
Mr. Speaker. The only thing we don’t have are canola and 
wheat fields. We have everything else. We have a bridge. We 
have a hospital. We have business, Mr. Speaker. We have a 
good life, Mr. Speaker, a very good life. The people in Prince 
Albert are happy to be in Prince Albert. Mr. Speaker, we are 
within an hour of almost any fishing and resort centre and 
tourism that you could imagine. Mr. Speaker, people are 
surprised when they come from out of province and come north 
to Prince Albert. 
 
In Prince Albert, we don’t call us . . . We don’t say that we’re 
from the North, Mr. Speaker. There’s still a lot of province to 

the north of us. But when we get to La Ronge, the people in La 
Ronge say they are from the North. I don’t hear anything from 
the member from Athabasca or the member from Cumberland 
about the beauty of the North, Mr. Speaker, but I assure you we 
have a beautiful part of the province in our North. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They’re all doom and gloom. 
 
Ms. Jurgens: — Doom and gloom, Mr. Speaker, all the time 
NDP doom and gloom. We can count on NDP being doom and 
gloom. 
 
Mr. Speaker, recently we opened up the Highway 11, which is a 
double lane highway from Saskatoon to Prince Albert, so we 
are connecting the south to the north. Many people say that 
Prince Albert is a gateway, but it is also a gathering ground 
because that highway brings people into Prince Albert. Mr. 
Speaker, as well we have just recently opened the St. Louis 
bridge. That is a bridge that connects with the primary weight 
corridor all the way from Assiniboia in the south all the way to 
La Ronge in the north, Mr. Speaker, another corridor that brings 
people and goods and services into our city and into the North. 
 
It is no secret that we have the Diefenbaker bridge, Mr. 
Speaker. In 2003 when the Diefenbaker bridge needed repairs, 
the members opposite, the members opposite refused to pay 
even 50 per cent of the cost. I do not know why they would not 
consider that the Diefenbaker bridge was an integral part of 
Highway 2, but their former Highways minister, Mr. Speaker, 
said the bridge wasn’t an integral part. Perhaps they should 
drive north and come to P.A. to see that it is a part of our 
highway, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact the NDP said, “It isn’t the government’s responsibility 
and I don’t think it’s something we are accountable for at this 
point.” Mr. Speaker, that’s a stark contrast to the way our 
Saskatchewan Party government believes that the Diefenbaker 
bridge should be dealt with. Mr. Speaker, when our bridge had 
difficulties and we needed to repair it, $4.2 million to bring the 
bridge to primary weight standards, no questions asked. What 
did they do on that side of the House? They can spout and 
sputter all they want, Mr. Speaker. They dismissed the integral 
importance of that bridge, Mr. Speaker. We do not. We have 
different priorities. P.A. is important. We took that 
responsibility seriously. 
 
We didn’t stop there, Mr. Speaker. In 2012 we paid for 
$1,697,493 for Diefenbaker traffic accommodations. As well, 
Mr. Speaker, we paid $2,003,918 for paving repairs on the 
Diefenbaker bridge, completed in 2013. Mr. Speaker, we didn’t 
stop there. 
 
In 2011 . . . I want to talk about our commitment to the second 
bridge, Mr. Speaker. In 2011 the NDP promised they would 
build a second bridge in Prince Albert. Again all talk, no action. 
They had 16 years and during those 16 years when they had 
power, they did nothing for that bridge. They said it wasn’t their 
responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do believe that when we are discussing record to 
record, it would be fair, more than fair, Mr. Speaker, to use 
seven years of their power to seven years of our record 
governing this province, Mr. Speaker. 



March 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6673 

So the members opposite like to talk about, perhaps we should 
talk about the ’70s. Well, Mr. Speaker, how about in 1977 when 
P.A. needed a second bridge? The NDP study said no, don’t 
need a second bridge. Don’t need it until P.A.’s population 
grows to 50,000. Well, Mr. Speaker, the voice of Prince Albert 
has been heard. When our bridge went down and the people 
started talking about getting a second bridge, Mr. Speaker, I 
spoke to my colleagues. And, Mr. Speaker, last year my 
colleagues — thank you to all of them — agreed that we should 
partner to build a bridge that the city of Prince Albert asked for, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
In 2011 the NDP didn’t have any funding from the federal 
government. They just promised. They can promise all they 
want. They can spout and sputter. Mr. Speaker, our 
commitment still stands. We are partnering with the provincial 
government and the city. To date, Mr. Speaker, our province 
has committed our share; the federal government has committed 
their share; the city has not committed their share. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert is more than a bridge. Prince Albert 
has people, has diversity. We also have educational institutions, 
Mr. Speaker, as I spoke about some of them in post-secondary. 
It doesn’t stop there, Mr. Speaker. We have educational 
institutions. In fact, Mr. Speaker, when the NDP talk about, 
where did all the money go, Prince Albert can be very pleased 
to report that we spent $14.7 million for the new École St. Anne 
School which was completed in 2011. 
 
[20:30] 
 
We can discuss the $12.2 million for a state-of-the-art gym, Mr. 
Speaker, in the Carlton community high school. And we can 
talk about the $389,000 for the restoration of King George 
School. That’s where some of the money went, specifically into 
Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also have 338 new child care spaces and 14 new pre-K 
[pre-kindergarten] programs. Mr. Speaker, some of those 
programs are in the schools. I think that is a wonderful idea that 
our government decided to do, was to create pre-K schools that 
would be attached to schools. Mr. Speaker, many times we have 
single parents that drop off their children for pre-K, and at the 
same time drop their children off for school. That is what we do 
as a government. We don’t talk just about dollars and cents, Mr. 
Speaker. We put into action our plan, and we see the results and 
the improvement to the families of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this budget of ’15-16, students across the 
province will also benefit from the inclusion of $4.6 million for 
supports for learning funding for school divisions to continue 
funding announced in the fall of 2014. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our budget very clearly indicated that we have 
more funds for additional English as an additional language 
support. Mr. Speaker, I have a teacher in the family who is a 
very brilliant teacher, very dynamic, determined, highly 
intelligent. She worked hard to get her advanced certification so 
that she could be highly qualified to teach English as a second 
language. In our province, we continue to bring people in from 
other countries. Mr. Speaker, what my daughter Shawna reports 
to me is that many times those children that are coming in have 
more than two other languages that they know before they ever 

learn English. What a dynamic diversity that we are adding to 
our province for our future benefit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week the Leader of the Opposition claimed 
we cut English as an additional language funding. Mr. Speaker, 
we have to correct the record because he is just plain wrong. 
EAL funds, or English as an additional language, are added. 
Last year we added an additional $1 million commitment to 
support EAL. $588,000 of that money went out in last year’s 
budget, 2014-15. This year we commit the rest of the $1 
million, which is $420,000, Mr. Speaker, to fund additional 
English as an additional language supports to deliver on 
commitments that we made to the school divisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very pleased to highlight our record that we 
do what we say we’re going to do. On that side of the House, 
Mr. Speaker, all talk, no action, all sputter. Mr. Speaker, on this 
side of the House we take action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year we will also have $6 million in continued 
funding to support government’s continued response to the 
recommendations from the joint task force on improving First 
Nations and Métis education and employment outcomes in 
Saskatchewan. So, Mr. Speaker, why would we focus on First 
Nations and Métis? Well, Mr. Speaker, our minister, our 
Government Relations minister says it best when he says, and I 
quote, “A strong Saskatchewan economy needs the engagement 
of First Nations and Métis people if it is to grow even more.” I 
think that’s a pretty wise minister, Mr. Speaker, very, very wise 
minister, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to say that he is also the 
minister that I report to as a Legislative Secretary for northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As we know in the North, there is a large number of First 
Nations and Métis people. In Prince Albert we have a large 
number of Métis and First Nations people. Mr. Speaker, on the 
advice of the joint task force on First Nations and Métis 
education and employment, our government is working to 
strengthen access to information services and supports that help 
people transition to school, to work, and to new communities. 
 
Just last fall our government announced $3 million to improve 
education outcomes for First Nations and Métis children. This 
will expand the use of Help Me Tell My Story. Mr. Speaker, 
our adult basic education investments are unique in Canada 
because 25 per cent of that funding, Mr. Speaker, is on-reserve 
funding, Mr. Speaker. That is a few of the many benefits that a 
growing, prosperous province can provide, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To continue with our strong commitment to students, Mr. 
Speaker, we have in this budget $32.5 million for the Student 
Aid Fund. Mr. Speaker, $9 million goes to the Saskatchewan 
Advantage Scholarship, $6.5 million for the Saskatchewan 
advantage grant for education savings. And, Mr. Speaker, for 
our graduate retention program — that we didn’t remove, 
despite what the NDP tried to throw smoke screens up; we 
didn’t remove it, Mr. Speaker; it is still there — $88 million of 
non-refundable tax credits. It now is extended so that people 
that work in our province and have graduated can earn their tax 
credits, Mr. Speaker. We’ve also increased operation funding to 
technical institutes and federated colleges that will increase by 2 
per cent. 
 



6674 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2015 

Mr. Speaker, I do have a preference for post-secondary 
education and, as I said, in Prince Albert we have many types of 
post-secondary education. 
 
What I am going to share with you now, Mr. Speaker, is some 
of the enhancements that will increase our labour market 
programs because many of the businesses in our province say 
we need more skilled people to work in our province. One thing 
that we discovered is the adult basic education program had a 
wait-list. It’s still a wait-list, but this year we are adding more 
seats, 200 more seats, Mr. Speaker, $600,000 increase. What it 
does is it provides a record investment of $25 million with a 
total program capacity of 8,780 seats. Mr. Speaker, one of the 
institutions in our city provides the ABE [adult basic education] 
program training and it is the Dumont Technical Institute, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We also added provincial training allowance. We added the 
Canada-Saskatchewan job grant. We increased it for a total fund 
of $4 million. We have employment assistance program for 
persons with disabilities. 
 
We increased the Saskatchewan Apprenticeship and Trade 
Certification Commission by 300 additional seats, $1 million, 
Mr. Speaker. What that does is it provides a total number of 
seats of 7,000 to our province, Mr. Speaker. But what does that 
mean? Mr. Speaker, what it means is that people are 
recognizing that they have a gap in their skill set. They want to 
join in our strong economy. They want to go and get the jobs 
that are out there, Mr. Speaker, because finally, after just seven 
years of a Saskatchewan Party government, a very short seven 
years, Mr. Speaker, we have the lowest unemployment rate in 
the country. We have more people going to school than ever 
before, Mr. Speaker. We have people that are ready to have a 
job and are ready to work hard for it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the First Nations and Métis, we have 
provided an extra $20.2 million in direct support. What it does 
is it adds 428,000 to the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technologies. Mr. Speaker, that’s an increase of 24 per cent. 
You would think that the members across the way, especially 
the members from Athabasca and Cumberland, would be voting 
for this budget. They should be coming across the floor and 
shaking my hand for doing such a good job. They should be 
shake everybody’s hand on this side of the floor, Mr. Speaker. 
We have added $75,000 to the First Nations University of 
Canada. We have added more money to the Gabriel Dumont 
Institute and to the Dumont Technical Institute. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 2007-08, the provincial government 
provided $477.5 million in funding to post-secondary 
institutions. How is this meeting our growth plan? Mr. Speaker, 
in our growth plan we say: 
 

By 2020, the Government of Saskatchewan’s goal is to 
ensure Saskatchewan leads the county in graduation rates 
and the graduation disparity between First Nations and 
Métis students and their non-Aboriginal peers has been 
reduced by 50 per cent. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we set goals. We set a plan. We are following 
through on it, unlike the NDP opposite who say that it just gets 
in the way of figuring out whether we should deal with any of 

the issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at what the vice-chief of the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations has to say, Mr. 
Bobby Cameron. He says, and I quote: 
 

The announcement of $2.2 million to one of our FSIN 
institutions, SIIT, they saw a pretty significant increase, so 
we’re pleased with that because we’re getting more and 
more enrolment from our First Nations grade 12 graduates. 

 
He goes on to say, and I quote, “Obviously that will go a long 
way in helping our students succeed in post-secondary 
education and trades.” Mr. Speaker, Bobby Cameron was pretty 
excited about our budget. He says, “Considering the current 
physical environment, we can’t be anything but pleased about 
the budget.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would invite the members opposite to vote in 
favour of our budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s look at another highly regarded person, Mr. 
Jeff Ritter of the Saskatchewan Apprenticeship and Trade 
Certification Commission. He says, “It was very nice to see the 
government support the increased demand that we’re seeing for 
skilled tradespeople through the addition of 300 more seats.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, post-secondary education, one of the things that 
the NDP so much ask for, is being recognized as a positive by 
many people in our province. Mr. Speaker, Larry Rosia, the 
president and CEO of Saskatchewan Polytechnic, has this to 
say, and I quote: 
 

We see our grant increase as a welcome investment in the 
future and really a vote of confidence in the work that we 
do at Saskatchewan Polytechnic. With the two per cent we 
will continue to seek opportunities to work with 
educational partners in the province and with industry to 
meet employer and student needs. 

 
Mr. Speaker, you don’t have to take our word for it. All you 
have to do is look around the province, Mr. Speaker. People are 
happy with our budget. People are pleased with what we’ve 
done as a Saskatchewan Party. Mr. Speaker, part of our budget 
includes health. In our budget, we spent the largest amount on 
health but, Mr. Speaker, between education, health, social 
services and assistance, we have nearly 75 per cent of our 
budget spent there. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would think that the member from Nutana, 
Saskatoon Nutana would vote for our budget. Those are the 
things that she asked for when she replied to our budget. Mr. 
Speaker, we’re two steps ahead of the NDP. We are already 
doing it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, regional health authorities this year will see $3.3 
billion for operating funds and targeted initiatives of an increase 
of $55.7 million. We are committed to providing the best 
quality of health care for people in the province and for Prince 
Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Prince Albert alone, we had $2 million in 
planning for the renewal of the Victoria Hospital that came 



March 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6675 

through in last year’s budget. Mr. Speaker, we also had $9 
million for a family addictions treatment centre that was 
completed in 2013. Mr. Speaker, I do hope the members 
opposite are listening because that’s where the money went. 
That’s where the money went. 
 
[20:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also increased in 2014-15, an increase of 
$320,000 for the Urgent Action Fund for Prince Albert 
Parkland region. Mr. Speaker, we invested in people and to the 
seniors’ supplement, the SAID, and the drug program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m deeply concerned about the NDP on that side 
of the House. Nine of them do not seem to be listening or, Mr. 
Speaker, is it because they can’t hear? If their hearing is going, 
Mr. Speaker, I invite them to go to one of our brand new health 
care facilities that we have just recently built, and with one of 
the extra 400 doctors that we have in this province, it will not 
take them long to get their hearing checked, Mr. Speaker. If 
they need new surgery to improve their hearing, Mr. Speaker, 
we have the lowest surgical wait-lists in the province, Mr. 
Speaker. That is completely opposite what the NDP had under 
their work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that it takes more than a hospital — 
which we’ve replaced in Moose Jaw, which we will be building 
in North Battleford — it takes more than long-term beds. We’ve 
increased our long-term beds and replaced the 1,200 that the 
NDP closed down. Mr. Speaker, our health region sees 
Pineview Terrace, a 60-bed unit, Mr. Speaker. I invite everyone 
to come and take a look at the state-of-the-art long-term care 
facility. We increased it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact it was interesting when it was being built. Our health 
region submitted a plan to the government, and they said, no, 
no, no, no, no, you’re not going to do that. You’re going to 
increase those beds, Mr. Speaker. Increase the beds — did we 
ever hear that under the NDP? No we didn’t. We heard, close 
the beds. We don’t care, if you don’t like it leave, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s what people did — leave. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it takes more than all of us working together. It 
takes more than people. It takes more than doctors and nurses. It 
takes more than hospital buildings. It takes people. Mr. Speaker, 
we supply the love to our loved ones when they go into those 
facilities. We supply the love when we have family members 
that need cancer treatments, Mr. Speaker. I am pretty sure that 
most, if not all, of us have been touched by cancer in one form 
or another, Mr. Speaker. We have increased the funding to the 
cancer centre. We’ve increased the funding to the health 
regions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope that the members opposite would vote for 
our budget because we also are fulfilling our medical training 
commitments, Mr. Speaker. We are working to continue to 
develop a skilled workforce. We have 100 medical training 
seats, 120 medical resident seats, and 20 new practitioner seats 
that we are supporting with this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have health, education, and social services, and 
assistance that add up to 73.2 per cent of all government 
expenses. Mr. Speaker, that spending is forecasted to be $10.4 

billion. That is for this budget. It is an increase of 1.9 per cent 
increase from last year’s budget. Mr. Speaker, what that is is an 
increase of 67.7 per cent since ’07-08. Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased 
to stand behind the record of our government. We are working 
with the people of our province. We are working for the 
1,132,640 people that now call Saskatchewan home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a total of $5.5 billion for health care. Mr. 
Speaker, we also in Prince Albert, with our new Saskatchewan 
international physician practice assessment, or SIPPA as we 
like to call it, we have three more doctors. Mr. Speaker, three 
more doctors for Prince Albert alone. So perhaps the members 
opposite when they need a little help with health care can come 
up to our lovely part of the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SIPPA is a made-in-Saskatchewan program that assesses 
international medical graduates on their education and clinical 
ability before allowing them to practise medicine. Since 2011 
this program has added 18 new practising physicians to the 
Prince Albert Parkland Health Region. Mr. Speaker, our 
community of Prince Albert highly welcomes these people to 
our province and to our fair city. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a seniors’ income plan that we’ve added 
to, Mr. Speaker. When the NDP say they are for the people, I 
don’t believe them. All we have to do is look at their 16 long 
years of being in power. Mr. Speaker, $90 per month for the 
seniors’ income plan, $90 for 16 years, and they said, that is all 
you’re getting. 
 
We don’t treat our seniors like that. What we did was we said, 
in 2015-16 we will provide a total of $26.5 million to the 
seniors’ income plan to increase maximum monthly benefits by 
$10 per month. Do you know what that adds up to, Mr. 
Speaker? That adds up to $270 for single seniors and $235 for 
each member of a senior couple. Mr. Speaker, how many 
seniors will be benefiting from that? Fourteen thousand seniors, 
Mr. Speaker, imagine. We are considering the people of our 
province — 14,000 seniors. 
 
Along with those benefits, these seniors will also be entitled to 
additional health benefits such as one free eye examination 
every 12 months; chiropractic services to a maximum of 12 
services per year; a reduced prescription drug plan, semi-annual 
deductible; a home care subsidy; and an exemption from many 
of the charges under the Saskatchewan Aids to Independent 
Living program. 
 
We didn’t stop there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We looked at other 
programs. We will be meeting our commitment to increase the 
monthly income threshold by $50 to $2,000 for the personal 
care home benefit when July 2015 comes around. Mr. Speaker, 
that benefit will be accessed by about 800 seniors. It was 
introduced in 2012 to assist our lower income seniors with the 
costs of living in a personal care home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what I call a government for the people. We 
share with our people. We share our benefits with our people. 
We work on what the people have told us we need to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we didn’t stop there. We added $10 million to 
dedicated seniors’ care, which will bring the total to $14.5 
million, which is a $3.5 million increase dedicated to enhance 



6676 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2015 

the Home First program. Mr. Speaker, the Home First program 
is important to our community of Prince Albert because we are 
one of the communities that benefit from the Home First 
program. Mr. Speaker, we are also adding $4.7 million to 
reduce emergency department wait times. Mr. Speaker, that’s 
an increase of $3 million from last year. 
 
Are we helping the people of this province? I would say yes, 
Mr. Speaker. The people of our province say yes. I’ve been out 
and about, as my colleagues have been, and we’ve been hearing 
the same thing, Mr. Speaker — good job. We like what you’ve 
done. Yes, it’s a tough budget. Do we want more? Always, we 
always want more, Mr. Speaker. But we are doing a good job 
and the people are recognizing it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government also committed to improving 
long-term care infrastructure in the province. As I said, in 
Prince Albert alone we got Pineview Terrace. In Swift Current 
they will be getting a long-term care facility, and so will Leader 
and so will Kelvington. They’ll be getting an integrated care 
facility, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The 2015-16 budget continues to invest in programs and 
services that benefit seniors. Mr. Speaker, through the Ministry 
of Social Services the province is fulfilling its four-year 
commitment to increase benefits under the seniors’ income plan 
and the personal care home benefit. Promise made; promise 
kept. Mr. Speaker, on that side of the House they just talk, talk, 
talk, talk, and never get around to doing anything of any 
substance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let’s look at what Ashley Martin from the Leader-Post on 
March 21st, 2015 had to say. The article title says, “Med 
Students [are] happy seniors’ care [made] a priority.” Mr. 
Speaker, Jessica Harris, second-year medical student and 
member of the University of Saskatchewan’s Student Medical 
Society said, and I quote, “The government sees seniors’ care to 
be a priority.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what the members opposite are 
reading. I don’t know what they’re hearing. Mr. Speaker, when 
we talk to the people across the province, they know what we’re 
doing in this province. They know what the budget says. They 
know how good a job we are doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s time to move a little bit further into our 
social services. Mr. Speaker, social services and social 
assistance adds up to a part of our 73 per cent of our budget. 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s most vulnerable will benefit from 
continued investment in support programs for children, youth, 
and their families. In 2015-16 the budget will also address the 
needs of people with disabilities and those in need of housing. 
For example, we are providing $7.7 million to help at-risk 
children, youth, and families. This includes foster care and 
extended family care, medically fragile children with complex 
needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, medically fragile children with complex needs, 
that hits home for Prince Albert. We have what’s called Hope’s 
Home. I was there when we had the grand opening, Mr. 
Speaker. It is a beautiful facility. It is set up specifically for 
children with medically fragile needs and their siblings, Mr. 
Speaker. 

One of the stories from one of the people that use that facility 
kind of tugged at my heartstrings, Mr. Speaker. This lady was a 
nurse — well, still is — and for many years she could not work 
in Prince Albert because she had a medically fragile child, and 
she could not leave the child. And she knew a lot about 
medically fragile children, so she knew not to leave the child 
just anywhere, Mr. Speaker. When Hope’s Home opened, she 
took that child and that child’s sibling, took it down to Hope’s 
Home, Mr. Speaker. What did that do? That added a better 
quality of life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that nurse wanted to work in our health care 
system. Mr. Speaker, that nurse wanted her children to 
participate in activities that child care will provide: lots of other 
friends, lots of new activities. Mr. Speaker, those children are 
happy to be going to work, as they sometimes call it, because 
they like to copy what their parents say. And, Mr. Speaker, that 
nurse is contributing to our society. She has a paycheque so that 
she can support herself, her family, and provide for the many 
needs of our community, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are going to increase the benefits to the Saskatchewan 
assured income for disability program for the fourth 
consecutive year with an additional $5.7 million. Mr. Speaker, 
the people that work with the Saskatchewan assured income for 
disability program in Prince Albert was so pleased and told me, 
on that day of the budget, he said, I am so pleased that you took 
it upon yourselves to remember the most vulnerable in our 
society. I was really concerned because, in the days of the past, 
what the NDP did was raise taxes, cut programs, chase people 
out of the province. But, Mr. Speaker, our people that take care 
of people with disabilities, Mr. Speaker, they’re telling us that 
we did a good job. Mr. Speaker, I hope the members opposite 
are listening. 
 
We’re also investing in social services and assistance to the 
tune of $1.2 billion in this budget, Mr. Speaker. That’s an 
increase of 3.2 per cent over last year’s budget. What it includes 
are multiple ministries that provide programming and increased 
program utilization for people with disabilities. That’s $485.7 
million, Mr. Speaker. That’s up from last year. 
 
[21:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we already talked about the increase to the 
seniors’ income plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am now going to turn to social housing. The transition will 
benefit people in greatest need. Mr. Speaker, in Prince Albert, 
our most vulnerable people will soon gain better access to 
affordable housing. It is because the decision to transition the 
affordable housing program into the social housing program 
will be occurring in our province’s largest centres. Beginning 
March 1st, 2015, anyone who applies for government-owned 
rental housing in urban centres will only be eligible for the 
social housing rental program. Rent will be based on 30 per 
cent of the income. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we didn’t stop there. We are providing a 1 per 
cent funding increase to our community-based organizations. 
Mr. Speaker, over the session when . . . or over the beginning of 
this year, January, February, when we weren’t sitting down in 
Regina here, the member from Saskatchewan Rivers and myself 



March 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6677 

had time to connect with some of our local organizations — the 
early childhood intervention program, Mr. Speaker. What those 
people told us really tends to tug at your heartstrings, and a 1 
per cent increase in funding will be highly welcomed by them, 
Mr. Speaker. We have families that have special needs in terms 
of intervention programming. That’s why it’s called early 
childhood intervention program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They told us one story of this young mom who had trouble with 
alcohol, and her first couple of children had fetal alcohol 
syndrome, Mr. Speaker. It is very tragic because once people 
have fetal alcohol syndrome, they never get cured from it, Mr. 
Speaker. So with the ECIP [early childhood intervention 
program] program and the intervention of several programs 
combined, Mr. Speaker, they worked together to help that mom 
not drink through her next couple of pregnancies, Mr. Speaker. 
What did that do? That instantly increased the quality of life for 
those children, Mr. Speaker. Can you imagine, in the future 
those children do not have to struggle with fetal alcohol 
syndrome. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Saskatchewan Rivers and 
myself have the joy of watching our grandchildren being raised 
in loving homes and seeing how much fun they have with their 
parents. And like I said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think our 
grandchildren are really quite brilliant. The member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers kind of agrees with me as well. And it is 
something that we wish for all children in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. So when we can provide a 1 per cent increase to 
programs for our community-based organizations, we are happy 
to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I said, safe, quality, and affordable housing is a priority for 
our government. It continues to support, we are continuing to 
support the federal-provincial Investment in Affordable 
Housing Agreement which has been extended to 2019 to fund 
new, affordable housing supply, home renovations, home 
adaptations, and rent housing supplements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, housing in Prince Albert is a big deal. We have 
many program partners. Linda Boyer, our manager from Prince 
Albert Community Housing Society Inc., her and I have been 
ribbon cutting many of the facilities that she’s opened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have Brian Howell, our manager from River 
Bank Development Corp. Mr. Speaker, we have Habitat for 
Humanity. That program was brought to Prince Albert by Frank 
Moore many years ago, Mr. Speaker, and our city has benefited 
most highly from it. Mr. Speaker, we had our past president, 
Morris Sawchuk, who took the program out to other 
communities such as Duck Lake. Mr. Speaker, our current 
president, Duane Hayunga, is a fabulous man that continues to 
support the Habitat for Humanity. Mr. Speaker, they have just 
recently brought Rob Dalziel on board, the executive director. I 
know the fabulous work that he did for fundraising for the 
Victoria Hospital, so I’m sure Habitat for Humanity will be 
very pleased. Mr. Speaker, in this year’s budget, we’ll see 
$130,000 for Habitat for Humanity. 
 
We’ve seen housing for . . . Or let me finish talking about the 
Habitat for Humanity because I think it is such a great program, 
Mr. Speaker. I even took one of Allan’s hammers . . . I did ask 
for his permission before I did it, but I turned it into a pink 

hammer, Mr. Speaker, because I think if I’m going to go and 
volunteer for one of our Habitat homes and start pounding nails, 
I should be having a pink hammer. Mr. Speaker, he’s a very 
gracious man and he gave me the pink duct tape to do it. 
Imagine pink duct tape. It was great, Mr. Speaker. So I have 
several pictures of me pounding nails. 
 
Now it might sound strange to those contractors in the province 
that use air guns, Mr. Speaker, but we have to remember 
Habitat for Humanity is being built in a location that we’d have 
to borrow electricity from the neighbours. That doesn’t make 
much sense, Mr. Speaker, so we ask for good old elbow grease 
and nails, hammers with pink handles to pound those nails. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for a family to get a Habitat for Humanity home, 
they must contribute a minimum of 500 hours of work. There is 
no interest to the mortgage, but they do not get the keys to their 
home, the official keys to their home, until they’ve proven for a 
year that they are good community members, that they can 
make those payments, and that they know how to take care of 
their home, Mr. Speaker. Talk about value added to our 
province. Talk about a better quality of life for our province, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. What happens is, when they pay back 
their mortgage it is contributed back into the program and a 
pay-it-forward program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our president and past president have recently 
signed agreements with the Sask Polytech carpentry students. 
They’ve also worked with the federal penitentiary inmates that 
learn new and useful skills for building these homes. They have 
Carlton high school students that help to build the homes, Mr. 
Speaker. All of these are value-added skills training for our 
community. Mr. Speaker, it makes a difference. 
 
Our housing has been built for grandparents with dependants, 
for young families with one dependant, for families with 
parents and grandparents, Mr. Speaker. I can think of one of the 
sod turnings that I had where we had a family, their parents, and 
their kids, Mr. Speaker. And we all know what little kids do so 
we had a pile of dirt, and the little two-year-old boy was 
crawling up and down and running around. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
said, wow, to the little boy. I said, you remind me just like my 
little grandson Everett. He is a going concern, Mr. Speaker. 
And with that, that little boy jumped into my arms and we gave 
each other a hug. Talk about a warm feeling for what we are 
doing for the people of our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said that housing is important for Prince Albert 
so I’m going to continue. We have $15.7 million in provincial 
funding for over 300 new rental units that were completed or in 
progress. Mr. Speaker, we’ve helped 132 households achieve 
home ownership. Up until this budget year, so up till 2014-15 
for the seven years that we’ve been asked to govern our 
province, $550,000 for 11 new Habitat for Humanity homes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go and on. But what this adds up to, Mr. 
Speaker, is over . . . If we put all the housing together in one 
spot, Mr. Speaker, it would cover over eight square city blocks. 
That’s a lot of housing, Mr. Speaker. That shows how we are 
committed to the people of our province, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, that creates strong families. That creates a strong 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 



6678 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2015 

This past year I also had the occasion to work with Donna 
Strauss and help her celebrate the 20th anniversary of Family 
Futures. She does great work for daycare in our province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We also have other community organizations and people that 
are working together to help create a better quality of life for 
our people, Mr. Speaker. In P.A. we’ve had many marches to 
celebrate peace and we get to see our peace officers such as 
Police Chief Troy, Deputy Chief Kelly Stienwand. Mr. Speaker, 
we like to honour our peace officers. To me, Mr. Speaker, their 
bravery should be highly commended and I commend them on 
this day in this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the shining examples of how our 
community takes the lead is through what we call the Hub, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a community mobilization project that was started 
in Prince Albert. We took several organizations: policing, 
health care, addictions and mental health, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
education. Everybody came together to create a prevention 
program to help people prevent the path of crime, Mr. Speaker. 
$450,000 per year has been put into the Hub. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this past budget year we’ve seen an increase in the 
Hubs across the province, or a community mobilization 
partnership to over a dozen of them. Mr. Speaker, it didn’t stop 
there. It’s going across the country. In fact, Mr. Speaker, that 
model is being looked at around the world and is being utilized 
in many different fashions. Talk about a success story. Talk 
about improved quality of life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have some stats that since the implementation in 
February of 2011, what the Hub has delivered is some 
significant results in Prince Albert. From the baseline of 
2010-2013, Mr. Speaker, our police service received 3,554 
fewer calls for service. Mr. Speaker, our property crime rate has 
decreased by 29 per cent. Overall crime rate has decreased by 
21 per cent, and violent crime has decreased by 38 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The past director, Ken Hunter, did a fabulous job. Our current 
director, Glenis Clarke, is someone that I worked with. Glenis is 
a lady that comes up through the addictions and mental health 
field from the health region, Mr. Speaker, and she did a 
fabulous job. In fact, for part of my time as a registered dietitian 
I worked in our mental health and addictions centre in Prince 
Albert. What happened is Glenis taught me many things. I 
taught her a few things back, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I had the occasion to attend the Addictions Professional 
Association of Saskatchewan event, Mr. Speaker, and we had 
Darren Tait who is an addictions professional that works in the 
health region. What he did was he brought in Skid Row CEO 
Joe Roberts. That event, Mr. Speaker, told us first-hand how 
this gentleman who was a skid-row bum, as he called himself, 
in the streets of Vancouver, turned his life around, made 
multi-millions of dollars. So he calls himself the Skid Row 
CEO, and he had a very compelling story to share with the 
people of Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one out of five people are dealing with or are 
affected by mental health and addictions. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased that our government is working together to create a 

strong Saskatchewan, because Saskatchewan is strong when our 
people are strong. That’s why our government committed to 
providing greater supports for those experiencing mental health 
and addictions issues. 
 
[21:15] 
 
And to that end, I’d like to thank Dr. Fern Stockdale Winder 
and many others for their work to shape the recommendations 
that are included in a new mental health and addictions action 
plan. Working together for change, this 10-year mental health 
and addictions action plan for Saskatchewan is the culmination 
of extensive public consultation that puts a particular emphasis 
on the voices of people with lived experience. This action plan, 
which addresses the complex and often connected issues of 
mental health and addictions, includes the voice of family 
members, concerned citizens, and providers from across the 
human service sectors. 
 
Our government has received and endorsed the report and 
remains committed to action that will improve the services 
provided to those living with mental health and addictions 
issues. Mr. Speaker, our government is a government for the 
people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would like to point out that we have a balanced budget, Mr. 
Speaker. Okay, Mr. Speaker, we have a balanced budget. We 
have not raised any taxes. We have a family of four that, just for 
the 2014 year, for a $50,000 income, will pay $166. Mr. 
Speaker, let’s contrast that to the NDP of the past. In 2007 
under the NDP that same family paid $2,302. Mr. Speaker, I 
think we are working for the people of Saskatchewan. We are 
strong. We are working to control spending, Mr. Speaker. We 
have no tax increases. We have investments in infrastructure. 
We have job creation. We have investments in people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our revenue tax sharing, Mr. Speaker, was a very 
beneficial event from our budget here, Mr. Speaker. What we 
did was we shared with everybody across the province, Mr. 
Speaker. And I would just like to share with you what SUMA 
[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association] president 
Debra Button said about our revenue sharing, and I quote: 
 

Today is a celebration, and I want to stress that. I feel very 
strongly that today the province sent a strong message to 
the cities, towns, villages, and our northern communities 
that we are a partner along with them in growing this 
province and planning for the future, with the economy and 
of course the growth that comes along with that. 

 
Mr. Speaker, our people are strong. Our budget is strong. Mr. 
Speaker, “from many peoples, strength” — that is 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. “From many peoples, strength.” I 
support the budget. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m very 
happy to stand up tonight and enter the debate on our balanced 
budget that is keeping Saskatchewan strong. 
 
But before I get to that, I’d like to take a few minutes to thank 



March 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6679 

the people who are most important to me, and I’m going to 
begin with my wife. She’s been with me through the thick and 
thin and she is still really and truly my biggest supporter. And I 
can’t thank her enough but I’ll just take a second to give her 
another thank you tonight. 
 
Also want to thank my mom and dad who, you know, it’s 
through them that I learned my work ethic. You know, they’re 
both, I won’t say well past the nominal age of retirement, but 
they’re past the regular age of retirement, and dad’s still going 
strong in the oil field and I think mom finally retired this year. 
We’ll see, but I’m not sure. But they are going to take a month 
and they’re going to go take a month off and go away. 
 
Next I need to thank my children, my kids, my young men that I 
have now. They’re really not kids any more. They’re young 
men. First of all my oldest boy Geoff, in spite of some recent 
setbacks, he’s graduating this spring from the U of R 
[University of Regina] in political science. So there’s one that’s 
got an intriguing future ahead of him. 
 
I’ve got Dylan and Kayleigh. They’re living right here in the 
Queen City with my two grandchildren. Those of us that have 
grandchildren here, it’s a great club to be in. And they truly, 
truly are the apple of my eye, and that’s Jordison and Jaxton. 
And I really enjoy the time we get together with them, my wife 
and I. 
 
And Ryan, my youngest boy, right now he’s off at school for a 
couple more weeks but he’ll be back working at the Moose Jaw 
airport. And he also will be adding to our family this 
September. He’s actually getting married to a young lady from 
Lumsden, Macey McGill, who is actually his high school 
sweetheart. She’s staying in the province going to school and 
she’s actually taking social work at Sask Polytechnic right here 
in Regina. 
 
And last but not least is Kyle who is one of the many young 
men we’ve had the joy of coming through our house, and he’s 
been with us for a long time. And he actually moved back last 
year from BC [British Columbia] where he was going to school, 
and now he works two jobs in Moose Jaw and has started a 
business with two friends, and actually finally moved out again 
last month. So we’re kidless for a while, sort of, but not really, 
so that’s nice. 
 
So it’s family that is so important to us and allows us to do our 
job here, so I just want to extend my thanks to them. I also 
would be very remiss if I didn’t thank Laurie who runs my 
office in the great constituency of Moose Jaw Wakamow. We 
can all agree that we have amazing, hard-working CAs who 
look after the things while we’re here at the legislature. So I 
want to send out a special thanks to Laurie Axten Kosior for the 
great job she does for us back in my office. 
 
And I would also like to thank all the caucus staff — some of 
them are still around tonight. We’ve got Paula and Megan, John 
and Karalee, Sean, Lee, Kim, and Gary’s back there working in 
the caucus office trying to keep us all up to date and keeping us 
all in line. So working with them in the caucus is always lots of 
fun. 
 
And last but not least, I also want to sincerely thank the 

constituents of Moose Jaw Wakamow. They are who gave me 
this honour to be able to stand here today and give this response 
to the budget, our eighth consecutive balanced budget. 
 
I’d like to reflect a bit on the past year and many of the 
accomplishments for residents of Moose Jaw in the last year. A 
number of new businesses have opened in the past year, another 
impressive sign of growth and a growing economy in our 
province. We’ve got Smoke’s Poutinerie, which if you haven’t 
been out there yet, everything’s poutine. So if you have an 
opportunity to get out there, give that a try. I would recommend 
it. Rock Creek Grill, the Grant Hall, Rowan Clothing Co., 
Common Bakery, Alliance Wellness and Rehabilitation, Liberty 
Home and decor, just to name a few of the new businesses in 
our city of Moose Jaw. 
 
Moose Jaw is also home to many exceptional businesses and 
people who are so very generous in their time and commitment, 
especially to our new regional hospital. You’ve got Yara, 
Mosaic, the Leipert family, the JGL group of companies, the 
Moose Jaw Refinery, Golden West Radio, are just some of the 
many amazing companies along with service clubs and truly 
countless dedicated volunteers who have generously donated 
time and dollars to the Moose Jaw Health Foundation. The 
generous spirit of the people of Moose Jaw and surrounding 
areas will make this a top-notch facility. 
 
For the many who are interested, the Five Hills Health Region 
has created a Flickr site which has updated photos of the 
interior of the hospital so you can actually take a look at the 
progress of the hospital as it’s moving forward. It’s truly 
incredible to see and definitely a facility that we are all proud 
of. I look forward to the opening of the regional hospital this 
year, and I’m certain that I will see an NDP Wakamow 
candidate at the ribbon cutting, and I’m sure she will enjoy 
working in the brand new facility. 
 
A regional hospital is a prime example of where the money 
went. The opposition’s new line is, where did the money go? 
Well I’d like to tell the members where the money went in 
Moose Jaw. So let’s start with the MRI [magnetic resonance 
imaging] operating funding, two new homes for Valley View 
residents, healthy wait initiatives, the Moose Jaw Aboriginal 
association, discount bus pass program, Sunflower Manor, 
affordable housing, five Habitat for Humanity homes, the 
community rink affordability grant, upgrades to the Moose Jaw 
Community Association Centre, the drug treatment court 
funding, upgrades to the Moose Jaw Airport, policing 
initiatives, Headstart on a Home, Highway 1 repaving project. 
And again I want to remind the members opposite, a brand new 
regional hospital. 
 
We had two cabinet ministers and a former . . . and a premier 
that was from Moose Jaw and they couldn’t get that done. 
Between the member for Moose Jaw North in the previous four 
years and when I came on, we got it done. 
 
These are just a few of the places the money went in Moose 
Jaw. I’d like to know what they would cut or what they would 
take away and at what price, what cost to the citizens of Moose 
Jaw. That’s the difference, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the difference 
between the members opposite and the members on this side — 
the difference between a shovel and a wrecking ball. And I’m 



6680 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2015 

going to have to explain that you guys. We’re building schools, 
hospitals, highways. That takes a shovel. Well the members 
opposite for 16 long years used a wrecking ball to close 52 
hospitals, close 1,200 long-term care beds and 176 schools 
including schools around Moose Jaw. 
 
In this year’s budget we’re continuing to make strong 
investments in agriculture, advanced education, health, 
highways, parks, social services, municipalities, and 
infrastructure, just to name a few. And speaking of 
municipalities and infrastructure, the city of Moose Jaw has 
received revenue sharing, since I was elected, an amount of 
$26.27 million, and that’s since 2011. And 7.1 million is 
projected for the 2015-16 year. That’s where the money went. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was a very busy year in the Friendly 
City. Visitors included Brad Paisley, Alan Jackson, the Doobie 
Brothers, John Fogerty, the Scotties, the Backstreet Boys, and 
the Saskatchewan NDP convention. Do you know what these 
events have in common, Mr. Speaker? Well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, if you were thinking of an exciting atmosphere, 
cheering crowds or great enthusiasm, you wouldn’t be quite 
right. 
 
Each of these events was held at Mosaic Place last year but, Mr. 
Speaker, one of these things is not like the other. Each of them 
boasted capacity crowds, with the exception of the NDP 
convention which was attended by less than 270 voting 
delegates. And I just want to point out that the member from 
Moose Jaw North’s nomination, at his nomination they had 
over 700 people there. Regularly at our contested nominations 
we have lots of people. Who’s the star guest? And their star 
guest was none other than its federal leader. So the Backstreet 
Boys were right in this case with their song, “Show Me the 
Meaning of Being Lonely.” 
 
Now let’s get to the good things in this budget, Mr. Speaker. 1.3 
billion for core infrastructure, the largest infrastructure 
investment in Saskatchewan history. That shovel is in the 
ground, Mr. Deputy Speaker, unlike the members opposite who, 
I said before, used a wrecking ball to close schools, hospitals, 
long-term beds and drove our young people away. 
 
This government is providing more money for health care, 
highways, education, social services, and municipalities. And 
you know what, Mr. Speaker? We did this without raising taxes. 
These are the choices this government has made. 
 
[21:30] 
 
The members opposite made choices too, Mr. Speaker. When 
they were in government — and I need to remind them again; 
they always forget — they raised taxes 17 times, stopped 
investing in infrastructure and closed facilities, closed 176 
schools, closed 1,200 long-term care beds. They underfunded 
municipalities to the point there was tax revolts, I hear. I was 
pretty young and in high school back in those days too. 
 
So education property tax hikes . . . And I want to quote a local 
Moose Jaw celebrity, Rob Carnie from Golden West Radio: 
 

Remember when? Remember years ago when the 
provincial budget was delivered the big deal was booze 

and smokes? It seems like that was a big story on an 
annual basis. Taxes on alcohol and cigarettes would go up, 
and there would be outrage from the masses. 

 
I could go on, Mr. Speaker, and on and on and on about the 
decline under the NDP, but I would rather focus on the 
positives because that’s the kind of guy I am. I like focusing on 
the positives of our province, its people, and our eighth 
consecutive balanced budget. 
 
And to further quote Mr. Carnie: “Our provincial government 
will spend 39% of our budget on health and 26% on education. 
That’s what we’ve called for and that’s what they’ve delivered.” 
 
On that note, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say a few other 
thank yous. I’d truly like to thank the Finance minister, the 
member from Canora-Pelly, for his leadership on this file. As 
this will be his last budget, his last balanced budget, I want to 
express my sincere thanks to him for his dedication to the 
people of this province, for his great advice, for his great 
counsel. And I will truly miss working with him. 
 
And there are a few other founding members of our party that 
will be retiring. To the member from Moosomin, sir, your faith 
is simply amazing. It’s truly been an honour working with you. 
To the member from Kelvington-Wadena, our former social 
services minister, working with you on that file truly showed 
me how much you really, really care. 
 
And to the member from Melville-Saltcoats: if I can ever rile up 
the opposition and get everybody fired up in my speeches like 
you do in your speeches, I will truly be doing a good job. You 
have dedicated a large part of your lives in service to the people 
of Saskatchewan. I’ve been blessed to get to know you and to 
have had the opportunity to learn from you and to work with 
you. For that I truly am grateful. Truly. 
 
So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank everyone for 
giving me the time to stand up, thank my constituents, my 
family, and my community of Moose Jaw. I’m just going to 
reiterate a few things for the members opposite in case they 
missed it, and I wasn’t speaking loud enough. This budget 
contains no tax increases. This was achieved by controlling 
spending. Even with these revenue challenges, this budget 
makes investments, significant investments in infrastructure. 
This budget supports employment training and job creation, 
increasing seats for our young folks in apprenticeship, medical 
training, and adult basic education. And this budget keeps 
Saskatchewan strong by investing in our people. This budget is 
a balanced budget. It’s about keeping Saskatchewan strong. 
 
And in closing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be supporting this 
budget, and I will not be supporting the opposition’s 
amendment. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure and a privilege to enter into the budget debate in the 
Legislative Assembly tonight, specifically the budget for the 
province of Saskatchewan, the eighth one for which I’m 
honoured to represent the constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers. 



March 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6681 

And as customary, I would like to thank again my family and 
supporters for the opportunities I have to serve in this historic 
building for the people of Saskatchewan and my 
ever-increasing, growing family, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who I 
might add, all live in the province of Saskatchewan. They work 
and they raise their families right here in the province. My 
husband and I were blessed on February 3rd with one more 
person to love, the birth of our seventh grandchild, Riley 
George Wilson. And he’s very fortunate to live in this bountiful 
province, and he was one of the first to be born in the year of 
2015. In the year 2014, over 15,000 people were born into the 
province of Saskatchewan, and that was the highest number 
since 1990. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to thank those who work and 
help in my constituency offices in Saskatchewan Rivers. The 
main office is in Red Wing, and I have a satellite office in the 
town of Big River. I’d like to thank my constituency assistant 
Marcus for taking care of the hardest moments that an MLA can 
experience and softening the edges. As we all know, they are in 
the front line, our loyal CAs. And I’d also like to thank Jason, 
Joan, Cora, and Jade here in the building for the great work that 
they do in and for the province. 
 
I must also thank my political family on this side of the House, 
as well as the staff in the building who have been so supportive 
and helpful to me throughout this exciting journey I have 
embarked on through the direction of the constituents of 
Saskatchewan Rivers riding. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member from Canora-Pelly, the 
Minister of Finance, should also be congratulated. The hours 
he’s gone in with the challenges arising this year has made this 
budget no small task. No item and no element in this debate so 
far is possible without resource revenue to support this 
government’s eighth balanced budget that we need to continue 
to build new schools and new hospitals and make investments 
in infrastructure. 
 
The economy is the driver, and rural Saskatchewan still is a 
very significant player. So with a robust and a thriving 
agriculture sector, this government will be able to provide the 
services that the people of Saskatchewan require to give them 
the quality of living wanted for all demographics. In terms of 
production and innovation that’s growing around agriculture, 
manufacturing exports are increasing, and the world wants what 
we produce. The importance of the agriculture sector is 
becoming an increasingly vital part of our economy. And that is 
why, in this budget, agriculture continues to receive a strong 
support, in this year’s budget containing over 71 million, 
including 26.7 million for agriculture research and innovation. 
 
As a former 4-H leader, I was really interested in seeing our 
government provide 4.2 million in industry assistance for 
support of organizations like the 4-H Council of Saskatchewan 
and the Western Canadian Agribition. This budget will continue 
to provide effective business-risk-management programming 
for the needs of all agriculture producers. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was also honoured this year to tour the 
campus at the North West Regional College in Big River on the 
extreme side of the Saskatchewan Rivers constituency. The 
institutional cooking class on the First Nation community of 

Big River prepared and cooked a beautiful Christmas meal that 
our tour group enjoyed immensely. Then we stopped by to talk 
to the students and staff at the school of excellence, recently 
built and partly funded by our government. We were impressed 
by the dedication of the board and teachers at both sites, one in 
the First Nation community and the other in the town of Big 
River. 
 
This budget provides over 20 million in direct support for First 
Nation and Métis post-secondary education and keeping 
Saskatchewan strong by investing in support for students and 
focusing on strong graduation retention rates and employment 
outcomes. 
 
I also had the pleasure of visiting another vibrant community on 
the west side. The village of Debden welcomed me to visit with 
their seniors in the village complex which houses the village 
office and the seniors’ activity room and bowling alley. Our 
budget funding continues for the Main Street Saskatchewan 
program and community rinks affordability grant to ensure that 
these communities stay vibrant and strong. 
 
All these small towns and villages have wonderful restaurants 
and museums to discover and enjoy, and historic areas that need 
conserving. So our government’s budget is helping keep 
Saskatchewan municipalities and communities strong by 
providing a record 265 million in municipal revenue sharing. 
That is up 108 per cent from the 2007 budget. 
 
Urban revenue sharing for all towns, villages, and resort 
villages will total over 170 million in this year’s budget. Overall 
direct provincial support in our government’s budget to 
municipalities totals over 346 million, which will help rural 
roads throughout the constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers 
through the municipal roads strategy which is 16 million. And 
we also remain committed to supporting our second bridge in 
Prince Albert through the P3 funding. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, those who are most vulnerable in the 
province need the support of our government: those with 
intellectual disabilities, those who need the dignity of a 
permanent home, and those who are in need of assured income. 
Our government’s budget assures the people of this province 
that they will not be forgotten. Our government’s budget makes 
investments for the disabled, Mr. Speaker. Our journey has 
been in the making for years now to find an income source and 
changing of the program to give dignity to those who in the past 
were forgotten numbers. And that is the meaning of success, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I belong to a program called adopt an MLA, so I was matched 
to a family in need of support and encouragement. And these 
past few years have been an incredible experience for me and, I 
hope, a good one for this family as well. This wonderful little 
boy has grown into a fine young man. He has autism and a 
single parent to guide him into society. Brian and his mother 
have welcomed me into their home and treated me as one of 
their own. Past government policies could be as elusive as 
smoke, but working with this little family struggling on alone is 
very real, and I can put a face to those in need of programs. And 
our government will continue to improve and support youth 
with autism spectrum disorder. 
 



6682 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2015 

Our government is also bridging the gap of inherited past 
ineffectiveness of possible programming. Our government’s 
past and present budget demonstrates our commitment of 
effective support with functioning, credible, real programs and 
resources for those in need. 
 
One of our government strategies that was born from 
consultation was the Saskatchewan assured income for 
disabilities. One recipient, a nice local lady, told me it brought 
her hope and dignity, as she wanted to work but couldn’t 
because of her health, and now even feels better about her 
situation. That, Mr. Speaker, is about our budget’s commitment 
to giving a better quality of life for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Our government is increasing benefits to the Saskatchewan 
assured income for disability program for the fourth 
consecutive year, with an additional 5.7 million. This province 
is committed to making Saskatchewan the best place in Canada 
for persons with disabilities and is developing a provincial 
disability strategy. 
 
In discussion on the budget, one woman said, “This is great . . . 
We were just hugging each other, and we’re very happy about 
the programming becoming permanent.” This is from Janine 
Shurmer, mom of a six-year-old, Judah, who graduated from 
the Little Tots autism intervention program in Saskatoon when 
she was discussing disabilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I attended the Sakâw update sessions in my 
community and riding of Saskatchewan Rivers during the week 
of January 19th. The purpose of these sessions was to seek 
community comments on Sakâw’s draft operating plans, as well 
to update the public on the 20-year forest management plan. 
 
[21:45] 
 
Saskatchewan has 10 large forest product facilities and more 
than 100 smaller businesses producing a variety of forest 
products. This budget continued infrastructure . . . addresses the 
needs of the logging industry. 
 
The Sakâw sessions were open to everyone in the hopes of 
generating some good discussions. And what I came away with 
was a good understanding of how important this forest 
management plan is for the ecosystem, wildlife, and forest 
sustainability for future harvesting. This model will be revisited 
every 10 years in predicting future growth and mortality of the 
forest. The staff described in detail management practices, 
harvest windows, how to emulate natural forest patterns for 
human and wildlife habitation. So the whole ecosystem 
sustainability is considered and explored to sustain harvest 
levels. 
 
Cabin owners, outfitters, Aboriginal shareholders are all 
consulted and considered in planning sustainability of our 
Saskatchewan forests. Forestry in northern Saskatchewan is the 
second-largest industry after mining, and our government 
values this growth in the province. It generates over 800 million 
in exports. 
 
Mr. Speaker, caribou habitat sustainability is recognized as a 
key species in a certain northern area of harvesting timber. And 
it’s also considered in this FA [forest agreement] model, as well 

as fire suppression. Some of the timber goes to Big River which 
currently runs two shifts and employs many men and women in 
this area of Saskatchewan. 
 
Managing the forest is very important to the Saskatchewan 
River constituents, as the industry is running efficiently as one 
can attest by the many logging trucks and forest equipment on 
the road again. Over 4,000 direct jobs are generated from the 
forestry industry, and First Nation and Métis people comprise 
the largest per cent of Aboriginal forestry employees in Canada, 
keeping Saskatchewan strong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget recognizes the importance of a diverse 
and busy economy. This year’s budget also introduces two new 
tax incentives for job creation and capital investment, 
increasing Saskatchewan’s ongoing competitiveness through 
tax competitiveness. 
 
This government’s budget has invested over 8 billion in 
infrastructure since 2008, 5.2 billion to address our province’s 
highway network, enabling our truckers to ensure their products 
such as lumber get there effectively and safely. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province has wonderful, enterprising 
entrepreneurs who have great ideas for thriving businesses, and 
one of those is Curtis Braaten who owns Haskap Central Sales 
in Henribourg in Saskatchewan Rivers. If you ever had the 
opportunity to eat a variety of haskap berries from the 20,000 
seedlings in the breeding orchard, it would be an experience 
you’ll never forget. Haskap is truly a Saskatchewan story. The 
berry was bred with superior flavours and introduced into the 
rest of the world. With businesses like Mr. Braaten’s, the 
Saskatchewan story will be told again and again. Mr. Braaten 
has told his exciting story around the world to different 
countries who have expressed an interest in this fruit venture. 
 
Our budget encourages businesses to grow and thrive, investing 
in infrastructure, keeping taxes low, and investing in people. 
Saskatchewan is a good place to live and work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Prairie Women On Snowmobiles, supporting 
breast cancer research, stopped through the town of Smeaton in 
Saskatchewan Rivers. I had the pleasure and opportunity to 
have lunch and visit with these courageous cancer survivors and 
volunteers who brave the long ride throughout their journey to 
recovery. Our government’s budget addresses health challenges 
such as cancer. 157 million for Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, 
up almost 100 per cent since 2008, is included in this year’s 
budget. Total spending for health care is 5.5 billion, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure crews had a 
challenging year in extreme weather. However, our government 
continued to maintain and improve the province’s 26 000 
kilometres of highways to accommodate Saskatchewan’s 
growth. I had the privilege of attending the grand opening at St. 
Louis bridge, which opened to traffic in October. 
 
As crews were building, repaving, undertaking 38 bridge 
projects and 323 culvert projects, other crews were maintaining 
mother nature’s flooding of washouts and closed highways. 
Since 2008 our government has invested a record 5.2 billion in 
transportation infrastructure. Our government will continue to 



March 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6683 

work to ensure that the best value for taxpayers’ dollars, as we 
maintain and upgrade the provincial highway system, working 
with rural and municipal governments, is important as we face 
future challenges. Keeping the province strong, this budget 
provides 46.2 million to repair or replace bridges, culverts, and 
over 73 million for TMS [thin membrane surface] rural roads. 
Our region in Saskatchewan Rivers was hit hard with flooding 
but this budget will provide 15 million to continue repairs from 
last year’s flooding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most important in this budget, besides the people 
of Saskatchewan, is the balancing of the budget. And this is a 
long-term legacy that this government can gift the 
Saskatchewan people. For eight years now this government has 
stood and delivered one of Canada’s balanced budgets, I believe 
only two in Canada this year. That in itself speaks volumes of 
the commitment this government has to its people who have 
asked for good governance. We delivered fiscal responsibility 
in times of restraint, while keeping Saskatchewan strong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to encourage all members in this Assembly 
to vote for the budget. It makes sense, it’s prudent, and it has 
vision for the future generations to come. Thus, Mr. Speaker, I 
want to put on record to indicate I will be voting in favour of 
the budget and against the amendment. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you so much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to join in the debate this evening about the 2015 
Keeping Saskatchewan Strong budget just released by the 
member from Canora-Pelly. 
 
All the members, I think, have a custom to thank a few people, 
and people like myself, private members on the backbenches, 
don’t always have a chance to publicly put on the record people 
important to us. So I’d like to thank a few people. First my wife 
Tami, my three sons, Nick, Ryan, and Blake of course mean so 
much to me, and they give me a lot of support in this job, being 
away from them on occasion. And they’re okay with that. 
 
My constituents of course, they’re the people that put their faith 
in me, and I hope I haven’t let them down. And it’s great, and I 
appreciate them calling me or coming to visit and telling me 
what’s on their mind. And I might not always agree, I might not 
always be able to help them, but certainly to have the 
opportunity to do that is what we’re here for, all of us are here 
for. First and foremost is to serve, to serve our constituents, and 
that’s the best part of the job. 
 
Brittany is my constituency assistant. She’s doing a great job in 
our office for the people of Regina Dewdney. 
 
I mentioned the Finance minister before, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 
like to thank him for his 20 years of service to the people of 
Saskatchewan. And the people certainly got their money’s 
worth from that member. He is very diligent in all his work. 
And he is of course the Finance minister, obviously, and that’s a 
very tough job, very difficult job, and he’s done it very well. 
And again thanks for his 20 years of service to the people of 
Saskatchewan and all the work he’s done on the budget. 
 

Just real quickly, I can’t remember the setting or the reason I 
was talking to somebody. They weren’t too enamoured with 
politicians in general, but the person I was talking to, I believe 
it was a constituent, he specifically mentioned that . . . He 
didn’t call him the MLA from Canora; he said his name, which 
I can’t say in the House here. But it stood out to me that in a 
position that sometimes it’s tough to get a pat on the back 
sometimes as an MLA, but that person told me what a great 
person and what a great MLA he is for the people of the 
province, and of course I agree. 
 
Thursday during routine proceedings, I guess the name Jim 
Hopson was in the gallery, Mr. Speaker. I didn’t get a chance to 
say anything or put it on record, but I’d like to join with what 
the other members said about Mr. Hopson. I had a chance to not 
work directly with him, but for a number of years in my 
previous position I noticed big changes, the culture change, the 
revenues that were raised by the Saskatchewan Roughriders and 
what a great job he did leading that franchise from where it was 
to where it is now. If you told me when I started out or even 
when Mr. Hopson started out, Jim started out, and if to where it 
is now, I probably wouldn’t have believed you. It’s such a 
dramatic turnaround that we’ve seen from the Roughriders, and 
now of course the flagship franchise of the CFL [Canadian 
Football League]. And I couldn’t be prouder for it. So thanks to 
Mr. Hopson. 
 
And I’d also like to wish his predecessor, the new CEO, the 
former CEO of the Roughriders, Craig Reynolds . . . I mention 
him not only for that, but he’s also a constituent of mine so 
we’ll have to keep close tabs on his progress. I’m sure we all 
will across this province. And we know how important the 
Roughriders are to the mood of the province and what that 
green and white means to everybody in Saskatchewan. So we 
obviously wish him well. 
 
Craig grew up in Saskatchewan in the Foam Lake area. He went 
to Alberta, like so many of our compatriots went to Alberta, to 
work. He’s an accountant. He worked out in the oil sector and 
was around in BC and Alberta. Mr. Hopson recruited him back 
to Saskatchewan, and he’s done a great job on the stadium file, 
on the Grey Cups that have been held here and has brought in 
business practices and new ways of doing things. And he’s 
definitely led to change and positive change, and so we’ll watch 
what he does. And he has a great young family, so again we 
wish him well. And I mentioned he came back to 
Saskatchewan, and a lot of people are coming back to 
Saskatchewan. New people from around the world are moving 
to our great province. And Craig and his family is one of the 
1,132,640 Saskatchewanians that are now in our province. 
 
So that’s great to see, of course, Mr. Speaker. And I think those 
type of families moving here . . . Years ago when you look 
down, break down those numbers, there was in Saskatchewan 
for a long time a lot of very young people and a lot of older 
people and not that many people in the middle. So the 
demographics have changed so much, and that’s very important 
for now and in the future of our great province to have more 
taxpayers of taxpaying age to pay for all the programs that we 
want to run. So demographics is very important. 
 
We have a very young population, and so the future just on that 
basis . . . And it’s difficult to turn those things around. It really 



6684 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2015 

is. We’ve had, you know, 70, 80 years of struggling in this 
province to attract people to our province, and you know, 
hopefully we’ve turned the corner for good, and that’s a good 
thing. Again a new high. And it’s been mentioned before that 
more people have come to our province than at any time under 
this Premier, except for our founding premier, Mr. Scott. 
 
So again back to the budget here. It was a tough year on the 
revenue side of course, a 660 million drop from oil. So revenue 
is down. There’s going to be some tough choices, some tough 
measures in the budget. But, Mr. Speaker, we have a balanced 
budget. I mean that’s something. And I mentioned before, from 
the work the Finance minister did, and the treasury board, and 
that is certainly a great accomplishment to keep a balanced 
budget, the eighth consecutive one that this government’s 
brought down, the fourth I’ve been able to be in the 
government. 
 
And we were able to do that with no tax increases, no tax 
increases. We weren’t downloading. That contrasts quite starkly 
to the members across the way when they were in government. 
Many of my colleagues have mentioned they raised taxes 17 
times. That’s worth noting, the contrast, the difference — 17 
times. 
 
Two of the worst I think or two of the most notable, the PST 
used to be 9 per cent in this province, 9 per cent. So you’re 
basically saying to anybody that wants to buy sort of a major 
thing, you know, some electronics or something bigger, you 
may as well go to Alberta. You may as well go to Alberta or 
North Dakota to just avoid paying that tax. So the only one 
maybe worse, the only tax, the NDP tax that was worse than the 
9 per cent PST — and they’re all bad; they’re all bad — but the 
3 per cent capital tax. 
 
[22:00] 
 
Now you ask economists, what’s a better tax? And of course no 
taxes are the best probably but, you know, a VAT [value-added 
tax] tax is one thing that . . . There might be argument about an 
income tax or capital gains and what those rates will be, but I 
think universally across the board, especially in a province like 
Saskatchewan, it’s so dependent on capital accumulation for 
major projects. 
 
We see the Esterhazy mine massive expansion, $1.7 billion. 
Just to drill a well is, you know, I don’t know what the numbers 
are, but they’re large. And so to have a 3 per cent capital tax, 
especially in this province, again you’re just asking . . . 
Investors don’t go here; go to Alberta because 3 per cent right 
off the top is just punitive, Mr. Speaker. We saw the results of 
the NDP years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again, no downloading to municipalities. We’ve kept that 
commitment, 265 million to municipalities, and that’s stable 
funding. Of course in Regina here, $41 million in this upcoming 
year to pave roads and fix sidewalks, etc., etc., that’s very 
important. 
 
A few items specifically in the budget, and I’ll talk about my 
. . . not my constituency but Regina and area. And the biggest 
one of course is the bypass. If it’s a speech in the legislature, 
I’ve talked about the bypass, and I’ll certainly do it again. This 

time there’s a line item, $211 million: 200 million or so from 
the feds, and the P3 evaluation’s under way. I believe land 
purchases are under way. 
 
And again the members opposite aren’t into P3s, and that’s fine. 
We can have that debate. But the ability to transfer risk to the 
private sector, whereas in big, huge infrastructure projects again 
this one’s tally could be over $1 billion, that protects the 
taxpayer from cost overruns, leads to innovation. When there’s 
three proponents spending millions of dollars just to be the one 
to get chosen to run a big project, there’s going to be lots of 
competition. There’s going to be innovation and do everything 
you can to come in at the lowest bid with the best products. So 
that’s part of the P3 evaluation that’s under way. 
 
And of course that’ll be announced later this year, I understand, 
and construction will begin. It allows us again to have . . . 
They’re estimating a three and a half to four-year window rather 
than in regular procurement we’re looking at the, you know, 
10-plus years. And that will drastically improve safety on our 
busy street. 
 
No. 1 East in particular I know is very busy. Victoria Avenue 
East is very busy. There’s seven traffic lights. So that 
investment and the ability to do it in three and a half to four 
years is a massive improvement from the traditional NDP 
method of taking 10, 12, 15 years to do each individual 
interchange, each area, and it just would take a lot of extra time. 
It will lead to safety: no traffic lights; no stops and starts for big 
semis; and to be able to go whatever the speed limit happens to 
be, 100 kilometres an hour without stopping, starts and 
stopping. So that’s a positive for Regina and area. 
 
Current traffic, not only people going along No. 1 through the 
city, particularly heavy truck traffic but also commuters within 
Regina will be able to use that because of its proximity. For 
people living in the southeast, that area of Regina is growing 
steadily, and there’s a lot of new construction, new housing, 
new families in there. They’re able to go east first to go west 
rather than going through the city, and it will help congestion 
along Arcola Avenue, Victoria Avenue, Assiniboine Avenue. 
So those are positive things all for Regina. 
 
Some of the few things I noticed in the budget that didn’t make 
a lot of headlines but they’re smaller, targeted measures 
particularly in health is again an increase to Home First/Quick 
Response, $3.5 million increase. In a tough budget, in a tough 
revenue year, I think we see that as a positive thing. 2.8 million 
for renos to a specialized unit for dementia care here in Regina 
and in Saskatoon, I could probably go on a lot longer about 
those particular areas, Mr. Speaker. $700,000 for a new 
geriatric program which includes recruiting a geriatrician, and 
as the population ages in our province, baby boomers age, that 
could be an important thing for long-term care and people with 
health issues that seniors develop. So we’ll look at that, and 
evaluate that program as it goes forward. But some of these 
smaller, targeted measures are exciting to see and a chance to 
see those go forward in this budget, so that’s positive news. 
 
In the education area, it’s been mentioned before but again P3, 
three new joint-use schools and the announcement that 100 per 
cent of capital for new schools will be funded by the 
government, going forward. So those are 900 million in total to 



March 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6685 

renovate and build new schools in our province, Mr. Speaker. 
Contrast to the members across the way, closed 176 schools. So 
we’re building them. We’re renovating them. Again there was a 
big infrastructure deficit in 2007 when we took over. We’re 
trying desperately to fill that and doing all we can. We know 
there’s a lot of work to do, so we’re happy to see that in the 
current budget year. 
 
Certainly I can go on in the areas of housing. In my 
constituency there’s not a lot of land left to build upon, but 
south of Victoria Square Mall there’s five large apartment units, 
Mr. Speaker, will help the vacancy in Regina and area. Province 
wide, the vacancy was raised to 4.1 per cent I believe is the 
number. Before, earlier it was under 1 per cent, and so that’s 
good news for renters to bring balance to the housing situation 
in our province and in Regina specifically. That’s what we 
want. 
 
I know the NDP, I’m not sure what they’re asking for now, but 
they were really big on rent control before the last election. So 
we see that rather than doing that, which leads to deterioration 
of the rental stock, our incentive programs have increased the 
number of units, particularly in Regina, that I know of, and I 
know province wide as well. There’s been a lot of work done in 
that area, and those incentives have been working. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in just the last few minutes, I’d like to turn my 
attention and mention a few things about the members opposite. 
I’d like to talk a little bit more about some of the things I’ve 
seen from them. I don’t get a chance to get on my feet too often, 
but I’d like to look at it through a lens of a bit of a TV show I 
watch . . . not a TV show, a segment on a TV show I watch, 
Sunday NFL Countdown. They have a show. One of the 
segments is called, “C’Mon Man,” and what they do on that, 
Boomer and — who else is on there? — Tom Jackson, and 
Keyshawn, and Cris Carter, they all have a clip that they show 
of something bad happening or somebody failing, somebody 
doing something silly, something goofy, and they, and at the 
end they say, “c’mon man.” 
 
Now unfortunately, unfortunately, I was on a team that had a 
clip shown on that show a few years ago, but we won’t get into 
that. We won’t talk about that one. We won’t talk about that 
one. But a good example would be somebody, it doesn’t have to 
be in football, but somebody can go in for a game-winning slam 
dunk and get rejected and not win the game. That might be a 
come on, man. 
 
So if there’s a political version, I think the NDP, some of their 
thoughts, some of their ideas would definitely be part of that 
segment. And one of the ones I thought, a few of them I looked 
at, the member from Rosemont every day brings up a petition 
for Dewdney Avenue west truck traffic. And that’s fine. That’s 
good that he stands up for his constituents. But what he fails to 
do, and the NDP quite often do this is, where do you want that 
truck traffic to go? Where do you want it to go? Do you want it 
to go down Albert Street? Would that be better with 20 traffic 
lights? I mean come on, man. Give us an idea of what you’d do 
differently. The other part is for example not wanting all those 
goods to be moved, helping make us more prosperous. I mean 
that’s a good thing. So I know he’s playing politics, and he’s 
standing up, but again give us something we can look at. 
 

The other thing I find quite interesting and almost bizarre from 
the Leader of the Opposition is when he pretends that the 
Premier is here. He pretends the Premier is here when he’s 
doing questions. And of course the Premier on occasion is 
away. He’s meeting with the Prime Minister. He’s on a trade 
mission, what have you. But the Leader of the Opposition asks, 
will the Premier commit to a meeting with somebody? Will the 
Premier answer these questions? And he’s not here. So come 
on, man. You’ve go to stop that. You’ve got to stop that 
because that’s quite bizarre. 
 
Now a couple of our members mentioned, from the good old 
days, the greatest hits of the NDP: the dot-coms, the bingos, the 
pawn shops. Come on, man. That was ridiculous. I wonder what 
they were thinking. The member from Athabasca and the 
member from Lakeview, they were in cabinet. I figure they 
might have watched the movie Wall Street or they read a 
biography of Warren Buffett or something like that, and there’s 
tons of money to be made out there. This is no problem. We just 
invest this money, the taxpayer money, and then we’ll have 
gold in the street, gold sidewalks. Well that’s ridiculous. So 
that’s a definite come on, man. What were you thinking back 
then? 
 
I just think, as I wrap it up, there’s a few more things here. But 
there’s, I think, just the general economic incoherence of the 
members opposite, we think recently of the Leader of the 
Opposition. When he was talking in a scrum, he mentioned the 
film employment tax credit. If we just brought that back, that 
would fill the near $700 million gap we have in oil royalties 
coming into the province. Now that’s pretty ridiculous. 
 
The must-haves that he had, it would have cost roughly $260 
million annually. Where is that money going to come from? 
Over $1 billion in capital spending on what is saved, you know, 
in the millions of dollars. I don’t know the exact numbers 
because there’s not a bunch of specificity from the members 
opposite. So come on, man, we need a little bit better. 
 
And again these nonsense sort of quotes, these ideas of more 
eggs and more baskets, buy-local day. That’s fine, I mean, but 
as for a comprehensive economic plan for the future of our 
province, I think we need a little bit better. So come on, man.  
 
And just a general idea of what, before I wrap up here, what 
would those members do differently? How would they pay for 
it? Mr. Speaker, we’ve got this beautiful building. We’ve got a 
lot of staff. We’ve got, you know, a 100-year-old building, and 
the reason we’re here is to debate ideas, different issues. We 
would love to hear from the members opposite. What would 
they do better? Let’s have a debate. Let’s have a debate on the 
floor. Let’s talk about ideas. Let’s generate thoughts about what 
would we do, and let’s take that to the people. So let’s debate. 
Come up with a plan so we can debate it. Come on, man. 
 
So anyway, Mr. Speaker, I think I’ll wrap up my comments for 
this evening. Thank you for all those who are listening, and I 
will be supporting the budget. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Come on, man. 



6686 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2015 

I’ve got to follow that? 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wanted to begin with well, well, 
well. No, I’m not missing my colleague friend from Prince 
Albert. It’s a saying my mom used to say to my dad often when 
we were growing up. You know, we always didn’t have a lot of 
money in the house, and mother would start a conversation 
around, we need to do something. And my father would always 
say, well, mother. And my mother would always say, well, 
well, well. That’s a hole in the ground, father. I wish mine had 
oil in it. 
 
And it just seems to be that that’s a little bit appropriate for the 
situation we’re in today; however, what happened back then is 
what’s happening today. Mother and Father would get together, 
and they’d figure out a way to do things to make ends meet, to 
make it good for the kids in the family. And it seems to me, Mr. 
Speaker, that that’s what our government is doing today. 
 
[22:15] 
 
We are facing some challenges because of the world situation. 
What we’ve done is we’ve dug in and we’ve worked together as 
a team, and we’ve come up with a plan that we believe meets 
the needs of our province going forward. And I can’t wait to 
take this out to the electorate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s customary at this time when we rise to speak 
to acknowledge folks, and I’d like to do the same. Obviously, to 
my grandparents who came to this country, to my mom and dad 
for providing us with the opportunity to appreciate their values, 
and to my dad for serving in the second war and protecting 
what we have. 
 
My older brother, Pat, and his wife, Sharon, couldn’t have a 
better older brother, just wonderful support. My sister Lois and 
her husband Brian who worked tirelessly on my campaign. My 
four wonderful children: Chris, Cam, Michelle, and Mel; eight 
grandchildren, the newest being Scarlett Anne, seven months 
old and just the apple of grandpa’s eye — really quite a neat 
experience to have those eight grandchildren. 
 
To my dear wife Karen, my best friend and partner, who makes 
me laugh every day. Well we kind of laugh together. It’s 
usually at my expense. And it seems, Mr. Speaker, that the 
older I get the hardier the laughs become. But we do have a 
good time, and it’s because of her companionship that those 
days and these days are as fulfilling as they are. So I thank 
Karen. 
 
I do want to make a little special mention of Karen’s family, the 
Hipperson family. I had the great fortune to speak about 100 
years of construction history in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Hipperson Construction is 108 years old. And Hy-Grade 
Millwork up in Saskatoon is 87 years old. So there’s been four 
generations of continuous construction contributions to the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And just recently Hy-Grade will be investing upwards of a half 
a million dollars in technical equipment that will make 
Hy-Grade Millwork probably one of the . . . Well it will make it 
the most technically advanced millwork company in Western 
Canada and probably one of the few technically advanced 

millwork companies in all of Canada. They’re bringing in a 
huge computer-driven woodwork technology that will allow 
Saskatchewan to compete on an international market in terms of 
millwork. It’s really quite an amazing story so I wanted to 
recognize those folks up in Saskatoon. 
 
And of course the people of Regina Douglas Park. You know, 
Douglas Park really is defined by its many, many cultures. 
Some of the first settlers to our province settled in Regina 
Douglas Park. So you’ll see the Romanian Orthodox church, the 
Ukrainian Catholic and Orthodox churches, the Serbian 
churches. And of course with all of those different cultural 
groups, there are the clubs. And you’ve not had a hamburger 
until you’ve had Serb burger on a Friday at the Serbian Club or 
you’ve participated in the buffet at the Hungarian Club on a 
Friday. There’s just nothing, nothing finer. 
 
Leibel Field, the newly renovated Leibel Field, probably one of 
the finest, if not the finest minor football, soccer facility in all 
of Western Canada. The Douglas Park track and area. The 
University of Regina. You know, to go from two classroom 
buildings on the new campus to where it is today, and those 
towering residences, just a testament to the growth of some of 
the landmarks in Regina Douglas Park. The Royal 
Saskatchewan Museum on the corner of Albert and College 
Avenue, from the old Normal School to the new building; the 
old power house, now the Science Centre; and of course two of 
the most modern, up-to-date progressive schools in all of 
Saskatchewan at Arcola Community School and Douglas Park 
School. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, for the next election of course, Regina 
Douglas Park will encompass the areas of Eastview and Broders 
Annex. And I had the opportunity to teach in that community in 
the late ’70s and had an absolutely wonderful experience and 
met a great many hard-working people. And I look forward to 
re-uniting with some of those. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, it’s indeed a privilege to be able to 
represent the people of Douglas Park, and certainly I am proud 
to be from Saskatchewan. This past winter my wife and I had a 
chance to travel to California for a short stay, and during that 
stay we made our way to San Diego to watch the Farmers Open 
golf tournament. We went specifically to watch Graham DeLaet 
of course play, and at the last moment he withdrew for health 
reasons. So did Tiger Woods. After the 10th hole, he withdrew 
for health reasons. But anyway, that’s not the story. The story 
really is that Karen and I wore our Saskatchewan Roughrider 
jerseys.  
 
And here you are on the golf links of La Jolla in San Diego, and 
you’re two people wearing green jerseys from Saskatchewan. It 
was incredible the number of people that came up to us and 
said, we knew we would see a Rider jersey at this golf 
tournament. And the pièce de résistance, if I may, was Chris 
Gilley, one of the pros, his caddy walking down the 11th 
fairway, came right past Karen and I and recognized the 
Saskatchewan Roughrider jersey. He says, the Saskatchewan 
Roughriders, my favourite Canadian football team. Ask me if I 
was pumped to be from Saskatchewan. 
 
There’s just, you know, all these people . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Yes, it was just an amazing story, Mr. Speaker. 



March 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6687 

And I wanted to share that because indeed I am very proud to 
be from Saskatchewan, as are all my colleagues. And I think we 
certainly tell our story every chance we get. 
 
It’s also a privilege, of course, for us to be in this Chamber. It’s 
a privilege to serve the people like so many before us have 
served and will continue to serve, given the world situation that 
we face. It’s a grave situation; we all know what we’re talking 
about here. And if it weren’t for the men and women of our 
services and our other protective services, our medics and our 
police forces and our firemen . . . They just make our world a 
safer place to be in. And I’m very, very privileged to be able to 
serve in that regard. 
 
You know, one of the things that this province did right a 
number of years ago was to institute the Protective Services 
Medal. I’m a firm believer in doing things right. You can do the 
right thing, but sometimes we do things right, and this was one 
of them. I’m very proud to be able to recognize and honour 
those people that serve our citizens in that protective way. So 
I’m very proud of that. 
 
Of course this speech is about the budget, Mr. Speaker, and so I 
do want to talk a little bit about that. Saskatchewan is strong, 
and this budget is about keeping Saskatchewan strong. There 
are many, many examples of strength in our province, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’ll begin with the population statistic, one of the 
main indicators of strength in this province: 1,132,640 strong. 
 
I can’t resist not using this quote from some time ago, and I 
quote, “. . . they propose to increase the population of 
Saskatchewan by 100,000, over . . . I forget what number of 
years, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s so over the top, it is so farcical, 
Mr. Speaker, that it flies in the face of reality.” Mr. Van 
Mulligen in 2003, Mr. Speaker. That’s almost archivable, it’s so 
farcical, that quote, that I just had to get that back in there, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So what does all that population mean? Well this weekend, Mr. 
Speaker, I had the great opportunity to watch my grandson play 
some hockey out at White City, a small community just east of 
Regina. In this White City hockey tournament, there were six 
teams of 12 players a side, 13 players a side, all under the age 
of six, all under the age of six playing minor hockey, from one 
small community. That’s population growth. And then of 
course all of the parents that go along with that, and the strength 
that they bring and vibrancy that they bring to that community, 
it was absolutely a joy to be in that rink over the weekend. I 
have to say that the grandson scored a hat trick — over two 
days, wasn’t all at once — so we’re pretty happy about that. 
 
But anyway, Mr. Speaker, that’s an example of Saskatchewan’s 
strength. I’ll never forget the day that my daughter took us out 
there to look at the property they bought. It was basically bald 
prairie. I was telling the minister from Kindersley at lunchtime 
that my son-in-law and I used to stand in the backyard, tee it up, 
and drive the golf ball across the highway to try to hit the barn 
across the road. Well today you’d break windows. There’s so 
many houses out there. It’s absolutely amazing, the growth. 
 
What does it mean in terms of investment in Saskatchewan? 
Well we know that Mosaic’s invested $1.7 billion expansion. 
We’ve got the K+S in Moose Jaw. We’ve got a AAA credit 

rating. We’ve got the North Battleford hospital, the children’s 
hospital, the Regina bypass, and 20-plus new schools, Mr. 
Speaker. It means manufacturing. Our manufacturing has taken 
off, and as a result of that, our exports are at an all-time high. 
And as the Premier often says, Mr. Speaker, not bad for a 
province with no ports. 
 
All of that provides a very strong fiscal foundation for the 
people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, these are all indicators of 
the strength. But for me the biggest indicator of our strength lies 
in our people. One doesn’t have to look much further than 
Telemiracle, another year of over $4 million raised by the 
Kinsmen Foundation for Telemiracle helping literally dozens 
and dozens of families in our province with the issues that face 
them. My colleague from Regina Dewdney talked about Jim 
Hopson and the contributions that he’s made to this province, 
and demonstrating the strength of his commitment to our 
growth and the growth of the Saskatchewan Roughriders and 
their recognizability. Is that a word? 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. 
 
Mr. Marchuk: — No? Well that’s archivable then. All over 
this continent, the George Reed Foundation for Special 
Olympics, Don Narcisse’s KidSport, Geroy Simon’s Coats for 
Kids. And of course I already mentioned Graham DeLaet. 
Imagine a kid from Weyburn, Saskatchewan on the world stage, 
the Presidents Cup, representing this province, showing the 
durability, the will to be able to be successful in that highly 
competitive world just speaks to the strength of the people of 
this province. And so, Mr. Speaker, as I said, this budget is 
about keeping Saskatchewan strong. 
 
I’m going to kind of move along here, Mr. Speaker. As we talk 
about those challenges and the benefits of growth, Mr. Speaker, 
we chose to build schools, not close 176. We chose to build 
roads, Mr. Speaker. I’ve travelled on Highway 10 to Fort 
Qu’Appelle. The passing lanes on it, it just made that road an 
absolutely wonderful highway to travel. The twinning from 
Saskatoon to P.A. is fantastic. 
 
We chose to build hospitals, not close 52. We chose to add 
long-term care beds, Mr. Speaker, not close them. Eight 
hundred new child care spaces with the new joint schools that 
we’re building, Mr. Speaker. You know, our working families 
need child care spaces, and we’re going to provide 800 of them. 
That really speaks to facing the challenges that we have. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we chose the benefits of growth over the costs 
of decline. And I can’t help but quote the stat that from ’96 to 
2006, we lost 28,000 people from this province. 
 
I want to close, Mr. Speaker, with where did we spend our 
money? Where did the money go? I can’t wait to hit the 
doorstep answering that question. Over this past year I met a 
woman up in Sandy Bay, Saskatchewan, a woman who . . . a 
mother of seven children and admitted to us that she couldn’t 
read or write. But because of one of our family resource centres, 
Cathy was able to move that along and become a contributing 
member. Got her out of the house, got her away from being 
embarrassed and lacking self-confidence, and as a result of our 
family resource centre and her connection to the community, 
Mr. Speaker, she’s very much active and engaged in not only 



6688 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2015 

the resource centre, but in the community of Sandy Bay. And 
that again is testament to the strength of Saskatchewan people. 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s how we spend our money. 
 
I’m very proud to be able to participate in this debate and very 
proud to be able to support the budget going forward. 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 10:30 p.m., this House stands 
adjourned to 1:30 p.m. tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6661 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6664 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6669 
  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6671 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6678 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6680 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 6683 
  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6685 
 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


