






















































Hansard: November 19, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 86A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 19, 2015, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Hon. Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7721 
 November 19, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Mr. Speaker, to request leave for an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this past summer from July 25th to August 2nd, Saskatchewan 
was represented at the 2015 Special Olympics World Games in 
Los Angeles, California. Our two Saskatchewan athletes had six 
podium finishes between them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, I’d like to introduce the 
Saskatchewan athletes and coaches who represented our 
province and our country at the 2015 Special Olympics World 
Games along with representatives from Special Olympics 
Saskatchewan. Joining us today: Lindsay Kinnear, athlete, track 
and field medallist, and her family. Lindsay is from Lumsden. 
She works as an early childhood educator at the Saskatchewan 
Polytechnic daycare.  
 
Michael Qing, athlete, swimming medallist, and his family. 
Also joining Michael are Abderrahmane Tissira, who is the 
Regina Optimist Dolphins head coach; Marj Walton from Swim 
Saskatchewan. From Regina, Michael is a third-year student at 
the University of Regina. 
 
Jackie Powell from Swift Current. She was a Special Olympics 
coach for the past 20 years; 2015 marked her third Special 
Olympics World Games. She also attended the 2007 and 2011 
games. Darlene MacQuarrie, director of programs, Special 
Olympics Saskatchewan. Chelsea Fidler, Special Olympics 
Saskatchewan director of marketing and development. Lindsey, 
Michael and Jackie have made and continue to make 
Saskatchewan proud. 
 
I’d like to extend thanks, not only to the athletes and coaches 
who have dedicated the time and effort ensuring that 
Saskatchewan is among the best in the sporting world, but also 
to the volunteers, families and friends of these individuals that 
contribute to the success. I ask, Mr. Speaker, that all members 
please join me in congratulating and welcoming these guests to 
their legislature. We’re very proud, and there’ll be a member’s 
statement coming up. But thank you, sir. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to rise with 
the minister to welcome these special guests to their Legislative 
Assembly, and indeed particularly Lindsay and Michael. 
Congratulations to you for your strong showing at the Special 
Olympics. We’re very, very proud of you and very thankful for 
all the hard work that you put in to put Saskatchewan on the 
map. Also to the families and of course the volunteers and 
organizers of Special Olympics and the coaches, obviously this 
is a team effort and we can’t thank you enough for your 
commitment to this program and for putting Saskatchewan on 
the map and on the podium. So that’s very exciting. 
 
So on behalf of the official opposition, we too would like to 
welcome you to your Legislative Assembly and congratulate 
you on the great showing. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And to 
you and through you and to all members of the Assembly, I 
have two guests in the west gallery that I’d like to introduce — 
two really good friends of mine; one potential colleague. 
 
First off I’d like to introduce Dave Marit. He’s our candidate 
for Wood River, and he’s a large producer out in the Lafleche 
area. And I got to know him well in the last couple of years. 
And obviously he’s been an integral part of SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] for the last 
decade or so as well. So I’d like to introduce him. 
 
And with him is Sean Wilson, a past chairman for the 
Saskatchewan Heavy Construction Association. He operates the 
family operation, G.W. Construction, out of Buchanan. It’s a 
long-serving business in Saskatchewan. His grandfather 
operated it, and he’s taken the reins a bit. I think grandpa still 
has a fair bit to say, but I think George is still in charge. 
 
Over the last few years Sean and I have become very good 
friends. And I take his counsel very highly, and he’s given us 
lots of advice on procurement and how to make things better for 
businesses throughout Saskatchewan.  
 
I just really want to say thank you for your involvement and 
thank you both for helping grow a better Saskatchewan and 
making Saskatchewan stronger. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
great pleasure of mine to rise in this Assembly to welcome 
some guests seated in the east gallery. I’m speaking of a group 
of 14 English as an additional language students from the 
Regina Open Door Society. They’re accompanied by their 
trusty teacher Deana Pageot, who’s a very faithful attendant to 
bringing people to the legislature to connect them with their 
Legislative Assembly. So it’s really great to see Deana yet 
again. 
 
And I was reminded, Mr. Speaker, that the students are learning 
. . . They’ve just learned the word courageous, but of course 
these are people that know the spirit of courage very well. 



7722 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2015 

They’ve come from Somalia, Vietnam, Iraq, China, Burma, 
Nepal, Afghanistan, and India to be here in Saskatchewan to 
make a home and to make a better life for themselves and their 
family and to show that courage. 
 
So it’s a great deal of pleasure to welcome these individuals to 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, where of course our 
motto is “from many peoples, strength.” And this is the strength 
that we see in these individuals here. So I’d like to wish them: 
 
[The hon. member extended salutations in other languages.] 
 
Welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
my colleague in welcoming a friend, a constituent, and the next 
member — I’m positive will be the next member — from Wood 
River, Mr. Dave Marit. Dave’s extremely well known in the 
constituency, as he is around the province from his past position 
as president of SARM. So I’d ask all members to please join me 
again in welcoming Dave to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Immigration. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to join with my friend opposite, the Opposition House 
Leader, in welcoming these new Canadians here to our 
Assembly today, folks from a number of different countries 
who are taking the English as an additional language course at 
the Regina Open Door Society. Welcome Deana as well. 
 
These are great folks. We very much welcome them to our 
country, and we’re looking forward to welcoming many more, I 
hear, to Saskatchewan from right around the world. And we’ll 
probably have a bit more to say about that later today. So I want 
to welcome them to their Assembly here today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased 
to welcome both Richard and Joanne Lepp to the Assembly. 
Richard and Joanne come here day in and day out. They are 
with the Saskatchewan House of Prayer, and they pray for us to 
ensure that we have good guidance and counsel in our 
deliberations as we prepare to serve the people of 
Saskatchewan. So thank you very much. I’m so proud of them 
as part of my constituency but also as people who have made a 
commitment to this province in serving the public. So thank you 
very much to the two of you for coming here again day after 
day. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
again today to present a petition calling for greater support for 
GSAs [gender and sexuality alliance] in Saskatchewan schools. 
And we know that this government is not doing enough to 
create safe spaces in our schools for sexually diverse students or 

students who are being bullied because of their sexual identity 
or orientation. We know that GSAs, or gender and sexuality 
alliances, play a pivotal role in providing inclusive, 
anti-oppressive learning environments and offer a reprieve from 
bullying and assault. So we ask this government: it must act so 
that students have simple, easy-to-understand information about 
GSAs in their schools, how to form GSAs, and who they should 
talk to in order to form a GSA. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
call on this government to take immediate and meaningful 
action to pass The Respect for Diversity — Student Bill of 
Rights Act and enshrine in legislation the right for 
Saskatchewan students to form GSAs within their schools 
in order to foster caring, accepting, inclusive environments 
and deliver equal opportunities for all students to reach 
their full potential. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
Wynyard, Saskatoon, and Regina. I do so present. Thank you 
very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
again pleased to stand in my place today to present a petition as 
it relates to cellphone coverage in the northwest part of 
Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To cause the provincial government to improve cell 
coverage for northern communities like St. George’s Hill, 
Dillon, Michel Village, Dore Lake, Michel Point, and Sled 
Lake to provide similar quality of cell service that 
southern communities currently enjoy. This would provide 
support for our northern industries as well as mitigate 
safety concerns for those living in the remote North. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said time and time again, we have 
had this petition signed from people from all throughout the 
great province of Saskatchewan, and on this particular page, 
Mr. Speaker, it is signed from Dalmeny, North Battleford, and 
Big River. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again, once again, to present a petition in support of better 
seniors’ care here in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this petition is 
about the reality that we have a seniors’ care crisis in this 
province and this government has failed to recognize it and 
failed to address it. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the provincial 
government to immediately undertake meaningful steps to 
improve the quality of seniors’ care in our province, 
including more spaces and more choices for seniors; 
ensuring higher standards of care in public facilities, 
private facilities, and for home care; ensuring appropriate 



November 19, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7723 

staffing levels in seniors’ care facilities; and providing 
more support to help seniors remain independent in their 
own homes for as long as they desire. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Regina. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition from citizens in the province of Saskatchewan 
concerned about the high cost of post-secondary education. 
They, in the prayer that reads as follows respectfully request: 
 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the provincial government to 
immediately increase the funding for post-secondary 
education in this province, with a legislated provision that 
this increase in funding be used to lower tuition rates. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from here in 
Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition in support of better schools. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan call on this government to immediately stop 
ignoring schools and start prioritizing students by capping 
classroom sizes, increasing support for students, and 
developing a transparent plan to build and repair our 
schools. 

 
These petitions are signed by residents of Saskatoon. I so 
present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Treaty Edcamp Held at University of Regina 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — On November 4th, the U of R 
[University of Regina] hosted a progressive and impressive 
learning opportunity for teachers here in Saskatchewan. The 
Treaty Edcamp was a professional development event 
organized by the U of R chapter of the Student Teachers 
Anti-Racist/Anti-Oppressive Society with the support of the 
Faculty of Education and Dean, Dr. Jennifer Tupper. We know 
how important treaty education is for our province. Every acre 
is covered by treaty and every resident is party to the treaty. 
 
There were more than 30 presenters leading the discussions 
about how to incorporate treaty education into classrooms, 
creating a rich learning opportunity. Also impressive were the 
250 teachers and students from across Saskatchewan that came 
to Regina to attend the camp on their own time on a Saturday. 
Some sessions focused on how to incorporate the treaties into 
math and science; others focused on strategies for talking about 
dark parts of our history with young students — all important 

topics for reconciliation in our province. 
 
And so I ask all members to join me in thanking Meagan 
Dobson, Katia Hildebrandt, Raquel Bellefleur for their work in 
organizing this conference and in recognizing the important 
work being done by students, teachers, elders, professors, 
educators, and administrators across our province to ensure that 
every student in Saskatchewan learns how important treaties 
have been in shaping Saskatchewan’s past and the fundamental 
role they must play in our province’s future if Saskatchewan is 
going to reach its full potential. We are, after all, all treaty 
people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 

Saskatchewan Theatre and Film 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently on 
behalf of the Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport and myself, I 
had the pleasure of attending TheatreOne’s production of 
Theatre Never Sleeps, along with a number of other 
productions, with my wife, Leone. TheatreOne is Theatre 
Saskatchewan’s annual three-day festival this year held in 
Yorkton. Each year the festival brings together actors, actresses, 
and others from all over Saskatchewan. 
 
This year featured community theatre groups from Kerrobert, 
Regina, Melfort, Indian Head, and Yorkton. Mr. Speaker, the 
festival showcases two nights of short plays performed by 
Theatre Saskatchewan and Paper Bag Players as well as 
workshops and adjudications. Mr. Speaker, I can honestly say I 
was blown away by the talent and professionalism of all the 
actors involved in TheatreOne. 
 
When offering comments on Saskatchewan theatre, SaskCulture 
President Pat Grayston said, “Saskatchewan theatre is the envy 
of its colleagues across Canada due to the support of this 
Saskatchewan government.” Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say that 
our government supports Theatre Saskatchewan and community 
theatre through partnerships with the Saskatchewan Arts Board, 
SaskCulture, and through funding provided by these 
organizations and others by the Saskatchewan Lotteries fund. 
 
On another note, I was honoured to attend the SMPIA 
[Saskatchewan Media Production Industry Association] 
Celebrate Sask Film Week reception last evening. A lot of 
positive comments in regard to the direction of the film industry 
from industry stakeholders, and great respect for their minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members in the House to join me in 
congratulating the actors, crew, volunteers, and local 
community theatre groups on a job well done. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 

Youthful Constituent Shows Determination, 
Commitment, and Spirit 

 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, Karis Oscienny is a girl from 



7724 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2015 

my constituency who has a rare form of eye cancer. Since 2005 
she has made over 100 trips to Toronto for treatment with her 
biggest supporter, her mom, Lisa Oscienny. Karis lost her left 
eye in 2009. The treatment for her tumour has caused the retina 
to detach in her right eye, and she has lost what little vision she 
had left. 
 
But none of this is holding Karis back at all. She’s doing well in 
school, reads Braille, loves to write, and uses a cane to get from 
place to place. She’s very musical, imaginative, bright, funny, 
and as her mother would say, full of . . . vinegar. 
 
Friends and family and community members have come to help 
her many times. Telemiracle came to her aid in 2005 with tens 
of thousands of dollars to help pay for medical trips and 
accommodations. Karis auditioned to be a part of Telemiracle 
39 last year and was thrilled when she found out she made it. 
She worked hard for fundraising with a raffle, movie nights, 
concerts in the North, and she was very proud to present over 
$7,400 when she performed at Telemiracle 39 earlier this 
spring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me and recognize Karis 
Oscienny, her determination, commitment, and spirit. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 

Group Homes Help to Make an Inclusive Community 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
to rise in this Assembly and share some great news with my 
colleagues. Today in my constituency of Regina Qu’Appelle 
Valley, I will be attending a grand opening of Chip and Dale 
Homes newest group home. 
 
Inclusion is a powerful thing. Community-based organizations 
such as Chip and Dale Homes help provide opportunities for 
individuals who have an intellectual disability to connect and 
successfully live integrated within our community. This 
benefits not just the people who will call this new group home 
their home, but also their families, their neighbours, and our 
city as a whole. That’s why the Government of Saskatchewan is 
proud to partner with Chip and Dale Homes by providing 
almost $475,000 in annual funding towards this home. This is 
in addition to the 4.9 million in funding this year to support 
Chip and Dale Homes with their 12 other residential projects. 
Since 2007 our government has spent nearly 2.7 billion to make 
sure Saskatchewan is a great place for people with intellectual 
disabilities to call home. 
 
I wish to ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing the good 
work that Chip and Dale Homes do in their efforts to make 
Regina an inclusive community and to congratulate them for all 
they do to make a difference in the lives of people with 
intellectual disability. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Achievements of Special Olympics Athletes 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

rise today to acknowledge the great achievements of the Special 
Olympics athletes present here in our Chamber. 
 
Lindsay Kinnear won a bronze long jump and a gold medal in 
both the 200 run and the 4 x 400 relay during the 2015 Special 
Olympics World Games. This was her first competition at the 
world level, and she did remarkably well. 
 
Michael Qing participated in four events at the 2015 games, 
winning a fifth place ribbon and a medal in every colour: 
bronze in the 400-m freestyles, silver in the 200-m individual 
medley, and gold in the 4 x 100 medley. He also competed and 
won medals in the 2007 and 2011 Special Olympic World 
Games in China and Greece. Only in his mid-20s, Michael has 
broken many swimming records, has mentored fellow athletes, 
and has been named in the Special Olympics Male Athlete of 
the Year Award and the Sask Sport Male Athlete of the Year 
Award. 
 
These achievements are amazing and would not be possible 
without the hard work and dedication required from not only 
the athletes competing but the entire sporting network. Mr. 
Speaker, Special Olympics has an extremely strong volunteer 
network. There are currently 1,200 volunteers with Special 
Olympics Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these accomplishments and these athletes have 
made absolutely remarkable accomplishments, and they should 
know the entire province is proud of their performance. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Global Entrepreneurship Week 
 
Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure today to rise in this Assembly to recognize that 
November 16th to 22nd is Global Entrepreneurship Week. 
Around the world, this week is set aside as a time to celebrate 
the contributions of all who are at some point in their 
entrepreneurial journey. Mr. Speaker, through innovation and 
sheer courage, they have moved from having an idea that would 
enhance life and living in some measure to actually seeing that 
idea come to fruition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has some of the finest examples of 
entrepreneurs in the world and, not surprisingly, there are lots 
of them stretching to all four corners of the province. They are 
our community leaders, risk takers, role models, and major 
contributors to our economic growth. 
 
Whether the community is large or small, we see and feel the 
effects of entrepreneurial spirit. In various fields — agriculture, 
science, technology, and more — these men and women have 
and continue to make a positive impact in our province, 
improving lives and advancing our economy. I ask all members 
of the Assembly to join me in recognizing entrepreneurs for 
their vital role in building strong communities and creating 
great jobs in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 



November 19, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7725 

Election Issues 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Nutana just 
can’t get it right. She couldn’t accurately speak to SLGA 
[Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] finances. She 
claimed SLGA would lose hundreds of millions in revenue. Not 
true. It’s the wholesaling that generates most of the revenue. 
She talked out both sides of her mouth and said that these stores 
shouldn’t be converted when the NDP [New Democratic Party] 
did the same thing. She tried fearmongering that Alberta 
businesses are going to suck up all the liquor revenue in the 
province. That’s probably news to Co-op in Saskatoon. 
 
But the member from Nutana said this won’t be a real issue 
come election time. They want to talk about health care. Great. 
They don’t want private surgical clinics delivering more 
surgeries. So what is their plan? Emergency wait times? These 
members closed 52 hospitals and had the worst doctor retention 
rate in Canada. So what is their plan? Schools and classroom 
size: they closed 176 schools; we’re building 40 new ones. 
What is their plan? 
 
It’s just ideology and rhetoric on that side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. At least Saskatchewan people only need to listen to 
five more days of platitudes before they get to choose who has a 
plan for the future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Carbon Capture and Storage Project 
 
Mr. Broten: — The United States Senate has voted to overturn 
the environmental protection authority’s rule for coal-fired 
power plants. And you know what one of the main reasons for 
that is? Because the EPA’s [Environmental Protection Agency] 
rule was based on the Sask Party’s misinformation. Senator Joe 
Manchin III, the senior senator from West Virginia, railed 
against that misinformation. This is what he said on the Senate 
floor: 
 

The EPA asserted in the final rule that the Boundary dam 
facility has been operating full carbon capture 
sequestration successfully at a commercial scale since 
October 2014. Mr. President, that is found to be totally 
untrue. 

 
So the Senate, they voted 52 to 46 to overturn the EPA rule. Is 
the Premier at all embarrassed that the false information spread 
by him and his government has led to this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, talk about jumping the shark, 
Mr. Speaker. This is incredible. Now the Leader of the 
Opposition is accusing the Saskatchewan Party, the government 
in the province of Saskatchewan, of controlling the GOP 
[Grand Old Party]-controlled Senate in the United States, that 
we have actually . . . It was the Saskatchewan Party that is the 
reason for a vote going a certain way in the Senate, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

The Senate, of course, is in a majority position for the 
Republican Party. The Republican Party has not liked the EPA 
rulings on coal long before they ever heard about carbon 
capture and sequestration in the province of Saskatchewan. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, every time we go down to Washington or 
when we’re engaged through the agency that we use, it’s pretty 
clear that Republicans and a few what they call blue dog 
Democrats, don’t support the EPA regulations with respect to 
coal, Mr. Speaker. It has nothing to do with the Saskatchewan 
Party government here or the carbon capture and sequestration 
project in Estevan, Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier should read the 
transcripts. He should watch the video, Mr. Speaker, and he 
would see that one of the reasons that was given by the 
senators, Mr. Speaker, was the misinformation provided by this 
Sask Party government. You know, 52, 52 US [United States] 
senators voted to overturn the EPA rule, and one of their 
arguments is that the EPA rule relies on misinformation spread 
by the Sask Party government, information that the senior 
senator from West Virginia says is “totally untrue.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s $4 million US lobbyist arranged 
many meetings with at least 10 of those senators: senators 
Capito, Donnelly, Heitkamp, Gardner, Hoeven, Inhofe, 
Manchin, McConnell, Sessions, and even Senator John McCain. 
And those senators, Mr. Speaker, this week were told that the 
information given by the Sask Party government was nothing 
but spin and hyperbole. So they and 42 of their colleagues voted 
to overturn the EPA rule. 
 
Again to the Premier, instead of laughing about it, he should be 
embarrassed, Mr. Speaker. Is he not embarrassed at all that the 
spreading of misinformation has led to this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I am very hopeful because if 
the Leader of the Opposition’s right and Washington’s taking 
their cue from the Saskatchewan Party government, soon we’ll 
see an end to country of origin labelling in the United States. 
Soon we’ll see the approval of the Keystone pipeline. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Republican Party in both the House and the 
Senate have long opposed and railed against the EPA changes 
by the administration, not just with respect to coal, but on the 
issue of climate change, Mr. Speaker. And frankly the EPA 
changes, we know, will actually, Mr. Speaker, actually assist 
jurisdictions like Saskatchewan that are pioneering in 
technology around carbon capture and sequestration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know the plant’s been restarted, adjustments 
have been made, and while 400 000 tonnes were captured in the 
first year, in the commissioning year, engineers are working 
hard to ensure that the full objective is met. We’ve 
communicated that to the senator. We’ve communicated that to 
the EPA. The International Energy Agency is still with the 
project. They’re still supportive of it, Mr. Speaker. They 
understand that it’s groundbreaking. We have experts that have 
come forward, actually in the sector, say this is something 
we’ve got to go forward with. 



7726 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2015 

Mr. Speaker, to say that one speech on the floor of the Senate, 
notwithstanding that it referenced Saskatchewan, controlled that 
particular vote, but it’s the longstanding reality that the 
Republicans have opposed these EPA regulations. Mr. Speaker, 
that is really jumping the shark. The Leader of the Opposition 
lacks credibility in the argument. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, he can listen to what his friend 
Senator Machin said, the senior senator from West Virginia. 
This is what he said, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The EPA asserted in the final rule that the Boundary dam 
facility has been operating full carbon capture 
sequestration successfully at a commercial scale since 
October 2014. Mr. President, that is found to be totally 
untrue. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s a senator on the floor clearly stating that. 
There are actually two resolutions that were brought forward to 
the Senate Tuesday evening. One was brought by Senator 
Shelley Capito of West Virginia and Senator Heidi Heitkamp of 
North Dakota. The Premier has met with both of them, and 
Senator Heitkamp has even toured Boundary dam. And the 
other resolution was brought by Senator Joe Manchin and 
Majority Leader Mitch McConnell. Now the Premier has met 
with both of these senators too. In fact he proudly tweeted, he 
proudly tweeted that he told the Senate Majority Leader all 
about Boundary dam. 
 
[10:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, this entire mess speaks volumes about this 
Premier’s credibility. And, Mr. Speaker, frankly this is 
embarrassing to Saskatchewan on the international stage. Will 
the Premier, will he write to all of those senators, will he write 
to the EPA to apologize for the misinformation that they were 
given? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’re coordinating 
communications with all those folks that have come to the 
carbon capture and sequestration project in Boundary dam. 
We’re going to give them a full update, including the challenges 
that have been faced at the plant that are being met, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re also going to communicate to them our 
confidence that SaskPower engineers are meeting those 
challenges. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I do think that in the months ahead the future 
version of the Leader of the Opposition will want to have 
counselled the current version of the Leader of the Opposition 
to maybe be a bit circumspect before he characterizes the 
project as a disaster. That’s what he did yesterday. I know that 
officials — IBEW [International Brotherhood of Electrical 
Workers] members who worked on the project, engineers who 
worked on the project — pretty disappointed, pretty 
disappointed in that assumption and that proclamation by the 
member. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the meantime, in the meantime we see experts 

coming forward, as was covered in the Regina Leader-Post. 
Ms. Preston, for example, who said: 
 

I’m wholly supportive of the project, and I believe that 
SaskPower made the right decision for Saskatchewan 
when it undertook the planning, design, and construction 
of the power plant retrofit to incorporate carbon capture 
and storage to ensure environmental sustainability . . . 

 
We’ll provide that information and all of the updates to anyone 
who has come to tour the project. Mr. Speaker, we’ll also 
provide that same update to the Leader of the Opposition should 
he ever, should he ever actually come down and have a look at 
the project at Boundary dam. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the problem is as the Premier has 
travelled, as the head of carbon capture has travelled around the 
world hyping this project, Mr. Speaker, they’ve been telling a 
story that actually isn’t true. They’ve been telling a story that 
isn’t rooted in the facts. The leaked documents, Mr. Speaker, 
have clearly seen that, and now we have US senators, Mr. 
Speaker, seeing that what they were told by this government 
can’t be trusted. And that calls into question the decisions that 
they have made. 
 
The Boundary dam project, Mr. Speaker, is mentioned 40 times 
in the EPA rule for coal-powered plants — 40 times. The EPA 
references this government’s news release about how the 
project was exceeding expectations. Everyone remembers that 
news release. It references the correspondence with this 
government’s head of carbon capture, and it speaks of 
presentations the government made in Washington, DC 
[District of Columbia]. Now based on what it was told, it says 
the project is “currently working very well. In fact, better than 
expected.” And the Premier’s maintaining that it’s working 
better than expected. What world has he been living in, Mr. 
Speaker? It’s unbelievable that they would maintain that 
assertion even today. 
 
You can’t blame the US government for any of this because 
they simply trusted what the Sask Party government was telling 
them. So 52 senators have now voted against this rule in part 
because of the misinformation that they were provided by this 
government. How can anyone possibly trust what the Premier is 
saying now when we have had over a year of misinformation 
from this Premier? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I think Washington, DC will 
survive this particular vote in the Senate. And again I want to 
point out, remember the premise of the member’s question — 
and he’s ran away from it now because I think he even realizes 
how ridiculous it is — the premise of this line of questioning, 
the premise of this line of questioning is that notwithstanding 
the fact that the Grand Old Party, the Republican party, has long 
opposed the EPA regulations on coal in the House and in the 
Senate, the fact that there was a vote expressing that opposition 
is owing to the Boundary dam 3 project in Estevan. 
 
They’re kind of nodding their head. They still believe that. Mr. 



November 19, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7727 

Speaker, Mr. Speaker, that is beyond the absurd. And moreover, 
moreover, Mr. Speaker, we will be reaching out to senators on 
both sides of the aisle. We’ll be reaching out to the 260 folks 
that have toured the plant with the good news, Mr. Speaker, that 
challenges in the commissioning year are being met, 
adjustments are being made by SaskPower engineers. 
 
That’s why the International Energy Agency is still on board. 
That’s why experts — maybe not, maybe not all the politicians 
— but experts are on board that this project must go forward. 
Mr. Speaker, we understand on this side of the House that coal 
needs to be a part of the mix, but we’ve got to clean it up. We 
want the coal mining jobs. We want the jobs at Boundary dam 
3, and we want to benefit from a tech transfer that will happen 
as a result of this innovation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s our plan. We’re prepared to go forward with it. Mr. 
Speaker, in the election campaign, we’ll campaign on it. What 
will he campaign on with respect to the coal industry? Will he 
shut it down, or will he support cleaning it up? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this Premier should be 
embarrassed, embarrassed that senators in the United States, 
Mr. Speaker, are speaking out, saying the information they were 
provided by this Premier, by the minister, by SaskPower, Mr. 
Speaker, can’t be trusted, that it’s not true. Those are the words 
of the senator, and the Premier should be embarrassed that 
Saskatchewan’s brought into this discussion in this way. 
 
When the EPA references the information that’s been given 
about Boundary dam projects 40 times in its rule, Mr. Speaker, 
and then says they can’t trust it, that’s a problem. That’s a 
problem because we have been paying incredible amounts of 
money for the Premier, US lobbyists travelling around the 
world to hype this project, but the story that they’ve been telling 
hasn’t been true, Mr. Speaker. And that is a serious problem 
and it affects the credibility of this Premier and this 
government. 
 
The senator should have been able to trust what they were being 
told, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan people, though, absolutely 
should have been able to trust what they were being told about 
this project because Saskatchewan people and ratepayers are the 
ones footing the bill for it, Mr. Speaker. This affects the 
Premier’s credibility, but he can take a step, he can take a step 
in the right direction now. 
 
We’ve been calling for the Crown and Central Agencies 
Committee to be convened in order to get to the bottom of this 
mess, not for the meetings that are scheduled in 2016 for 
another topic, Mr. Speaker, but meetings now to dig into this 
mess. And I see now the House Leader is saying the minister is 
going to handle this because the Premier doesn’t want to answer 
this question. But Saskatchewan people deserve, Saskatchewan 
people deserve to know the truth. Why won’t the Premier call 
the Crown and Central Agencies Committee, allow it to be 
convened so we can get to the bottom of this mess? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, now the Leader of the 

Opposition knows what the House Leader said to me in private 
conversation here. Actually what he said was yes, we will meet. 
Yes, the committee will meet. Yes, you’ll have the opportunity 
to ask any question you like about Boundary dam 3, and we’ll 
be fully prepared to answer all the questions, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ll be happy to answer any of the questions that the Leader 
of the Opposition or anybody else out there might have, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
That committee will meet. We’ll be meeting, but we’ll be 
meeting just prior to the election. And I think that’s going to . . . 
We’ll be meeting before, we’ll be meeting before the election, 
Mr. Speaker, some time in the next few months, Mr. Speaker. I 
think it’s important because the people of Saskatchewan will be 
very, very interested . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Athabasca seems to have a 
lot to say today. Perhaps he’d like to put some of it on the 
record. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll be happy to have those 
meetings in the next few weeks leading up to the election 
campaign. It’ll be interesting because we want to get these 
people on the other side on the record as to whether they 
support the facility or don’t support the facility. And I would 
just add, Mr. Speaker, perhaps we could have those committee 
meetings down in Estevan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 

Statement on Sixties Scoop 
 
Mr. Vermette: — On June 24th the Premier promised that the 
government would formally apologize for the Sixties Scoop. He 
said that would happen in late summer or the fall, but it’s now 
winter. What happened to the Premier’s promise? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There will be 
meetings set up with the leader of the First Nations, FSIN 
[Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations]. There was a bit 
of a delay because of their election. So that meeting has been 
scheduled as well as a meeting with the Métis Nation leader in 
order to have that conversation of what they would like to see 
happen. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — It’s been almost five months since the 
Premier promised an apology for the Sixties Scoop, but he 
hasn’t followed through. We’ve heard from many people 
affected by the Sixties Scoop, including First Nation, Métis 
leaders who haven’t heard a thing from this government. To the 
Premier: why not? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll have to repeat the 
answer because perhaps the member didn’t hear it. But out of 
respect for the elections of FSIN, we were asked to wait until 



7728 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2015 

that election took place. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Reports on Seniors’ Care 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thirty-eight days ago, the Minister of Health 
said the government’s internal reports on the state of seniors’ 
care would be released “shortly,” but the Sask Party is still 
sitting on those reports. Why is the Health minister still keeping 
those reports secret? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s interesting to note that over the last number of years that we 
have made a commitment to increase the transparency and 
accountability in long-term care. 
 
As a part of that, that is done through CEO [chief executive 
officer] tours and the reports that are made public, which is 
unlike the members opposite where that information was not 
made public because in fact they never actually had the senior 
management tour long-term care facilities. And in fact under the 
regulations, it provided for the Ministry of Health to inspect 
long-term care facilities, but they stopped that practice and in 
fact took that out of the legislation. Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well the reports will be released next week. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, if the reports are ready now, 
they need to be tabled now. I’m asking the minister, table those 
reports today. 
 
The question the Health minister needs to answer is whether the 
government has changed those reports in any way. If not, 
there’s no reason those reports can’t be released right now. But 
if the Sask Party is sanitizing those reports, that is unacceptable, 
and they need to release those originals today — now, Mr. 
Speaker. So to the minister: what’s the answer? Has he changed 
those reports in any way? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we will look 
at the reports and have looked at the reports. We ensure that 
those reports do not have personal information identified in 
them, so we de-identify any personal information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the member opposite will know in the last 
round of reports that had been released, obviously there were 
positive things that had been in those reports and there were 
things that pointed out some concerns and challenges, and we 
did not take those out of those reports. Mr. Speaker, frankly I’m 
a little insulted that the member opposite would think that we 
would be changing the reports that the CEOs [chief executive 
officer] are going to be provided, Mr. Speaker. We haven’t in 
the past and we won’t in the future. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 
 

Health Care Expenditures 
 
Ms. Chartier: — What I do know, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
minister cut and pasted in the second round of those CEO tour 
reports, Mr. Speaker.  
 
Pay for senior health executives is up 20 per cent across the 
board since 2012, and in some health regions pay for senior 
executives has jumped as much as 37 per cent and even 46 per 
cent. Meanwhile patients are dealing with cuts, including a huge 
cut to the number of surgeries this year. How can the Health 
minister justify this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to 
correct the member opposite, which I have to do on a regular 
basis on the days that I actually get up in question period, which 
has been a little bit few and far between lately. But, Mr. 
Speaker, the minister did not cut and paste the reports. The 
CEO and the health region indicated that they did and they 
apologized . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the health 
system in this province, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
will know that spending on health care services are up this year 
as opposed to last year. They’re up from the last seven years 
under this government. They will know that staffing is up in all 
categories, Mr. Speaker. And in fact I can inform the House that 
Health Sciences Association issued a report and that report 
indicated, Mr. Speaker, that 90 per cent of people rate the 
system as good to excellent, Mr. Speaker, which is in fact up 2 
per cent from last year. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, it’s becoming increasingly clear 
that patients just aren’t this government’s priority anymore. The 
things we should be able to count on are being cut or stretched 
thin, but the Sask Party always seems to have more money for 
senior health executives or for consultants. Does the Health 
minister really think it’s acceptable to increase pay for senior 
health executives by 46 per cent while making cuts to the 
services patients should be able to count on? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, actually this year in light 
of the challenges that we have, Mr. Speaker, we have suspended 
the pay for performance for our CEOs. In fact we have frozen 
their pay in this year, Mr. Speaker.  
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s hard coming from the members opposite who 
provided over a system that saw over 100 physicians lost in this 
province, that closed 1,200 long-term care beds, that closed 
over a dozen long-term care facilities, that closed 52 rural 



November 19, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7729 

hospitals in this province, that closed the Plains Health Centre 
that served not only Regina, but all of southern Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, in light of the fact that on this side of the House 
we’re seeing record investments.  
 
We’re seeing record numbers of health providers in this 
province — over 500 additional physicians practising in 
Saskatchewan, over 3,000 designations of all designations of 
nurses practising in this province, nearly 800 full-time 
equivalents in long-term care and integrated facilities — a far 
cry from the members opposite and the mess that they left in 
health care in this province. 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Nutana 
. . . excuse me, Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, Regina Qu’Appelle Health 
Region had the largest increase in executive pay. That’s the 
same health region that doesn’t fund cardiac rehab like other 
health regions do. It’s the same health region that has seen a 50 
per cent increase in surgical wait times since March, and it’s the 
same health region that has dismal physician and employee 
engagement — both of those measures are at 35 per cent. 
 
So in the areas that really matter to patients and their families, 
things are not going well at all, but this government has jacked 
up executive pay anyway. To the minister: how can he possibly 
justify these huge salary increases for senior health executives? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well in fact as 
I’ve said before, we had frozen the pay of CEOs in our health 
regions across the province. We have suspended the pay for 
performance in this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what we do see on this side of the House is increased 
support to our health regions. The budget of Regina Qu’Appelle 
Health Region is up this year compared to last, as it is in every 
single health region, Mr. Speaker. We are seeing certainly a 
higher number of supports that are provided in terms of the 
funding that’s provided in our budget for health regions, and 
especially, Mr. Speaker, in those important services as 
compared to the members opposite.  
 
Mr. Speaker, we are seeing continued support in areas like CT 
[computerized tomography] and MRI [magnetic resonance 
imaging], Mr. Speaker. In fact we’re looking at other ways to 
provide that services in the community through contracted 
work, Mr. Speaker, which it would be interesting to know 
where the members stand on that because, in so many different 
areas, it’s so hard to tell what the plan is of the NDP. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — This government has made no progress on the 
Premier’s ER [emergency room] wait time promise. Waits for 
specialists have gotten much worse. The average wait is about 
11 months now, in spite of the Premier’s promise of one-week 
waits for everyone. And even surgical wait times are getting 

worse again because the government cut funding for surgeries. 
But despite all of that, the Sask Party has increased salaries for 
senior health executives. Talk about misplaced priorities. 
 
So to the Health minister: when ER waits are horrible, specialist 
waits are getting worse, and surgical waits are growing again, 
why are health executives getting massive wage increases? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Again, Mr. Speaker, just look at the 
record of this government compared to the former government. 
Mr. Speaker, in the last year, Mr. Speaker, Regina Qu’Appelle 
Health Region, last year Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region 
targeted to do 25,950 surgeries. What did they actually 
accomplish? 26,596 surgeries, an increase from what they 
actually targeted. Saskatoon was targeting just over 37,000 
surgeries. What did they achieve? 39,000 surgeries. In fact there 
was 1,000 more surgeries that were done last year in this 
province than we actually projected at the beginning of the year. 
 
Here’s the NDP record. RQHR [Regina Qu’Appelle Health 
Region] under the NDP in 2006-2007 targeted 21,500 surgeries. 
How many did they actually perform? Just 20,000. Saskatoon 
targeted 33,900. What did they achieve? Just over 33,000. Mr. 
Speaker, they couldn’t even hit the targets that they actually set 
when they were the government. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Senior health executives in Five Hills Health 
Region have had their pay increased by 37 per cent. This 
government has no money to properly utilize the Craik health 
centre. They couldn’t even get air conditioning into seniors’ 
care homes in Moose Jaw, and they closed the dementia ward in 
Assiniboia. But it had more than enough money to increase pay 
for senior health executives in that region. Again talk about 
misplaced priorities. To the minister: how does that make any 
sense? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I know the member 
mentions Assiniboia, and I know at least one family member 
that’s waiting for an apology for the fact that their loved ones 
ended up on the suppertime news without their consent. And so 
I hope they address that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, about three or four weeks ago the Leader of 
the Opposition was out in the rotunda and he was asked what he 
would do. And at that time he said, well I don’t have a platform. 
Mr. Speaker, actually I think he was wrong. He does have a 
platform. It’s called being the Leader of the Opposition. It’s 
called the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. And I think in 
Saskatchewan politics, there ain’t no bigger platform than right 
here on the floor of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
So he needs to tell the people of the province, would he cut 
11,000 publicly funded surgeries that are performed in private 
centres? Would he cut 15,000 private CT scans that are done 
under the public system? Would he cut 3,000 MRI scans that 
are done in the public system in a private setting? Would he cut 



7730 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2015 

1,000 jobs in Estevan, Mr. Speaker? The Leader of the 
Opposition needs to tell us what his plan is. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 

Saskatchewan Refugee Intake Initiative 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to make a statement about a new initiative of the 
government to establish a refugee settlement centre and a 
coordinated plan with respect to the refugee intake that we 
expect here in the province of Saskatchewan. I’ll get into the 
very specifics of the announcement in a moment. 
 
I don’t have a text, otherwise I would have shared it with the 
Leader of the Opposition, but I do have the press release which 
I think we delivered to the Leader of the Opposition prior to the 
proceedings this morning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just before I get into the very specifics of the 
announcement today, I wouldn’t mind setting the context. I 
want to confirm the establishment of this centre and our 
coordinated approach to the issue. I do also want to share with 
the House, the position of the Government of Saskatchewan 
remains that the federal government should remove the deadline 
attached to the quota with respect to its plan for refugees, the 
25,000 by December 31st, Mr. Speaker. We offered that 
counsel to the Prime Minister and to various ministers and at 
the official level in a considered way, Mr. Speaker. We offered 
it because we understand how important it is that this settlement 
happen effectively and safely for the refugees, for the settlement 
groups, and for the people of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have a proud history in this country and in this province of 
welcoming refugees. That’s a heritage that we’re all proud of in 
this House and all members are proud of it, on both sides of the 
Legislative Assembly. Mr. Speaker, we’ve all experienced, at 
different stages in our life, different refugee initiatives, and 
some of them come in in smaller numbers. There was the large 
one that I remember, growing up in the 1970s in Swift Current, 
the refugees that came from Vietnam, Mr. Speaker. And that 
particular settlement happened very effectively. I think 
everyone would agree with that, including those who were 
refugees or the family members now of those refugees. But 
there was no deadline associated with it, Mr. Speaker. There 
was not a quota and a deadline attached to it, Mr. Speaker. The 
process quite rightly was driven by results. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we continue to make that case to the 
federal government, that the deadline ought not to . . . That 
needs to be waived so that we can focus on a results-based 
refugee initiative from the Government of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when those who advocate for that prudence, when 
they do that, I hope that they will not be accused by those who 
disagree of somehow trying to stir division or somehow trying 
to foment fear. I hope that those values are not ascribed to their 
position with respect to advocating prudence and caution and 
the removal of the deadline, just as I would hope that those who 
do advocate that position would not ascribe to those who 
oppose it that they don’t care, that that side doesn’t care about 

security, Mr. Speaker, because neither of those, both of those 
arguments are disingenuine. Both of those arguments represent 
the straw man argument, the last refuge of those who don’t have 
necessarily the facts to back up their view and so they create a 
false argument, and they knock that down. That will not help 
us, Mr. Speaker, going forward to ensure that this process is 
what we want it to be — safe and effective and a harbour for 
those refugees who need Canada at this particular moment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know the facts of the attacks in Paris. They’ve 
been presented well in the news, confirmed unfortunately that a 
terrorist used the refugee stream in Greece and eventually ended 
up in that concert hall in Paris, murdering innocent people. 
That’s a fact. We know there is a fact, Mr. Speaker, in 
Germany, where the national police chief has said they are 
concerned about the number of terrorists that might be hiding 
amongst refugees. We know that there is an additional fact in 
the United States where President Obama is saying quite clearly 
that their screening system needs to be 18 months to 24 months, 
Mr. Speaker, and not that we’re advocating that period of time, 
but these are all facts entered into the debate and we should 
have the discussion freely. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s why we’ve been led to the announcement 
today, which is to say this. Notwithstanding our disagreement 
with the federal government, we want to be there for refugees. 
We want to move ahead in an effective way. And so I’m 
announcing today the creation of the refugee settlement centre, 
an interagency, multidisciplinary, coordinative approach to this 
issue so that we can welcome approximately 800 refugees. We 
think that’s the number. We don’t know for sure from the feds. 
That would be our proportionate share. 
 
I’m also announcing that we are striking a ministerial 
committee to make sure we’re coordinating this effort with the 
settlement groups, with school districts, with every CBO 
[community-based organization], and with every ministry so 
that we will get this right, so that Saskatchewan will continue to 
welcome refugees, and we’ll do so in a way that is both safe, 
Mr. Speaker, and gives the best possible chance for successful 
settlement for the newcomers. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you to the 
Premier for the remarks that he provided. This is indeed a very 
important discussion. It’s important and it’s timely because we 
see world events. We see world history unfolding before our 
eyes, and there is indeed great cause for concern. There is 
tragedy. There is heartbreak. There is violence. There is 
outrage. There is regret for how this could happen, among 
many. But we know, Mr. Speaker, that this is a serious issue for 
all people in the world and especially for countries that are 
Western democracies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this notion or concept of a refugee settlement 
centre, that’s good news. That is a good step, certainly, and 
something that we support. 
 
Of course we in the opposition, as government members and 
people throughout the province and the country, we have been 
angered and saddened to see the recent acts of violence, 
whether it was in Beirut, whether it was in Paris. We know, Mr. 



November 19, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7731 

Speaker, that while we have these two most recent incidents, we 
know this is violence that has been carried out in places like 
Iraq, in places like Syria, in places like Afghanistan for some 
time. And these, tragically, are not unfamiliar stories to so many 
people. Perhaps fitting we are having this discussion on the day 
where we’ve had guests in the Assembly from Open Door 
Society, many people coming to Saskatchewan for a fresh and a 
safe start. 
 
I do think in that context, Mr. Speaker, while the Premier made 
remarks about the need to ensure the security measures are there 
— I wholeheartedly agree that we need security measures — I 
think it’s also very important as we have this discussion in 
Canada and in Saskatchewan that we never take steps to fan 
flames where there may be fear, where there may be attitudes 
that we don’t want in an inclusive Saskatchewan. And that’s 
why I have taken issue with some of the language and the 
approach that the Premier has used on this as he expressed 
perhaps some comments about the approach that we’ve been 
talking about. 
 
But I think of the context within the national perspective. I 
think about some of the news that we saw yesterday where we 
saw the director of CSIS [Canadian Security Intelligence 
Service] say in a large news conference with our Public Safety 
minister, Ralph Goodale, where the director of CSIS said, “I’m 
confident that the measures in place are robust and appropriate.” 
And he was referring to the screening process. And we know 
we’ve also heard from our minister from Saskatchewan on this 
issue for public safety, talking about the measures that are in 
place. We’ve also had comments from respected individuals 
like Lloyd Axworthy with a lot of experience and know-how in 
this field. 
 
So this is an important step, Mr. Speaker. I hope that it in many 
ways signals a change from some of the earlier positions that 
we saw the government take. And I think this is something that 
I know Saskatchewan people want to get behind, something that 
Saskatchewan people indeed want to support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we think of the refugees, the pictures that we’ve 
seen. We think of young Alan Kurdi on a beach, washed up. 
And it’s absolutely impossible to look at a child that age and for 
us not to think of our own children, for us not to think of our 
grandchildren, for us not to think of any little toddler that we 
know, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Absolutely there are security threats existing, and there are 
measures to ensure that those coming to Canada would have the 
necessary screening so that Saskatchewan and Canada can be 
safe. But, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan and Canada has been a 
welcoming place for many, many years. For many years, in 
treaty territory, this province has welcomed people to this 
province for that fresh start, and that’s something that I 
absolutely want to see continue. And I want to see a spirit of 
inclusion that is promoted and spread throughout 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So I thank the Premier for his remarks and the opportunity to 
make some as well. Thank you. 
 
[11:00] 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill 188, The 
Best Value in Procurement Act, 2015 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill be now read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 
Whole on Bill No. 188, The Best Value in Procurement Act, 
2015 and that the bill now be read the third time. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 188 — The Best Value in Procurement Act, 2015 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move this bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General that Bill No. 188, The Best Value in 
Procurement Act, 2015 be now read the third time and passed 
under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to inform the House that the Lieutenant 
Governor is here for Royal Assent. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
[At 11:04 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following bills.] 
 



7732 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2015 

Her Honour: — Pray be seated. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly in its present session has passed several bills which 
in the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour, to 
which bills I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 
 
Clerk: — Your Honour, the bills are as follows: 
 
Bill No. 179  - The MRI Facilities Licensing Act 
Bill No. 183  - The Saskatchewan Employment (Essential 

Services) Amendment Act, 2015 
Bill No. 184  - The Automobile Accident Insurance 

(Motorcycles) Amendment Act, 2015 
Bill No. 185  - The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous Measures) 

Amendment Act, 2015 
Bill No. 186  - The Municipal Conflict of Interest 

Amendment Act, 2015 
Bill No. 187  - The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment 

Act, 2015 
Bill No. 188  - The Best Value in Procurement Act, 2015 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these bills. 
 
[Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 11:06.] 
 
The Speaker: — You may be seated. Why is the member on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Phillips: — To make an introduction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave for 
introductions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all members of the House, I would like to 
introduce five people from the Failure Prevention Services in 
Watson, Saskatchewan, FPS. They’ve been contributing to our 
province for nearly three decades. They make recyclable 
stainless steel filters for a variety of industries around the world. 
In fact only about 2 per cent of their production actually ends 
up in Saskatchewan. They look after filters for nuclear mining 
and power generation industries and they’re great members of 
not only the Watson community but the entire Saskatchewan 
community. And with us today are Dan Beuker, CEO; Dean 
Beuker, sales manager; Leanne Beuker, operations manage; and 
Jesse Schwartz, operations manager; and Ron Graf, production 
manager. I would ask all members welcome these constituents 
to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — With leave to welcome guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave to introduce 
guests. Is leave granted? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just very 
briefly, it’s nice to join with the member for Melfort and 
welcome these business leaders and this business to their 
Assembly. Thank you for your work within Saskatchewan and 
your role within our economy. It’s a pleasure to welcome you 
here today. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to table the answers to 
questions 1,043 through 1,057. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 1,043 through 1,057. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Performance of Government and Opposition 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I appreciate the opportunity to, one more time, be able 
to get up and debate a motion in this legislature. And today I 
think it’s very timely with an election coming up very shortly. 
And what the motion really is saying in essence is that we’re 
comparing the vision on this side of the House to the lack of 
vision on that side of the House. And I’ll maybe elaborate a 
little bit on that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, you know I heard once in this legislature 
someone say that when you’re in opposition, you can say 
anything you want. And you know after today . . . I’ve been 
here 20-plus years, and have never seen anything like today in 
question period. I almost feel like a mentor for the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know we have a popular Premier in this 
province. We all know that on this side of the House. In fact, I 
think they know it on that side of the House. Maybe a bit 
envious of that, especially when it comes to the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know that our Premier, and we’re very 
proud of him, is very influential in the province, across this 
country. But today went to new extremes that even I couldn’t 
imagine. Now the Premier’s affecting votes in the US, in the 
Senate. Next thing it’ll be in Congress. The next thing he’ll be 
blaming the Premier for is affecting the presidential race in the 
U of S, and we know where his sympathies lie in that case, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, today I just want to take the opportunity to 
make some comparisons between the members opposite and the 



November 19, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7733 

members on this side of the House. And how do we do that? 
We do that by going back over our record of eight years, and I 
think a number of the accomplishments that we’ve had, and 
then the accomplishments of the members opposite in the 16 
years previous to that. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we could talk for one thing about 
population, be a good example. It’s probably just something 
that shows how this province is doing. But under the NDP 
government from ’91 to 2007, Mr. Speaker, 56,000 more people 
moved out of Saskatchewan than moved back in. Mr. Speaker, 
under the Sask Party government — we were elected in 2007 — 
80,000 more people moved into Saskatchewan than moved out. 
So, Mr. Speaker, just an example of where the comparisons lie. 
With an election coming, I hope people take that into account 
and show how our province is growing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we could talk about many areas of the province 
that are growing right now. Economic growth. Let’s talk about 
the NDP for a minute. From 2001 to 2007, we had the worst 
economic growth rate in the country. Well, Mr. Speaker, right 
now, from 2008 to ’14, in Saskatchewan we have the 
second-best economic growth in the country, only second to 
Alberta. And probably we’re neck and neck with them right 
now due to the oil prices being somewhat lower than they had 
before. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can talk about balanced budgets and lower 
taxes. I will take a minute and talk about lower taxes, Mr. 
Speaker, and remember back. And I know many people on this 
side of the House will remember the NDP government. They 
raised taxes 21 times in 16 years. And I think that’s worth 
repeating: 21 times in 16 years. 
 
Now on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, I believe we have 
record property tax reductions and record income tax 
reductions. The education tax on property, remember that one 
for farmers? There isn’t a farmer in this province that doesn’t 
shudder when they hear the word NDP because every time they 
hear that, they think there goes . . . The education tax will be 
back on farm land. 
 
And remember one of the previous premiers said at SARM a 
number of times, the status quo is not on; we will deal with the 
education tax. Well they did; they lost the election. We won and 
we dealt with the education tax on property. And I know the 
member opposite from Nutana appreciates that. She’s the Ag 
critic, and she knew we should have took that off. They just 
wouldn’t do it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s so many areas that I can talk about in 
comparisons with the NDP to the Saskatchewan Party, and I 
think we have a number of areas where I think we’ve dealt with 
a number of issues. Sure a lot more to go, Mr. Speaker, but after 
the next election I feel we’ll have the mandate to do that. 
 
I want to talk about highways for a minute, Mr. Speaker. And 
the member for Indian Head-Milestone was Highways minister, 
and now the member for Martensville is the Highways minister, 
Mr. Speaker. And they’ve done some really good work across 
this province, but they’ve done some really good work out in 
my area for the people of my constituency. 
 

Mr. Speaker, some of the good things I think that have 
happened in highways here, besides the record number of 
dollars that have been spent on highways compared to where 
the NDP were, the passing lanes between Balgonie and Fort 
Qu’Appelle. And I actually drive on that road, Mr. Speaker, 
usually at least once a week, and those passing lanes, I believe, 
have saved lives but made driving out there much safer. 
 
Highway 7, Mr. Speaker, $8.9 million in funding for that 
project. Highway 16, 45 million between Clavet and Saskatoon, 
twinning, Mr. Speaker. Estevan, twinning from Estevan to 
Bienfait, 8 kilometres there, Mr. Speaker. That’s in the works. I 
believe the member for Estevan the other day was out there, and 
the bypass around or the road around Estevan, which has been 
asked for — for how many years? — for many, many years 
even when the NDP were in power. 
 
[11:15] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think we all remember very clearly out in 
rural Saskatchewan especially . . . Well the urban will too 
because every time they come out to visit us, they saw them. 
 
But the number of orange flags, remember that trend out there 
when the NDP were in power? You’d come across a road and 
there would be an NDP orange flag — well I think it was NDP 
colours — and then there would be a sign that says, the next 7 
kilometres not in good shape. And then you’d go that 7 
kilometres. You’d get to another one. And the next sign would 
say, the next 10 kilometres not in very good shape. They had a 
different word for it, but I got sick of looking at it. And that 
went on and on and on. 
 
My daughter lives in Eston, over in the member for 
Kindersley’s constituency, or the member for Rosetown. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I would go across the province, and that was 
continual right across this province. And it always made me 
wonder, why wouldn’t you, on the Manitoba border and the 
Alberta border, just put a sign up that said, highways for the 
next 4 or 500 miles, lousy? In fact, some cases worse than that. 
It would’ve saved a lot of money, and they could have spent 
that on the health care and the hospitals that they managed to 
close right across this province. 
 
And speaking of that, Mr. Speaker, I think there’s another good 
comparison. The Health minister could tell you a lot better than 
I can on the millions and millions of dollars that have gone into 
the health care system since 2007 when we came to power. And 
then that brings back memories of when the members opposite 
came into power, and one of their first acts was to close 52 
hospitals. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, why I remember that so clearly, because in 
my constituency, in the community of Langenburg, the 
community had got together with the blessing of the NDP 
government as they came into power and said, let’s go out and 
raise, I think at that time it was about $3 million for the 
community for a new health centre, a new hospital in the 
community of Langenburg. So the NDP at that time said, go for 
it; go raise your money. And they did. They raised every cent of 
it. They were ready to go, ready to build a new hospital, and 
guess what happened, Mr. Speaker? The NDP, in their wisdom, 
come along, along with 51 other hospitals and shut down the 



7734 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2015 

Langenburg hospital. So the community had gone to work, done 
their share to provide health care in their community, and the 
members opposite saw fit to close that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when you think about that, you know, the 
shortage of nurses, as we got into the late ’90s and into the 
2000s we were short of nurses. The nurses were not happy. 
Patients were . . . Everybody was complaining about the health 
care in our province, Mr. Speaker. How did the NDP think that 
would affect when you close 52 hospitals? And then you, on top 
of that, part of that, you close the Plains hospital, which was 
one of the most accessible hospitals in Regina. I know many of 
my constituents were really not happy when that hospital was 
closed. 
 
But what, I wonder, did the NDP, in their wisdom, think would 
happen to the nurses and doctors that worked in those 52 
hospitals and mostly, in fact, other than the Plains, I think all in 
our rural constituencies? They left the province because they 
had no jobs here. 
 
At the same time we were short of nurses, we were short of 
doctors. We were short of specialists. But then at that time, Mr. 
Speaker . . . And we have to remember this because there’s an 
election coming. But at that time in the ’90s and into the 2000s, 
rural Saskatchewan didn’t much matter. And I know there’s 
members, well in fact all of the members on this side of the 
House, all the representation of rural Saskatchewan is on this 
side of the House . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, all you have to do is go out, and people remember 
out there the record of the NDP. And I don’t think those people 
that lived through that time will have to be reminded too often, 
but it doesn’t hurt to do it. When the election comes in April, 
remember the comparison between the members on this side of 
the House — and we care for our constituents; we work for our 
constituents — and the track record of the NDP, what they did 
to rural Saskatchewan, not just in health care, but that’s one of 
the main issues I think that I got elected for five terms in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s so many things I’d like to talk about 
today, but I better speed it up a little bit. But, Mr. Speaker, you 
know, we talked about the shortage of doctors, the shortage of 
nurses, and all that right across the province. But remember 
back . . . And I think a lot about my kids right now as I’m 
coming to the end of my time in here. And I had three kids. 
Two went in for teachers; one went in for an accountant. And 
remember, many of you did at the same time, pretty close to the 
same age. Well most of you are close. Some of you are close to 
the same age. 
 
But anyway, Mr. Speaker, remember when our kids would go 
through grade 12, graduate, and then go on to university, some 
of them. And they’d go get their university, whatever it was, 
teacher, you know, whatever it was. Nurses at that time of 
course. They were short of nurses, but they weren’t hiring any. 
But you’d go through that, and you couldn’t get a job in 
Saskatchewan. Do you remember that? And I talked about the 
out-migration before, and it was the trend then. When you 
passed grade 12, you got luggage, and you headed for Alberta, 
Ontario, the States, anywhere it was because you couldn’t get a 
job in Saskatchewan. 

And a lot of what’s happened since 2007 in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, I believe is right here. The attitude of the people in 
Saskatchewan has changed. There’s no more of this, that we 
can’t do it. We just . . . Oh, in Saskatchewan we can’t do it, Mr. 
Speaker. I think that attitude out there — rural, urban, doesn’t 
matter — people are saying . . . Whether if you’re in business, 
they’re saying, I can succeed in business. Or people that are 
getting a job, I can find a job out there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s so different than where we were in times past, Mr. Speaker, 
where the members opposite, even in government, promoted 
doom and gloom. Remember that? It didn’t matter when Mr. 
Romanow was premier, and I remember we were in opposition 
and you’d get up and ask questions and, we can’t do this, we 
can’t do that. 
 
I remember the day . . . Some of my colleagues will remember 
when I think I was Highways critic, and I know the member for 
Athabasca is going to appreciate this. But do you remember the 
day that a constituent from Estevan in fact come in, and she had 
this piece of pavement off the highway? It was about yay big. I 
could hardly lift it. I’m just a little guy. But it was about that big 
and I brought it in the legislature and I was asking questions to 
the Highways minister. And, Mr. Speaker, you’ll appreciate 
this. I think you were sitting with us at that time. The Speaker 
took it away from me because . . . We knew that would happen 
because it’s a prop. But it was a sign of how the highways were 
in the province of Saskatchewan. That piece of pavement had 
flipped up behind a semi and gone through the windshield of 
that lady’s truck. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite . . . I think we had a 
couple of highways questions this session, maybe two, and 
that’s probably two more than the Agriculture minister’s had. 
Mr. Speaker, I think the comparisons are obvious out there. 
We’ve seen some really good things happen across the province 
out there and certainly not all because of the provincial 
government. But I think why it’s timely right now, we have an 
election coming, and we want to show our record compared to 
the NDP members opposite. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to take a minute and talk a little bit 
about the Leader of the Opposition because he seems to take 
what I say to heart. So I think I could possibly give him some 
advice. But what I will say, Mr. Speaker, is question period has 
been a really funny agenda for the NDP this session. They 
asked questions on health care day after day, and the Leader of 
the Opposition, if they look like they’re good ones, he takes 
them. If they don’t look so good, he lets the critic take them. 
Did anybody notice that? You know about that old saying, 
there’s no I in team? Well there is in some places, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But he asked questions on health care day after day after day 
and, Mr. Speaker, you know I would feel a little bit . . . If I had 
sat in government side and then went over to opposition and 
then got very critical of the health care system, I would feel 
somewhat hypocritical, and maybe he does. You know, he 
probably does; he’s just not saying it. He’s not saying it very 
loud, that’s for sure.  
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when he asks these questions about 
emergency wait times, isn’t that funny how that works? He’s 
talking about people at times waiting three to four hours. Mr. 



November 19, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7735 

Speaker, under the NDP, eight, ten hours was nothing to sit in 
an emergency room and then actually quite often not get to see 
a doctor because we were short of doctors at that time. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, he also gets up and the member for 
Rosemont gets up and talks about education. You know, he has 
the audacity to get up and tell the Minister of Education that oh, 
we’re short of teachers, we’re short of rooms. Well you know in 
a way he’s probably right because the population’s growing so 
fast in this province the 58 schools that the Saskatchewan Party 
and the Minister of Education have on the go right now — 58 
schools are being either built, built or in the process of coming 
for that to happen. And, Mr. Speaker, when you compare that, 
and we have to going into an election, that’s in comparison to 
176 schools that were closed by the members opposite to 58 
being built on this side. 
 
Now which side of the House do you think is more qualified to 
run this province, creates the attitude that people in 
Saskatchewan want to have? And, Mr. Speaker, I think when 
this election comes up, not that we want to harp on what we’ve 
done — we certainly aren’t bragging about it because we’ve got 
a lot of things we want to do yet, Mr. Speaker — but I’m going 
to take great pride when I get a little bit older and retire. Well I 
am retiring, but I’m going to take great pride in watching the 
government of the day, which I believe will be the 
Saskatchewan Party, carry this province forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I want to read the motion into the 
record that we’re talking about today: 
 

That this Assembly supports the government’s vision and 
plan for growing Saskatchewan, most notably for its work 
and ongoing plan to invest in infrastructure projects across 
the province and for its work to foster economic 
opportunity; for its continuing work to keep taxes low for 
Saskatchewan families; for improving the lives of those 
living with disabilities; and for making Saskatchewan the 
best place to stay, work, and grow a family after 
post-secondary education; and further 
 
That this Assembly condemns the opposition for not 
having a plan or vision for the future for Saskatchewan 
people. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion from the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats: 
 

That this Assembly supports the government’s vision and 
plan for a growing Saskatchewan, most notably for its 
work and ongoing plan to invest in infrastructure projects 
across the province; for its work to foster economic 
opportunity; for its continuing work to keep taxes low for 
Saskatchewan families; for improving the lives of those 
living with a disability; and for making Saskatchewan the 
best place to stay, work, and grow a family after 
post-secondary education; and further 
 
That this Assembly condemns the opposition for not 
having a plan or vision for the future of Saskatchewan or 
its people. 

I recognize the member . . . Why is the member on her feet? . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . I recognize the member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
quite pleased to enter into the debate. And as I listened to the 
presentation by the member from Saltcoats, Mr. Speaker, what 
the Conservative Party does, Mr. Speaker, is they refuse to 
recognize . . . They want to go down the historical path of 
where Saskatchewan was in the ’80s and the ’90s. 
 
Let’s go down that path, Mr. Speaker. They know very well and 
he knows very well, Mr. Speaker, that the Conservatives put the 
Saskatchewan people in debt for years and years and years — 
fifteen and a half billion dollars in debt when the NDP took 
over, Mr. Speaker, fifteen and a half billion dollars in debt. And 
every single day, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan, 
under the NDP government, had to pay $2 million-plus in 
interest alone as a result of the mismanagement of the Devine 
government in the 1980s. 
 
Not only that, Mr. Speaker, they tried to sell our Crowns, Mr. 
Speaker. Not only that, they even sold highways equipment, 
Mr. Speaker. They put all the highways equipment on sale, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It’s convenient that the member from Melville-Saltcoats forgets 
those facts, Mr. Speaker. It’s very convenient for him to put the 
blame . . . But every single day, the people of Saskatchewan, if 
you want to go down in history, you cannot escape from your 
history. As a Conservative Party you almost broke the backs of 
Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. You almost broke the bank 
of the Saskatchewan people, the Government of Saskatchewan. 
And every single day, Mr. Speaker, every single day, we had to 
pay down massive debts racked up by the Conservative 
government of the 1980s. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan were well 
served by leaders like Blakeney, Romanow, Calvert, Mr. 
Speaker. They were very well served. They had a job to do and 
there was some very tough choices. But, Mr. Speaker, let the 
people be reminded of the Devine government in the 1980s. 
And it’s convenient that the member from Melville-Saltcoats 
forgets to mention that fact, that we had a fifteen and a half 
billion dollar burden called the provincial debt, Mr. Speaker, 
compliments of the Saskatchewan Conservative Party, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that’s why we will not 
listen to any words that they talk to us about the history of how 
Saskatchewan was left with very little to build on, Mr. Speaker, 
and that is a direct result of the mismanagement of the 
Conservative government of the ’80s. And they all know it, Mr. 
Speaker. We all know it. 
 
And how do you fix highways when you have no equipment 
that was sold by the Conservative government? How could you 
fix some of the issues? We had no money, Mr. Speaker, in the 
bank. How could you talk about a bold plan and a vision when 
you’re busy going to banks in Eastern Canada to try and keep 
our lights on, even in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker? 
 
That’s the record of the Conservative government, Mr. Speaker. 



7736 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2015 

And we will never apologize, never apologize for helping the 
Saskatchewan people, for cleaning up that Tory mess of the 
1980s. That’s the real story, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now as I look at some of the issues, Mr. Speaker, of how 
they’re back-patting themselves, Mr. Speaker, everybody 
knows, everybody knows that the Saskatchewan Party inherited 
a booming economy, Mr. Speaker. Everybody knows they 
inherited money in the bank, Mr. Speaker. Everybody knows 
that we had a growing population. They simply inherited all that 
great news, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[11:30] 
 
But the bottom line is, after eight years of record revenue, we 
have seen they have failed on many fronts. They have failed on 
many fronts, Mr. Speaker. And I want to point out to the people 
that are listening, they have failed on many people. They have 
failed on many people’s issues and they have failed many 
people as well. And I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, one of the 
particular people that I had a opportunity to visit, Mr. Speaker, 
were really heartbroken. These people live in Makwa, and 
Makwa is a community on Highway 306 probably about a 
half-hour west of Meadow Lake. And this couple, Mr. Speaker, 
their names are Fran and Virgil Paul, and both the Paul couple, 
they really had some difficult times over their lives. 
 
This is an example of how this government has ignored many 
people’s issues across the province. And most recently, Mr. 
Speaker, they had a bunch of flooding issues that really affected 
two of their homes. They have two homes in Makwa, Mr. 
Speaker. And as a result of some of the flooding that was 
occurring, they ended up losing one home that was an older 
home. Then they had their entire basement, which was part of 
their existing home, flooded and they lost a lot of the contents, 
Mr. Speaker, a lot of the contents. 
 
And they tried hard to deal with the Highways and Highways 
really said it’s not an issue; the flooding’s not our concern. So 
they went to SaskWater, and SaskWater said, well it’s not our 
concern. They went to Environment. Environment said, it’s not 
our concern. So one after another, some of these departments 
slammed the door in their faces saying, it’s not our problem. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s how this provincial government is 
failing many families throughout the province of Saskatchewan 
as they have historically failed the province overall, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now what I want to point out with Fran and Virgil Paul, Mr. 
Speaker, whose problem is it that the highway construction that 
was undertaken near their home had simply taken out a bridge 
and replaced that bridge with culverts, Mr. Speaker? And as a 
result of taking the bridge out and putting culverts in, a lot of 
the water backed up onto Makwa, onto the actual community of 
Makwa. And what happened, Mr. Speaker, is the water flooded 
into basements. A number of homes were affected, including 
the Paul’s home. And as a result of them having insurance, they 
found out later that after they lost so much, Mr. Speaker, after 
they lost so much in their homes, that they didn’t have 
insurance for flooding. Flooding wasn’t covered in their 
insurance policy. As a result they had a financial loss of their 
buildings, of their homes, and also their contents, Mr. Speaker, 
none of which insurance would cover. 

And then they turned to the government saying, well as a result 
of you replacing a bridge with culverts, it was poorly designed 
to begin with. All the water that backfilled our property and 
backfilled our homes, can you guys help us with this problem? 
And, Mr. Speaker, all they got was a non-response from the 
Saskatchewan Party government. And I say shame on them. 
This has got to be fixed. 
 
These people have put their lives into these homes. And as a 
result of all the hardships, as a result of not having no 
insurance, losing one older home, and then having their entire 
new home backfilled with water, Mr. Speaker, because 
Highways, the SaskWater, Environment ministers wouldn’t 
deal with them, Mr. Speaker, now we have a couple, an older 
couple that has to relocate because their home has become so 
destroyed. And yet no one is helping them solve this problem. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, these are some of the issues that I speak about 
in the Assembly. And we have asked time and time again to the 
Minister of Highways, will you help the Pauls? We have asked 
the Minister of SaskWater. We met with the Minister of the 
Environment. Would somebody take leadership on that side to 
recognize that as a result of how you’ve designed a bridge or 
you’ve taken a bridge that used the proper way to let water 
through and you replaced the bridge with culverts and those 
culverts couldn’t handle the volume. So it was the 
government’s mistake and yet, Mr. Speaker, they are simply not 
dealing with these issues. 
 
These are some of the things, a few stories that I’ve picked up 
over the last few weeks, Mr. Speaker, of people that are 
frustrated with this government, so busy patting themselves on 
the back that they forget the people in the background that are 
hurt by some of their decisions. And yet they continually ignore 
people. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to shift gears in the last few minutes I 
have to point out to the people of Saskatchewan this. We know 
that the governments across, the municipal governments across 
the province have to take on more debt, Mr. Speaker. They have 
to take on more debt because the province is making them take 
on more debt. And as a result of that record debt for 
municipalities, guess who pays that, Mr. Speaker? Property 
owners pay that. The business community and the private 
homeowners pay that. 
 
Carbon capture failure, we’re talking about that for the last 
several weeks, Mr. Speaker, means that as a result of the 
political mess created by the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker — not 
SaskPower but the Sask Party — what’s going to happen is 
they’re going to start paying more on their power bills, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re going to pay more on their power bills, and 
that’s thanks to the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Then look at the private health care services that they’re 
promoting. It’s going to cost people more money out of their 
pockets, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as well to the future taxpayers, their work is not done 
there, Mr. Speaker. The future taxpayers are going to pay more 
through their P3 [public-private partnership] schemes. The 
current taxpayers are going to pay more for some of the debt 
that we see the government is piling on this year, and this 



November 19, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7737 

despite the fact that they had record revenue the last eight years, 
Mr. Speaker, record revenue. They had a booming economy yet 
somehow, Mr. Speaker, the Conservatives once again found a 
way to mess that up. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we want to talk about history. Let’s go down 
that path. But the future is where the real challenge is. We see 
that the Saskatchewan Party government is so busy patting 
themselves on the back with motions like this that we’re seeing 
that the decimation of services and the loss of hope by many 
people throughout the province of Saskatchewan is starting to 
be something that is occurring on a regular basis. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we will always oppose the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m delighted to rise 
in the House today for probably what will be the last debate as 
an elected member. It’s interesting that I got a chance to debate 
with the two gentlemen that were elected the same year as I 
was. The member from Athabasca that just finished speaking 
was elected. We sat on the same side of the floor, and I 
remember him ranting and hollering at the NDP. For the whole 
time that we sat together on that side of the floor, he was 
ranting at the NDP, and now he’s ranting as an NDP, and he’s 
saying the very same words. And he uses the word shame just 
as often as he did when he was ranting at the NDP. I can’t 
believe the gentleman that actually doesn’t have the nerve to 
know what’s the difference in life here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am absolutely delighted to follow the member 
from Saltcoats who talked about the change in government 
since we were elected in 2007. Of course him being much older 
than me, he can remember some of these details that I can’t, but 
I’m really glad that I’ve had a chance to listen to what he had to 
say today and understand some of what he has been saying. Mr. 
Speaker, he did mention when he first stood up that he could 
remember somebody in opposition saying that you can say 
anything that you want to. I do believe that was that member 
that said it. But that’s okay because we actually got to do what 
we said we were going to do when we were in opposition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reason why the member from Saltcoats ran is 
the same reason why I ran. Mr. Speaker, we’ve been elected 
five times, and I understand and I agree with what he has to say. 
But there was another reason why I ran. I ran because I was fed 
up with listening to the NDP who had given up on rural 
Saskatchewan. Not only had they given up on rural 
Saskatchewan, they actually wrote it off. They believed as long 
as they could get Saskatoon and Regina and Yorkton and P.A. 
[Prince Albert], they could be government, and they really 
didn’t care about the rest of us. They ripped up the GRIP [gross 
revenue insurance program] program. They tore it up, the 
program that actually was the basis for what our farmers 
needed, and at the same time they increased crop insurance 
twice and the coverage actually went down. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we actually lived through the time when 
those people opposite closed 52 hospitals, hospitals where some 
of my children were born, a hospital where one of my daughters 
lost two of her fingers. We had to go to the hospital during that 
night for the care that we needed to be able to go on to a larger 

hospital that isn’t there anymore. That’s what used to happen in 
rural Saskatchewan before the NDP came into government. 
 
They also closed 176 schools. That’s one school for every 
month they were elected. Mr. Speaker, that’s affected my 
children and many of the children that are from members on 
this side of the House. We probably had the highest education 
tax in all of Canada. We laid off 400 teachers when they were 
government. And, Mr. Speaker, they downloaded onto every 
municipality they could. 
 
But all of that wasn’t as bad as the biggest issue that I . . . the 
reason why I decided to run, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I ran because 
of what had happened to the attitude of the people of our 
province. The propaganda and the programs that controlled our 
citizens because of the NDP government was perpetual fear. 
There was a long time that we were ashamed of dreaming for 
something better. We didn’t believe we had the right to dream. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people from all over Canada would feel sorry for 
us. They would say, you’re actually from Saskatchewan? That’s 
okay. When are you going to move out? Are you the last one 
going? You have to turn the lights off when you leave. Mr. 
Speaker, we, in a province that has over 40 per cent of the 
arable land in Canada, we have the world’s largest supply of 
potash. We have oil and gas and uranium energy, and people 
felt sorry for us. Under that government, they allowed us to be 
able to not feel proud, and that’s something that I can never 
accept, Mr. Speaker. We were embarrassed about our roads. We 
were embarrassed about our schools. We were embarrassed 
about our hospitals. We are embarrassed about everything that 
happened in rural Saskatchewan because of the NDP 
government. 
 
People sort of jokingly asked, are you still there? And they’d 
say, do you only build highways going one direction, going into 
Alberta? Well, Mr. Speaker, at that time we didn’t stand tall. 
We didn’t hold our heads up high. We had people, the NDP 
always had people believing that they knew what was best for 
the people of the province. We couldn’t have it. They decided 
we couldn’t have something because it wasn’t good for us. 
They were the big brother in the province. They would let us 
know of what we should be doing. 
 
Under the NDP, government knew best and they let the people 
use issues. You know, Mr. Speaker, the government under the 
NDP owned the land and they let the people use it. Under the 
NDP, the government would own the liquor stores and let 
people work for them. People didn’t have a right to actually 
look at the opportunities themselves. 
 
People would tell me, if you flew a small plane across the 
border at night going into Alberta, it was dark; it was dark; it 
was dark until about 50 miles from Alberta, and you’d see the 
lights on. You’d know that there was pumpjacks going. You’d 
know that there was people working. You knew there was 
activity going on. But in the darkness of Saskatchewan under 
the NDP, it wasn’t happening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP always acted like big brothers, and they 
would decide what we could do and when we can do it. But you 
know what happened? The day after the election in 2007, 
something happened. There was a change in attitude. There was 



7738 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2015 

a difference in people’s eyes. There was a difference in their 
optimism. It was like they’d fought a war for independence and 
they finally won. 
 
And I look back now and I know that the economic 
opportunities were there before the election, but people didn’t 
feel it. Not because of government but because there was no 
hope. In 2007 I think most of you remember that we had a 
campaign that said, hope beats fear. Mr. Speaker, that’s what 
we believe in. We believe that action will still allow people to 
have hope. 
 
The NDP used the fear factor with all citizens. But, Mr. 
Speaker, none more brutal . . . There was nobody that was more 
brutally used than our seniors and those that were vulnerable, 
Mr. Speaker, those that were with a disability. Mr. Speaker, 
seniors under the NDP, the assistance for seniors was frozen for 
16 years, Mr. Speaker — 16 years. For 16 years the government 
told our pioneers that $90 a month was good enough for them. 
They eliminated 1,200 long-term care beds in a province where 
we had the highest percentage of seniors per capita in Canada. 
And for any senior that actually did have some money, they 
were expected to pay up to 90 per cent of their income for 
seniors . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. It appears that a number of 
members would like to enter the debate. I think they will have a 
chance, but currently the member from Kelvington-Wadena has 
the floor. I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I think many members know that I have a deep 
interest in people with disabilities. In fact I’ve had the 
opportunity and the fortune to meet with a number of them in 
the last 20 years, and I consider many of them my friends and 
examples of how humanity and goodness can take the place of 
sometimes physical and intellectual capabilities. 
 
But the NDP had told the vulnerable people that they had to be 
scared of us. Mr. Speaker, that was the message that went. 
Regardless of the disability or why the people weren’t working, 
they were on something called the SAP [Saskatchewan 
assistance plan] plan, the social assistance plan.  
 
There was an opportunity for people who had a long-term 
disability to actually be in a separate program where they 
wouldn’t have to, on a monthly basis, explain that, yes, they 
still had a vulnerability, and yes, but they still would get the 
same amount of money as anyone else. Some people with a 
disability can never work and they can never get any more out 
of their life, but they deserve more. And as a government it was 
one of our first steps, that Minister of Social Services now, at 
that time introduced that plan. We now have over 13,000 people 
in this province that have a pride in who they are. They know 
they are valued in our province and it’s something that we can 
all be very, very proud of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has a plan. We have a plan for 
growth. And included in our growth is a plan to recognize 
opportunities in places like our military. For the first time I 
believe government has, with the different scholarships and the 
Highway of Heroes and the supporting our troops, we actually 
are looking at our veterans and our military force and doing 
more than what we did before, rising it, making sure that people 

understood that we are proud of them and we have to do more. 
 
[11:45] 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are ads on TV right now. The Leader 
of the Opposition is talking about what they should be doing, 
and that is looking backwards. And again it’s a fear factor. Mr. 
Speaker, they’re not talking about a plan for the future. They’re 
talking about . . . They’re criticizing us, but they’re never telling 
us what they’re going to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that there are 10 of us right now who have 
decided not to seek re-election. Life has changed in 
Saskatchewan since 2007 and even with the decline in things 
like the oil prices, life is still very good in Saskatchewan. It’s 
the best place in the world to live. And right now, we know that 
nobody wants to go back. Mr. Speaker, there’s still 
opportunities in this province. We’re never going to go back to 
the days when the NDP were telling people how to live, what 
they could do, and where they could go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m so very proud of having the opportunity of 
being in here today and speaking and to make a difference. And 
I know that with democracy, we have a . . . The criticism that’s 
coming from their side is what their job is, but there also has to 
be a plan. There has to be hope. And the people of the province 
deserve to have a government who cares about them and knows 
that they are as smart as anybody and they will grow the future. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is a 
pleasure to enter into the debate, and we always have good 
debates and this morning, Thursday morning, private members’ 
day. And it is always interesting how this government bends 
over backward and I’ve got to say, I was going to count how 
many times but there’s dozens of times, to stretch and just give 
the, pat itself on the back, just really . . . And then it’s . . . I find 
it very interesting that they’re always full of pointers about 
what we should do, because they’re pretty good . . . They were 
pretty good at opposition. They should go back to opposition 
because they’re pretty good at it. They seem to know what 
opposition’s all about, you know. 
 
But here we have a strange session this term where we didn’t 
get a chance to have a Throne Speech. Why is that? Why didn’t 
we get a Throne Speech or any message from the government 
about what their plan or vision was? They’re criticizing us for 
not having a plan or vision, but what happened to the Throne 
Speech? You kind of forgot, kind of forgot what you do. You 
kind of forgot what you do. Now they will say, well you know 
it’s just, what we do. But it’s sort of funny that, very convenient 
for them to have pointers for us but we’re just saying, where’s 
the Throne Speech? Where’s the Throne Speech? 
 
Now it’s also very convenient and I understand that in a few 
weeks we’re going to have our third quarter financial, mid-year 
report, after we’re done here. After we’re done here. How 
convenient. How convenient. Now would they stand for that in 
opposition? Major, major documents that we should have for 
this House, how convenient that it’s after the fact, after the fact. 



November 19, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7739 

And even my colleague from Cumberland House today asked 
about where’s the apology for the Sixties Scoop that they’d 
promised in June. Made a big deal of it. They said sometime in 
the fall. Well now they’ve got a delay on it, so we can’t talk 
about that. All the things that we can’t talk about. 
 
But you know what the real question is out there? The real 
question is, so where did all the money go? And here we have a 
Minister of Finance who really doesn’t know. And please don’t 
tell me where the money went and don’t tell me about the 
clawbacks because he can get up and say, apparently with a 
straight face, he didn’t know. But a week later, he does know. 
Isn’t that amazing? Isn’t that amazing? Here we have those 
folks over there that can stand up with a straight face. 
 
And you know, I do appreciate the members who have spoken. 
And it seems that, you know, maybe all the folks who are 
retiring . . . And we know that’s interesting. It’s good that they 
get up and have their say in a 75-minute debate, but we’ll know 
they’ll have their say next week. 
 
But you know, I have to say that it is rather odd that when they 
talk about us, talking about our vision, they’re having their 
retiring folks get up and speak, and they have to talk about the 
’90s. That’s fair enough. And we talk about the past. But they 
conveniently forget about the ’80s. They conveniently forget 
about what happened in the ’80s. And I’ve got to say, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I remember some of the phrases we had like 
whoa, don’t say whoa in a mudhole. And that may be what the 
Minister of the Economy’s talking about when he talks about 
Boundary dam. But you know, today we even heard and we’ve 
heard, you know, they talk about our commitment about that. 
But what’s their commitment about Boundary dam for 3 and 4, 
4 and 5? What are they going to do about 4 and 5? Silence on 
that. Silence on that. 
 
But you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I heard the member 
from Kelvington and she was talking about the good work they 
did with SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for disability] 
and fair enough, and we’ve got up and we’ve said that we’ve 
appreciated that. But man, the stuff that’s happening in Social 
Services today, I don’t think there’s a lot of pride to go around. 
You know, today we know kids are staying in hotel rooms. Kids 
are staying in hotel rooms, foster kids who should have better 
care. 
 
And I just got this morning an answer to my questions, and I’ll 
just put this on the record because we don’t have many days left 
to go. And we talked about this in the summer, that we need to 
have better protection for those kids who are in vulnerable 
circumstances. But here we have, in May there were seven kids 
in hotel rooms; June, 27; July, there was 17; August, there was 
55 kids in Saskatchewan who were in hotel rooms because they 
couldn’t find the care for them; September, 37; October, 36. 
And we don’t know the numbers for this month. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think this is an urgent issue, and we need 
to deal with this. We need to deal with these things. And this is 
the kind of thing we should be debating, as opposed to, how can 
the Sask Party once again pat themselves on the back yet again? 
 
And I don’t know how many dozens of times I’ve heard it over 
the past eight years. And people are asking, where did the 

money go? Why aren’t you investing it in things that matter to 
people, investing it in things that matter to people? 
 
Instead we get in question period time after time, every one of 
them . . . I don’t know whether they have a school back in their 
room where they get, you know, they have to do the lessons of 
the ’90s but forget about the ’80s because of the debt the 
Conservative government at the time put on this province and 
almost bankrupt this province, almost bankrupt the province. 
And that’s a pretty straightforward thing. We know that’s what 
was happening in the early ’90s. This government tends to 
forget all about it, tends to forget about it. 
 
And you know, the question is, where did all the money go? 
And you know, the Minister of Finance said, we’ll tighten the 
belts; we’ll do things that we . . . We’ll have to for example cut 
post-secondary, and they’ve clawed back money from there. 
 
But interestingly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a couple of things I want 
to raise, a couple of things. When we go into this election — 
they talk about how they’re going to look forward to this 
election — we’ll have three more MLAs [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly]. How can that be? How can that be? And 
we fought that good fight a couple of years ago. But how can 
that be when we know that really this is the . . . We should 
practise what we preach. We should practise what we preach. 
We should be looking at ways to make things more efficient, 
more effective. 
 
And yet we have the lowest number of people represented by 
each MLA in Canada, and we could afford to keep the same 
numbers. We could afford to keep the same numbers, but the 
government of the day say whoa; never say whoa in a mudhole. 
And we told them, this is not good planning. This is not good 
planning. But yet here we are. In this election we’re going to 
see three more MLAs. And we’re going to wonder, do we really 
need those MLAs? 
 
And we have lots of questions about what this government’s up 
to but you know, and they talk about, I mean . . . And the other 
thing I wanted to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I found it very, very 
interesting, and I guess we’ll hear about it next week, is the 
Premier let it out of the bag that we’re going to be having 50 
per cent renewables by 2030. Isn’t that a great idea? That’s a 
great idea. Where have we heard that before? Where have we 
heard that before? Yes, I think we heard that before from the 
member from Nutana, in the spring, in a private member’s bill. 
So I just think it’s passing, very interesting that all of a sudden 
this number is lifted by the government over there, and then 
says we have no vision, no plans, and here we have here. 
 
And then we have an accountability Act that this government 
talked about, that we had just passed, and the Lieutenant 
Governor was here. Where have we heard that before? From the 
member right here talking about how we need to have more 
accountability and transparency. Where have we heard that 
before? And yet they tell us, they tell us that we have no ideas, 
and it seems that they found some of our ideas very, very 
interesting. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I tell you we’ve got lots of ideas, and stay 
tuned when we come into the election. And we’ve got a great 
group of candidates, and we’re ready to fight that election. 



7740 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2015 

We’re ready to fight that election, but you know right now, our 
job right now is to hold this government accountable. 
 
I find it interesting, you know, the member over there will talk 
about how they would like to have other questions. Yes, I bet 
they would. Because they want to talk about anything else other 
than Boundary dam. Can we please change the channel on 
Boundary dam? We’re not going to change the channel when 
we are fighting for transparency and accountability and truth 
and honesty. And it just makes some of those members over 
there a little uncomfortable because we are going to talk about 
the things that matter to the people of Saskatchewan and the job 
that this government has to be doing. 
 
So I will be voting against the resolution, very clearly. And I 
have so much more to say, but I’ve got to tell you, Mr. Speaker, 
that when we have to talk about the issues of this government, 
it’s clearly it’s coming forward in the dying days of their term, 
we’re going to raise those issues for the people of 
Saskatchewan because they deserve the truth and the 
accountability. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now the 
problem with speaking third in a debate like this is that most of 
the really good material has been used already, but some of it 
was so well presented that I’m not going to try and compete 
with it. But I do think it’s worth, it’s worth repeating. It really is 
substantial material, and I want to highlight some of the good 
points that were made by my colleagues earlier. 
 
And you know, when you have a voice like this, you probably 
shouldn’t be speaking at all, but you know, this is an important 
topic and I wanted to address it because it speaks to the reason I 
first became involved politically. This is an argument of can do, 
can’t do. This is an argument of optimism versus pessimism. 
This is the glass half full and running over or the glass half 
empty. And I think this particular discussion today will 
represent clearly the distinction between the governing 
Saskatchewan Party and the NDP in opposition. 
 
I think that attitude of we really can’t have too high an 
expectation or we may not be able to achieve what we ought to 
be able to achieve was most clearly articulated by former 
Premier Calvert when he said, we’ll always be in and out of 
equalization. There was no thought of, hey, we can get out of 
equalization. We can grow our economy. We can become a net 
contributor to the national economy and take a leadership role 
in the nation. It was always, well we may or may not be able to 
do what is possible and we might have to accept a little bit of 
equalization. 
 
You know, there was a former Finance minister by the name of 
Janice MacKinnon who said the reason we couldn’t do certain 
things in this province is it would affect, it would undermine 
our opportunity to collect equalization. What she was saying 
basically is that it was easier to sit here and collect federal 
welfare payments than it was to pick ourselves up and do what 
we had the potential to do all along. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s some very clear 

statistics that indicate how this province has changed 
attitudinally in the years following the 2007 election. And I 
want to talk about this specifically because this is very clearly 
the best way I think we can identify how the attitude has 
changed here. 
 
Saskatchewan is known as an exporting province. Most of our 
GDP [gross domestic product] actually comes from exporting 
products around the world, but what has happened since 2007 is 
that our growth in exports has been not just marginal, not just 
steady, but exponential, frankly. 
 
[12:00] 
 
And as most people know, the United States is Saskatchewan’s 
largest trading partner. But in the seven years from 2007 to 
2014, Saskatchewan’s trade with the United States saw an 89 
per cent increase. We went from $12 billion in sales to the US 
in 2007 to $22.7 billion in 2014 — 89 per cent increase. That’s 
unheard of, and that is clearly a statistic that is representative of 
the new attitude that has enveloped Saskatchewan. 
 
China. This is an interesting story, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because China has become Saskatchewan’s second-largest 
trading partner. We have seen a 231 per cent increase in sales to 
China since 2007 — 231 per cent increase. The real interesting 
part of that discussion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that when 
Premier Roy Romanow was asked if he would consider going 
to China on a trade mission, he refused to participate with the 
federal government and many of their partners because there 
was no clear benefit to the province of Saskatchewan. He 
wouldn’t go. He couldn’t see the potential that might arise from 
that visit, and now China has become our second-largest trading 
partner. 
 
Number three is India with an 86 per cent increase in sales. We 
had the High Commissioner from India visiting us just in the 
last couple of days and they’re so optimistic about their 
relationship with Saskatchewan and Canada as a whole, and 
they anticipate doing much more business with us. The 
interesting thing about India is that within the next 25 years it 
will become the most populous nation on Earth. And the trade 
potential and the economic development opportunities dealing 
with India present a real opportunity for this province in its own 
right. And really, the bulk of our sales to India had been in 
agricultural products: peas and lentils and wheat and canola, 
both seed and oil. And now we’re starting to look at other 
manufactured goods and other potentialities that will make that 
trade option and opportunity that much greater. 
 
You know, when the NDP talked about twinning the highways 
west from Gull Lake to the Alberta border, they had about a 
15-year schedule to get that built. It was never going to happen. 
But when Lee Morrison, the Reform MP [Member of 
Parliament] from Cypress Hills-Grasslands, heard that, he said 
he was afraid that it would be three lanes west and one lane 
east. And at that time the people of the western part of the 
province were evacuating and moving to Alberta because there 
was no opportunity in Saskatchewan. 
 
Early in my elected career I went to the school in Burstall and 
did an informal poll of the grade 12 class. There wasn’t a single 
young person in that class who said that he or she were going to 



November 19, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7741 

stay in Saskatchewan to pursue their education or a career. 
Every one of those young people were heading to Alberta. That 
was replicated in class after class after class in small-town 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that saying, and I think of my colleague 
from . . . One of the people who spoke earlier said that, you 
know, there was a saying at that time that the last person out of 
the province, turn out the lights. Hey, we lived with that reality 
in small-town Saskatchewan: schools being closed on a regular 
basis, 176 of them under the NDP. 
 
Let me tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, how bleak the outlook 
was for the province and the young people of this province 
under that former government. Jim Melenchuk was the minister 
of Education and stood at his desk right there and said that they 
had a plan that foresaw 30,000 less students in the public school 
system in the next 10 years. They were predicting a loss of 
30,000 young people in 10 years. It’s no wonder they had to 
close schools, and they weren’t concerned about it because we 
had members stand saying, more left for the rest of us. Good for 
those people who go. There’s more left for the rest of us. That is 
an attitude of defeatism if I ever heard it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is all kinds of opportunity in this 
great province of Saskatchewan, and we’re seeing it more and 
more because the Government of Saskatchewan believes in the 
people of this province and believes in their ability to contribute 
in tremendous ways, both economically and socially, and that 
our growth opportunities are unlimited. The sky is the limit. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve had a clear indication of how 
attitude informs the actions and the activities of people. And 
since the government has changed, we have seen numbers of 
people moving into Saskatchewan, never seen before outside of 
possibly the 1920s when so many people moved to 
Saskatchewan to take advantage of settlement and free land 
opportunities. But in the intervening years, for the most part our 
population was leaving. 
 
Since the Saskatchewan Party has become the government of 
the day and helped recharge and renew that optimism, we have 
seen a net increase of something like 60,000 people coming into 
the province. Much of that is just simply driven by attitude. And 
if you’re in a jurisdiction where your leadership doesn’t believe 
in your future, when your leadership won’t unfetter the 
opportunities and potentialities that exist, people tend to leave. 
And that’s what happened under the previous government. 
 
You know, it was so disturbing when we as an opposition 
projected a growth plan of 1 per cent. You know, just the 
national average, 1 per cent of growth per year. And we were 
told by an NDP member that sat on this side at that time that 
that was so wild and absurd it was impossible to achieve; it just 
wasn’t possible to do. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve 
exceeded that substantially and now Saskatchewan is home to 
record numbers of people once again. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a topic that bears real reflection. 
We are not congratulating ourselves. This isn’t an exercise of 
patting ourselves on the back. This is an exercise of recognizing 
the people of this province have flourished under this 
government and the conditions we’ve set in place, and we are 

happy to continue to provide those opportunities for the people 
of this province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s certainly my pleasure to enter into a discussion here today. 
And it’s certainly nice as well to see members across the way 
that maybe that was one of their last speeches in this Assembly. 
And regardless of political stripes or debate over issues, and 
being sometimes probably on different sides of issues, certainly 
I think those three members have served honourably in this 
Assembly, and it’s nice for them to enter in here today in that 
debate. 
 
[Applause] 
 
I don’t know if they’re going to be clapping in a few minutes, 
Mr. Speaker, but I think, you know, I think that we have a lot of 
opportunity in this province, Mr. Speaker. It’s been provided by 
the resources within this province, the hard work of 
Saskatchewan people, the exceptional entrepreneurs within this 
province, the organizations that have been built that serve 
within our communities, the Crown corporations that have been 
built within this province, Mr. Speaker. We have a lot of 
potential in this province, really because of Saskatchewan 
people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And my speech, I know many of them have been focused 
maybe on, you know, elections past or different periods of time 
in Saskatchewan’s history, Mr. Speaker. I really do want to 
focus on the future, Mr. Speaker, as well on really what matters 
to Saskatchewan families today all across our fine province. 
And I think ultimately that’s what’s most important to them, 
Mr. Speaker. So I’m not going to . . . 
 
Although the speech was well done by the member from 
Athabasca who laid down the facts that are certainly facts, that 
are ones that Saskatchewan people remember or many 
Saskatchewan people remember, the hard realities and impacts 
of the period of the 1980s. I’m not going to get into the period 
that was discussed as much by members opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
But what I do know, Mr. Speaker, is we have day in, day out in 
this province, workers and businesses doing their part to make 
this province such a great place. We have community 
organizations and settlement groups, Mr. Speaker, doing all that 
they can to make this a great place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I guess what they deserve or what I believe they deserve is 
a government that respects the work they do, that understands 
the reality of everyday families and communities across 
Saskatchewan, that focuses on what matters and that moves the 
yardsticks where it matters, Mr. Speaker. We have tremendous 
opportunity in this province to be able to deliver incredible 
opportunity for young people, affordability for families, 
security and dignity for seniors, Mr. Speaker. But to do so, we 
have to change some of the decisions that we see right now that 
permeate government. 
 
Unfortunately what we see day in, day out from a government 
that’s grown long in its tooth, Mr. Speaker, that presides with a 
large majority, is a government that seems to have fallen out of 



7742 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2015 

touch with Saskatchewan people. I hear many people tell me, 
Mr. Speaker, that a government that has changed in their time in 
office, Mr. Speaker, a government that no longer seems to get 
the reality of everyday families and some of the pressures that 
they’re facing, Mr. Speaker, and when we think of some of 
those pressures, certainly they’re paramount when we look at 
cost of living, Mr. Speaker, families working harder and harder 
to certainly make ends meet and to build the future for their 
families that they all deserve, Mr. Speaker. But they also look 
to government to make sure that government’s holding up its 
end of the bargain. 
 
Too often, Mr. Speaker, we see an approach from the current 
Premier and cabinet, Mr. Speaker, the current government, the 
Sask Party, of this self-congratulatory sort of boosting and 
boasting, Mr. Speaker. And don’t get me wrong. Anyone should 
be proud of accomplishments that are in the interests of people, 
Mr. Speaker. But far too often we see a government tripping 
over itself to pat itself on the back and really to focus on its own 
political self-interest, if you will, Mr. Speaker, instead of what 
really matters to Saskatchewan people. Not the public’s interest. 
 
You know, we’re going to be committed, Mr. Speaker, to 
addressing the neglect that we see in classrooms across 
Saskatchewan under this government. This government’s been 
provided a historic opportunity with record revenues, but it’s 
failed to fund classrooms all across Saskatchewan. Right now 
we have school divisions that have new students after new 
students coming into classrooms every day, which provides a 
tremendous opportunity for all of us in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. But the funding has been cut to support those students 
coming into classrooms, and we see classrooms that are 
bursting at the seams. We see supports that have been cut, Mr. 
Speaker. And that limits the opportunity not just of those young 
people and the families that it directly impacts, but it impacts all 
of us, Mr. Speaker, and the future of Saskatchewan 
economically, socially, and otherwise, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We see a government that spins and boasts on apparent 
accomplishments in health care but is disregarding the reality 
on so many fronts: ER waits that are far, far too long, Mr. 
Speaker, and far too often going in the wrong directions; 
wait-lists for specialists, Mr. Speaker, that are absolutely 
unacceptable; and surgical waits, Mr. Speaker, that are on the 
rise once again, Mr. Speaker, which is really the wrong way to 
go. 
 
We see a government that spends money hand over fist on big, 
misplaced priorities, Mr. Speaker, not managing the resources 
of the public in a way that’s prudent, Mr. Speaker, piling on 
debt for the next generation, Mr. Speaker, passing along costs to 
current families. 
 
And a prime example of that, Mr. Speaker, is the whole carbon 
capture debacle that we see, Mr. Speaker, where we see a 
government that, once we had leaked documents that came 
forward, was that this government was briefed about the 
high-risk nature of this experiment, Mr. Speaker, as well as the 
high cost to it, as well as the uncertainty to it, Mr. Speaker. That 
government went out without caution, Mr. Speaker, and spent 
$1.5 billion of Saskatchewan people’s money, sticking 
Saskatchewan people with massive power bill hikes across this 
province, adding on top of that to the smart meter mess and the 

massive costs created by this government with similar types of 
reckless decisions, Mr. Speaker, and then didn’t share the facts 
with Saskatchewan people or the world, Mr. Speaker, and 
continued to spend big money, public’s money, taxpayers’ 
money, Mr. Speaker, to tell a story that just wasn’t accurate. 
 
You know, Saskatchewan people know that there’s tremendous 
opportunity in this province, but they also know that there’s 
challenges that families are facing. We’re forward looking. 
We’re going to continue to work to develop a plan that’s going 
to ensure the bright future and the prosperity that every family 
deserves in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I certainly won’t support a motion that was put forward here 
today to simply . . . really that’s out of touch, that 
self-congratulates and boasts, Mr. Speaker, instead of moving 
the yardsticks where it really matters in the lives of 
Saskatchewan families all across Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Time for debate has expired. 
Questions. I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 
[12:15) 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the last time the NDP was in government, they sat idly 
by and GHG [greenhouse gas] emissions rose by 17 per cent in 
this province. In more recent times, members opposite have 
regularly stood in this House and called for real action on 
climate change, only to stubbornly dismiss the actions our 
government has taken to reduce carbon emissions produced as a 
result of power generation in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the member from Saskatoon 
Centre: will you take this opportunity to present to the people of 
Saskatchewan your party’s plan to reduce GHG gas emissions, 
or does the NDP have nothing more than rhetoric to offer when 
it comes to the environment? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 
opportunity to get up and answer that question. And you know, 
I find it interesting to come from a member from Estevan who 
we now know . . . I just looked at the report about the food bank 
usage in Estevan, and this is what the Salvation Army major has 
to say — up 40 per cent. And she’s very happy about the 
record. 
 
But I’ll talk about the greenhouse gas emission, and clean . . . 
our plan forward. We put forward a bill last spring, and I’m 
sure glad to see the Premier’s lifting some of the numbers from 
that. That’s very nice. That’s very good. So we’re very proud of 
our plan. I would suggest the member from Estevan should do 
her homework and not read her statements that have been 
poorly written . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Okay. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — I’m going to ask my question to the 
member from Melville-Saltcoats because I like how he gets up 



November 19, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7743 

and he certainly gives it back. But my question to the member: 
certainly we see some really massive overruns with taxpayers’ 
money here recently, over $1 billion on a bypass with a 
European company that’s engaged, Mr. Speaker. We see $1.5 
billion and counting on an experiment that’s adding massively 
to the costs, the power bills of Saskatchewan people. Add that 
to the smart meters, Mr. Speaker. I guess my question to the 
member: why do Saskatchewan people, why should they have 
to pick up the tab for Sask Party mistakes? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I 
appreciate the opportunity and the question from the member 
opposite. What he neglected to talk about was the 58 new 
schools that the members on this side of the House are building. 
What he forgot to mention was the new Moose Jaw hospital in 
Moose Jaw that just opened last week, I believe it was; new 
hospital in North Battleford, Mr. Speaker — that’s 
infrastructure — and all the new facilities and infrastructure and 
highways, and all the other things that are happening in the 
province. 
 
It’s funny how the members opposite neglect to talk about all 
the good things that are happening in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, the Opposition Leader has 
been the NDP’s leader for two and a half years. That’s two and 
a half years without a plan. While the Opposition Leader signed 
off on the tree book in 2011, it’s nowhere to be seen. In fact, 
Mr. Speaker, the tree book is nowhere to be found. It’s even 
been removed from the NDP website. Mr. Speaker, my question 
to the member from Regina Rosemont: what is your plan? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, we 
heard speeches about the 1990s and 1970s, Mr. Speaker. Now 
we hear a debate about the last election, Mr. Speaker. What 
we’re going to be focused on, Mr. Speaker, is making 
improvements where they count for Saskatchewan families, Mr. 
Speaker. The plans that we’ve laid out in education, the plans 
providing protection and dignity for seniors, Mr. Speaker, the 
Act around renewable energy and affordable power for 
Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, and about fixing 
procurement, Mr. Speaker, where we had a government that 
dismissed the issue and delayed action, Mr. Speaker, all while 
doling out massive contracts, Mr. Speaker, to companies all 
around the world, all while not providing fairness or best value 
for Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the member 
from Melville-Saltcoats, as he can’t wait to get out of Dodge. 
Based on the fact that he’s left record debt through things like 

the lean program, as my colleague mentioned, the Regina 
bypass, the one and a half billion dollar bill that you’re leaving 
SaskPower, Mr. Speaker, I guess the question I would have for 
the member from Melville-Saltcoats: why won’t you answer the 
question about the debt you’re leaving behind, as you can’t wait 
to get out of Dodge? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’m glad 
to have another opportunity to get up today because I actually 
didn’t get all my material in that I wanted to talk about when I 
was giving my speech. The one thing I wanted to talk about was 
the 25 per cent in the polls that the NDP are at right now. Even 
under Mr. Lingenfelter, he couldn’t see that big of a drop when 
he was the leader of the opposition. So maybe the members 
opposite should be out knocking some more doors instead of 
sitting in here asking me questions. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 
Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
people of Saskatchewan know that although the NDP have 
changed their logo, their tag line, and probably their colour 
shades a little bit, but they’re really still the same old NDP. 
Their tired, outdated ideology saw a decline in this province for 
a generation and kept the province from reaching its full 
potential, whereas our government, the Government of 
Saskatchewan, is now leading the country in economic growth. 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the member from Saskatoon 
Centre: why would people in Saskatchewan vote for a party that 
has no vision and no plan? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — I find this very interesting from the member 
from Moose Jaw. I mean I really have to say to the people who 
write these questions, you know, what they should be really 
writing is a Throne Speech. We would have really appreciated a 
Throne Speech. We come back here for 25 days, and we have 
no idea what this government’s plan is. We get bills that are 
copies of our ideas, but here we have a member who will stand 
up, ask a question. Our question is, where is the Throne 
Speech? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 
was interesting yesterday that, the Premier couldn’t help 
himself, but he had to sort of sneak a preview, an announcement 
that’s coming on Monday where this government is finally 
committing to having a 50 per cent mix of renewable power. 
 
I’m always bothered by the fact that this government’s had five 
Environment ministers who have promised 20 per cent 
reduction in greenhouse gas emissions in the last eight years, 
and we’ve seen no reductions. But we have the minister giving 
advanced notice of this promise. Remarkably, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that’s the same content that was in our plan, the NDP 



7744 Saskatchewan Hansard November 19, 2015 

plan for reducing greenhouse gas emissions. To the member 
from Kelvington: does she support the Premier’s use of our 
plan? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, first of all I should tell you that I 
support everything our Premier does because he’s working in 
contact with a caucus that’s working well together. 
 
And the other thing that the members opposite should know is 
that at least we’re giving you a hint. On the other side of the 
House, we have no idea what these members stand for, neither 
do the constituents who are going into the next election. People 
don’t have a clue what you stand for. And our government is 
open and accountable, and I’m proud of them. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, there were some dark days 
for those unfortunate to have disabilities during the NDP’s 16 
years in government. 
 
Our government’s making Saskatchewan the best province in 
Canada for those living with disabilities. We’ve invested 2.7 
billion since 2007 on programs such as SAID [Saskatchewan 
assured income for disability]. I’d like to know from the 
member from Saskatoon Centre, what is the NDP’s plan for 
people with disabilities? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The members over 
there will know that we support SAID. We’ve said many 
positive things about SAID, and that’s a fact so we will 
continue that. 
 
But I want to know, what will they do about the kids in hotel 
rooms? I mean I find this really interesting coming from a 
member from Regina when we know that in October there were 
36 kids in hotel rooms in this city. What’s he doing about that? 
That’s an issue. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
reminded by one of the speeches opposite that it’s rare that you 
see a windmill that runs on water, and we got to see that again 
here today. But my question is to the member from Cypress 
Hills. They’ve adopted the NDP plan on renewable energy 
production. Now that’s very interesting, and we’re glad to see 
they’ve at least got, they’ve finally got a clue on that front. I 
guess my question to him is, on Tuesday after they come out 
with it full bore, is the Minister of Finance going to come along 
and take half of it back? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress 
Hills. 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s an 
interesting question. Anybody of . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Time for the 75-minute debate has 
expired. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 609 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Ms. Chartier that Bill No. 609 — The 
Residents-in-Care Bill of Rights Act be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
honour again to enter the debate on Bill 609, The 
Residents-in-Care Bill of Rights Act. I’ve had the opportunity to 
speak to this bill already, but I would like to put a few more 
comments on the record. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, that we have a seniors’ care crisis here 
in Saskatchewan. We know, Mr. Speaker, from a steady stream 
of individuals who have been willing to come to the legislature 
to share their stories, Mr. Speaker, families talking about their 
loved ones in care, and because of a lack of staffing what has 
led to neglect because of a lack of staffing, Mr. Speaker. We 
hear those stories in our offices, and not everybody is 
comfortable coming to the legislature, but I can guarantee that 
all of us in here have heard stories about seniors not receiving 
the care that they need. 
 
We have, Mr. Speaker, this government’s own CEO tour report 
from a couple years ago, that they were dragged kicking and 
screaming to actually do in the first place. And it highlighted a 
lack of proper care because of a lack of staff, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, across the province. We have the minister’s second 
CEO tour which also showed that there was no progress made, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have this government . . . the Ombudsman did a report on 
long-term care that showed that this is, the issues of quality of 
care, the challenges with quality of care are widespread. It’s not 
isolated in one community or another. It is in fact an issue that 
goes across the province where our seniors in long-term care are 
neglected, not because care workers don’t want to do their job 
well and not because they don’t have the skills and abilities, it’s 
because they don’t have time because they’re stretched so thin, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We had an opportunity last night as MLAs to meet with the 
Health Sciences Association of Saskatchewan, and I know there 
were members opposite there as well. And many of those folks 
there last night work in long-term care, are very familiar with it. 
And those in their profession who work in long-term care — 
occupational therapists, respiratory therapists, dietitians, CPAS 



November 19, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7745 

[client patient access services] assessors and coordinators — 
sharing their stories around the challenges with seniors’ care, 
but long-term care in particular, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government has buried its head in the sand and refuses to 
acknowledge that there is a seniors’ care crisis in the province. I 
would argue you can’t fix it unless you’re willing to 
acknowledge that it exists. So I wish they would take the first 
step and say, hey we have a problem here. 
 
But what this bill does, Mr. Speaker, it undoes some of the 
damage that this government caused back in 2011 when they 
cut the minimum quality of care standards that, Mr. Speaker, 
those minimum care standards in special . . . They scrapped the 
minimum care standards in special care home regulations. So 
these regulations used to require a minimum of two hours per 
day of nursing and personal care for residents but, like I said, 
this government got rid of those, and quite quietly. They didn’t 
send out a news release, Mr. Speaker. They got rid of them 
quietly, that minimum care standard. They didn’t want anyone 
to know that they were scrapping those. That two hour standard 
wasn’t close to good enough, Mr. Speaker. So what the 
government should have done is strengthened that number, not 
scrapped it and thrown in the towel, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister talks about a very lengthy document, that he says, 
oh we do have standards. Well those standards, as the 
Ombudsman has said, are very difficult to operationalize. It’s 
very hard to staff for when it comes to . . . Very good language, 
Mr. Speaker, but they’re very high level statements and really 
very difficult to put teeth to that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This bill here, it does a few things, but I think the most 
important thing it does is it would require the government to put 
back in place minimum quality of care standards to ensure that 
our seniors, our vulnerable loved ones have the care and the 
dignity that they deserve, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I was very proud to bring this bill forward. I think it sends a 
strong message to the government, that get your head out of the 
sand and start doing something about the seniors’ care crisis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have an opportunity to vote with us here 
today, and I am optimistic that they will. I know that they hear 
from their constituents that there are issues in long-term care 
facilities across this province. So I know they’ve all heard 
stories, Mr. Speaker. So I’m optimistic that they will see the 
benefit in our bill for not only the loved ones of their 
constituents but possibly their own loved ones as well, Mr. 
Speaker. So I look forward to the vote. Thank you. 
 
[12:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 
by the member for Saskatoon Riversdale that Bill No. 609, The 
Residents-in-Care Bill of Rights Act be now read the second 
time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is lost. Call in the members. 

[The division bells rang from 12:30 until 12:33.] 
 
The Speaker: — All those in favour please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 9] 
 
Broten Forbes Wotherspoon 
Vermette Belanger Chartier 
McCall Nilson Sproule 
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed please rise. 
 

[Nays — 36] 
 
Morgan Stewart Wyant 
McMorris Boyd Doherty 
Reiter Moe Huyghebaert 
Cox Docherty Campeau 
Cheveldayoff Harrison Tell 
Eagles Bjornerud Hart 
Brkich Makowsky Weekes 
Merriman Draude Wilson 
Marchuk Ross Bradshaw 
Kirsch Hutchinson Michelson 
Jurgens Steinley Young 
Tochor Elhard Phillips 
 
Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the second reading 
motion, 9; those opposed, 36. 
 
The Speaker: — The nays have it. The motion is lost. I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. 
Monday. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:36.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7721 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7721 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7721 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7721 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7722 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7722 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7722 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7732 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7732 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7722 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7722 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7722 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7723 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7723 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Treaty Edcamp Held at University of Regina 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7723 
 Saskatchewan Theatre and Film 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7723 
 Youthful Constituent Shows Determination, Commitment, and Spirit 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7723 
 Group Homes Help to Make an Inclusive Community 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7724 
 Achievements of Special Olympics Athletes 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7724 
 Global Entrepreneurship Week 
  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7724 
 Election Issues 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7725 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Carbon Capture and Storage Project 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7725 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7725 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7727 
 Statement on Sixties Scoop 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7727 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7727 
 Reports on Seniors’ Care 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7728 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7728 
 Health Care Expenditures 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7728 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7728 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Saskatchewan Refugee Intake Initiative 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7730 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7730 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 7731 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 188 — The Best Value in Procurement Act, 2015 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7731 
ROYAL ASSENT ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7731 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7732 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Performance of Government and Opposition 
  Bjornerud ...................................................................................................................................................................... 7732, 7743 



 

  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 7735, 7743 
  Draude ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7737, 7744 
  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7738, 7742 
  Elhard ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7740, 7744 
  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 7741, 7742 
  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7742 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7743 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7743 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7743 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 7744 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7744 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 609 — The Residents-in-Care Bill of Rights Act 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7744 
 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 7745 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


