






















































Hansard: April 02, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 45A  THURSDAY, APRIL 2, 2015, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6867 
 April 2, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — With leave to make a statement. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave to make a 
statement. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Apology for Remarks During Statements by Members 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was reviewing my 
member’s statement last night; I wish to withdraw and 
apologize. 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to thank the member for his 
withdrawal and apology, and that will settle the matter on the 
point of order. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning I’d like 
to introduce to you and through you to all members, two 
individuals who are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, and 
that’s Mr. Jesse Todd and Mr. Lee Todd. Jesse and Lee are 
brothers, and they’re also both representatives with the 
Saskatchewan Asbestos Disease Awareness Organization. 
 
Both have been tireless advocates for occupational health and 
safety issues in the province, especially around the area of 
asbestos. Members will recall the work around Howard’s law 
and the work that Jesse, Lee, and as well as their mom, Brenda, 
did in passing and pushing for important legislation here in the 
House. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to welcome these 
folks. 
 
And on a related note, Mr. Speaker, I also want to point out that 
Jesse Todd is our candidate in the next election in the Saskatoon 
Eastview constituency. We’re very proud to have him on the 
team, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the member opposite in welcoming Jesse Todd and his 
brother to the legislature today. I want to concur with the 
member opposite’s comments about Jesse being a tireless 
advocate and recognize the good work that Howard Willems 

had done with regard to asbestos, and I want to urge him to 
continue doing that. We have asked him to participate in our 
asbestos advisory committee, and in that regard I want to wish 
him every success. In the other endeavour that he’s taking, not 
so much. In any event, Mr. Speaker, welcome them to their 
legislature today. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to take a moment to introduce a few visitors that are seated 
in your gallery this morning. They represent organizations that 
make a vital contribution to the safety and well-being of 
Saskatchewan’s citizens and families. As you may know, the 
province is committed to more than $11 million this year for 
more than 40 community-based programs that offer support and 
care for victims of interpersonal violence and abuse. 
 
These programs provide important services, ranging from 
public education about violence and abuse to putting a safe and 
secure roof over the heads of women and children who are 
fleeing violent relationships. These organizations offer support 
to people in their time of need. 
 
With us today in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, Jo-Anne Dusel, the 
coordinator of the Provincial Association of Transition Houses 
and Services of Saskatchewan. Can you give us a wave? 
Thanks. Tracy Knutson is the coordinator at Saskatchewan 
Towards Offering Partnership Solutions to Violence, and 
Dianna Graves is the executive director for the Sexual Assault 
Services of Saskatchewan. I thank them for all of the work that 
they do, Mr. Speaker, and I would like all members to join me 
in welcoming them to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the minister in welcoming Jo-Anne Dusel, Tracy Knutson, and 
Dianna Graves to their legislature today. Thank you for all the 
work that you do, and to say thank you for all the work that you 
do in supporting women and families in dealing with some of 
the challenges around interpersonal violence, providing a safe 
shelter, but also preventing and supporting those going through 
that. So thank you for all the work that you do, and welcome to 
your legislature today. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to welcome, 
we have Arden Fiala here today with SaskFEAT [Saskatchewan 
Families for Effective Autism Treatment]. Arden is a tireless 
advocate for individuals and families and communities in terms 
of providing supports, improving supports for those who are 
living with autism spectrum disorder. Today is World Autism 
Awareness Day, so welcome Arden to her legislature here 
today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join 
with the member opposite in welcoming Arden Fiala to her 
Legislative Assembly. Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity to 



6868 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2015 

meet with Arden on a number of occasions even prior to today’s 
flag-raising. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Arden is president of SaskFEAT that does such 
great work in our province advocating on behalf of those that 
have been diagnosed on the autism spectrum, Mr. Speaker. As 
well as she’s a Saskatchewan director and the vice-president of 
Autism Society Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
She’s a tireless advocate for those, including for her daughter 
who I had an opportunity to meet with a couple of months ago. 
And she’s very, Arden’s very proud of her daughter who has 
been accepted into Sask Polytechnic in Moose Jaw into an 
engineering program. Mr. Speaker, I know she’s looking 
forward to that. And, Mr. Speaker, with that I would ask all 
members to join with me in welcoming Arden to her Legislative 
Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present 
a petition calling for greater support for education here in 
Saskatchewan. And we know that education is one of the most 
vital services this government can provide to its citizens, but 
this government has failed to deliver a long-term plan and 
vision and necessary resources to prioritize the delivery of 
educational excellence. And this government has failed to 
develop a real plan to close the Aboriginal education gap and to 
support English as additional language students, support 
community schools, and their communities and students. And 
we know, Mr. Speaker, we must build the best education system 
for today and for Saskatchewan’s future. I’d like to read the 
prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately prioritize education by laying out a 
long-term vision and plan with the necessary resources 
that provides the best quality education for Saskatchewan 
that reflects Saskatchewan’s demographic and population 
changes, that is based on proven educational best 
practices, that is developed through consultation with the 
education sector, and that builds strong educational 
infrastructure to serve students and communities long into 
the future. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from Moose 
Jaw and Estevan and other locations in the province. I do so 
present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 
again today to present petitions on behalf of concerned citizens 
as it relates to the unsafe conditions created by that government 
on Dewdney Avenue and their failure to consider the safety of 
this residential artery and those families directly impacted, their 
failure to plan the safe movement of heavy-haul trucks through 
Regina, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads as follows: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on 
Dewdney Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the 
safety and well-being of communities, families, residents, 
and users; and that those actions and plans should include 
rerouting the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial 
funding, and be developed through consultation with the 
city of Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions are signed once again by concerned residents of 
Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition in support of safe staffing 
levels in long-term care. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out 
that many aspects of long-term care are deteriorating under this 
government. They talk about how the government has removed 
the regulations requiring a minimum standard of care for 
seniors, which has resulted in neglect; and that chronic 
understaffing in long-term care facilities results in unacceptable 
conditions, including unanswered calls for help, infrequent 
bathing, and a rise in physical violence amongst residents. I’d 
like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the government to 
commit to the creation of safe staffing levels for all valued 
members of the health care team and to reintroduce actual 
numbers of staff to match the level of care needs and the 
number of residents under their care in long-term care 
facilities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed from citizens from 
Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise to present a 
petition for real action on climate change. And the individuals 
who have signed this wish to bring to our attention the 
following: that Saskatchewan produces the highest greenhouse 
gas emissions per capita in all of Canada; slashing programs 
such as the Go Green Fund and the EnerGuide for Houses 
energy-efficiency program has set the province on a backwards 
course; since 2009 the Government of Saskatchewan reduced 
climate change funding by 83 per cent. In the prayer that reads 
as follows they: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan enact a real plan and allocate appropriate 
funding in the provincial budget to tackle climate change 



April 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6869 

by reducing greenhouse gas emissions, helping families 
transition to energy-efficient homes, and encouraging 
everyone in the province to take real action to protect the 
environment. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by individuals from Saskatoon and 
Assiniboia. I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

World Autism Awareness Day 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today, April 2nd, 
we celebrate the eighth annual World Autism Awareness Day, 
which aims to shine a bright light on autism as a growing global 
health concern. Here in Saskatchewan I was pleased to be part 
of the autism awareness flag raising this morning at the 
legislature with the Health minister and members on both sides 
of the House. 
 
As part of World Autism Awareness Day, there is a global 
campaign to unite people across the globe as they celebrate 
Light It Up Blue. This important initiative helps kick off a 
month of autism awareness as iconic landmarks and venues as 
well as homes and communities light their buildings blue. 
Maybe next year even our own legislature could be involved. 
 
The goal of World Autism Awareness Day is to honour the 
millions of individuals and families around the world affected 
by autism and to share information about the importance of 
early diagnosis and early intervention. It is also an opportunity 
to celebrate the unique talents and skills of persons with autism. 
Mr. Speaker, last month Saskatoon hosted renowned animal 
expert and autism advocate, Temple Grandin. She discussed 
both the challenges and the benefits of living with autism. She 
went on to say, “I am different, not less.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing World 
Autism Awareness Day. We also need to express our gratitude 
to organizations that advocate for improved services for 
individuals living with autism spectrum disorder, their families, 
and their communities, and to those who provide those direct 
services and supports: SaskFEAT, Autism Resource Centre, 
Autism Services Saskatoon, SACL [Saskatchewan Association 
for Community Living], the SACL Family Network, and ECIP 
[early childhood intervention program], to name a few. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to join 
stakeholders and advocates from around the world in formally 
recognizing today, April 2nd, as the eighth annual World 
Autism Awareness Day. To mark this day, we have raised the 
autism awareness flag in front of our Legislative Building. 
 
Mr. Speaker, autism, more commonly understood as autism 
spectrum disorder or ASD, encompasses a wide array of 
disorders. ASD is often marked by challenges in 

communication, delayed social interaction skills, difficulties in 
motor coordination, and other physical health issues. 
 
This government is proud to provide funding to support 
enhanced autism interventions that help families as well as 
individuals affected. We are investing $7.55 million annually 
towards targeted autism supports. Mr. Speaker, in the 
2015-2016 budget, our government has also committed 
$550,000 of annual funding for the Little Tots program in 
Saskatoon. Thanks to this funding, Little Tots, which started as 
a pilot project, will now become permanent and serve as a best 
practice example for providing specialized applied behavioural 
analysis programs to preschoolers. 
 
On this very special day, Mr. Speaker, I want to remind my 
colleagues that we all have a responsibility to raise awareness, 
to provide support, and to be involved in addressing autism. I 
ask all members of the House to please join me in recognizing 
World Autism Awareness Day. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Asbestos Awareness Week 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, April 1 
to 7 is Asbestos Awareness Week, marked globally by the 
Asbestos Disease Awareness Organization. This week is a time 
to raise awareness about asbestos-related diseases. Mr. Speaker, 
asbestos is the leading cause of workplace deaths in Canada and 
it is estimated that 152,000 workers in Canada are currently 
exposed to asbestos. These figures however only account for 
the number of accepted claims and don’t include people who 
can’t prove work-related exposure. The number of people who 
have been affected by asbestos is therefore likely much higher. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a very special role here in the legislature, 
and it was incredibly encouraging to have members from both 
sides of the aisle co-operate on the creation of Howard’s law, a 
mandatory registry of public buildings. Howard’s law was 
brought forward on behalf of Howard Willems, a Saskatoon 
man who was lost to a rare form of cancer caused by inhaling 
asbestos fibres. 
 
It’s been now almost two years since Howard’s law was passed 
in the Saskatchewan legislature. Significant progress has been 
made on the registry and we urge the government to complete 
the registry. When completed, this system would be the first of 
its kind in Canada. I call on all members to recognize this week 
as a time to raise awareness about asbestos-related diseases, to 
remember those lost, and to remain vigilant in the protection of 
Saskatchewan workers and families. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

4-H Members Compete in Public Speaking Competition 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In March, the 
2015 North East Regional 4-H Public Speaking Competition 
was held at Wesmor School at Prince Albert. I had the honour 
of attending and serving as a judge at this event. 



6870 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2015 

Public speaking is an important part of the 4-H club year. All 
4-H members take part in 4-H public speaking. Mr. Speaker, the 
4-H motto is “learn to do by doing,” and by taking part in 
public speaking 4-H members learn important communication 
skills which they will find invaluable in their future endeavours. 
 
Individual 4-H clubs send members in various age divisions to 
district competitions where the best speakers earn the right to 
move on to regional competitions to compete for a spot in the 
provincial competition. This year’s Provincial 4-H Public 
Speaking Competition will be held in Swift Current on April 
11th. 
 
Representing the North East Region at the provincial 
competition will be Danika Prevost and Skyler Preston in the 
clover bud division, Jaxson Lindgren and Christina Posnikoff in 
the junior division, Ben Grassick and Kyle Kirzinger in the 
intermediate division, and Sara Grassick and Catherine Lang in 
the senior division. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 
the speakers who competed, and I would like to wish the 
winners best of luck at the provincial competition. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince 
Albert-Northcote. 
 

Legacy Award for Prince Albert Couple 
 
Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had a wonderful 
opportunity to present the 2014 Legacy Award at the Prince 
Albert Chamber of Commerce brunch on March 19th. The very 
deserving recipients of the 2014 award were Gene Kapacila and 
his wife, Doreen, for their business, Gene’s Sports Excellence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Gene has lived in Prince Albert for 61 years. He 
originally moved to the city in 1954 to work at the Imperial 
Bank of Commerce, where he met his now wife, Doreen. In 
1973, Gene and his wife started Gene’s Sports Excellence, and 
it has continued to remain one of Prince Albert’s longest 
family-owned businesses. Gene noted that with few 
family-operated businesses still running in Prince Albert, loyal 
customers and community members keep returning to his store. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Prince Albert & District Chamber of 
Commerce CEO [chief executive officer], Merle Lacert, said 
that Gene and Doreen are an example of a couple that has made 
a commitment and dedication of services to the community of 
Prince Albert. He also noted that the couple’s vast experience as 
the owners and operators of the business for more than four 
decades was ultimately why they were chosen as this year’s 
recipient. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Gene and Doreen Kapacila on winning the 2014 Legacy Award. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 

Funding for New Hepatitis Drugs 
 
Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 

announce as of April 1st our government will provide coverage 
for two new life-saving drugs for hepatitis C patients. When 
these drug therapies, Harvoni and Sovaldi, are taken 
appropriately, they can cure over 90 per cent of the people 
treated in as little as 8 to 12 weeks time. Mr. Speaker, hepatitis 
C is a viral disease that affects the liver and about 1 per cent of 
our population is affected by it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are pleased to cover these drugs that offer 
effective, simple, and fast treatment for Saskatchewan people 
with hepatitis C. These new medications provide an opportunity 
for patients to move from treatment to cure and can greatly 
improve the quality of life for those affected. Mr. Speaker, the 
Ministry of Health will list these two drugs on the 
Saskatchewan formulary as exceptional drug status benefits. 
About 1,100 qualified patients will access the coverage for the 
next three years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government will continue our overall efforts 
to lower drug costs and to negotiate the best value for new 
therapies through a pan-Canadian process. Mr. Speaker, our 
government is committed to providing our residents with better 
access to new and effective medications, and this is another 
example how we’re putting patients first. We’ll continue our 
commitment to provide better health, better value, and better 
care to Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 

Message of Easter 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is the 
Easter weekend and Christians around the world will be taking 
time to reflect on the message of Easter and how we can 
emulate that message in our own lives. 
 
Tomorrow morning is Good Friday and in churches across our 
province, country, and around the world, people will gather to 
remember the suffering, torture, and death of Jesus Christ. 
While the Friday is seen as one of sorrow and despair, a new 
day is dawning. On Sunday morning, churches again will be 
filled. This time worshippers will feel joy and thanksgiving as 
they rejoice in the message given by the angel to the women 
who went to the tomb: “He is not here; he is risen.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe the Easter message can be summed up in 
the words to us by John in his Gospel, chapter 3, verse 16: “God 
so loved that He gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever 
believes in Him should not perish, but have everlasting life.” 
 
The Easter message is a message of love, forgiveness, and hope. 
Mr. Speaker, the celebration of Easter could not come at a 
better time of the year. It is the spring season, and with spring 
we look forward to the awakening of new life. 
 
To members of this Legislative Assembly, staff working in this 
building, and to the people of Saskatchewan: have a blessed 
Easter weekend as you gather with family and friends, and 
please drive safely. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 



April 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6871 

Provision of Care and Staffing Levels in Long-Term 
Care Facilities 

 
Mr. Broten: — Yesterday we learned that a senior with 
dementia died in a Moose Jaw care facility after eating Tide 
laundry detergent pods. In a bizarre explanation, a government 
official claims that this has nothing whatsoever to do with a 
lack of proper supervision for the senior. Does the Premier 
share that view or will he admit that the care aids are right, that 
short-staffing contributed to this awful premature death? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the absence 
of the Premier I’ll answer on behalf of the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a senior vice-president of Five Hills Health 
Region did publicly report on the findings of the investigation 
and the fact that the region has made an action plan to prevent a 
similar situation in the future. Mr. Speaker, at that time the 
official had indicated that after reviewing the incident and the 
investigation, Mr. Speaker, that no issue of neglect, no issue of 
a person being unsupervised or improperly supervised, none of 
those things are evident in this incident. Mr. Speaker, I think the 
region is able to speak more . . . further on what exactly the 
investigation did in fact find, Mr. Speaker. I take the region at 
face value in terms of, this was the result of the investigation 
that the . . . this was the findings in the investigation. 
 
That being said, Mr. Speaker, this is a tragedy. This is a tragic 
situation and, Mr. Speaker, we will learn from the situation so 
that this doesn’t happen to anybody else in our care. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the action plan is simply to limit 
the number of detergent pods that are given out. Mr. Speaker, I 
think people in the province will clearly see that that is a very 
weak response to such a tragedy. 
 
Imagine a toddler, Mr. Speaker, a toddler in a licensed child 
care centre eating pods of laundry detergent and dying. Do you 
think that this government would try to argue that that has 
nothing to do with a lack of proper supervision? Absolutely not. 
So it’s appalling, Mr. Speaker, that this government is trying to 
argue that a vulnerable senior with dementia in a care facility 
eating pods of laundry detergent and dying has nothing 
whatsoever to do with a lack of proper supervision and a lack of 
staff. 
 
If there had been enough staff around to see the resident was 
wandering where it wasn’t safe, they could have stopped him 
and prevented this tragic death. How can the Premier possibly 
dispute that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Again, Mr. Speaker, in the absence of 
the Premier I’ll take that question on behalf of the government. 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that Five Hills Health Region is taking 
this incident very seriously. They’ve done a thorough 
investigation, Mr. Speaker. They notified the family 
immediately upon this incident taking place, Mr. Speaker. They 

followed all of the established protocols, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this case, in this facility, there is laundry 
facilities in each room that are available to the residents. Mr. 
Speaker, I know that the region and the facility are going to take 
precautions to ensure that proper storage takes place, that there 
aren’t an overabundance of these pods that would be available 
to somebody, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do want to be able to put on the record though 
that the Leader of the Opposition brought up his belief that it 
delivered a strategy of short-staffing by not filling shifts, 
yesterday in his questions. Mr. Speaker, in this case, in this 
facility in the last three months, a very small number of shifts 
went unfilled. The vast, vast majority, 99.5, 99.5 per cent of the 
shifts were filled by this facility, Mr. Speaker. But we’ll 
continue to ensure that we have safe procedures and safe 
protocols in place in long-term care. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I should hope that the family 
would be immediately notified. That’s a bare minimum. But 
what also is a bare minimum, Mr. Speaker, is for a government 
to realize that its actions and its policies have created a crisis in 
seniors’ care here in Saskatchewan. And we’re hearing from 
nurses. We’re hearing from care aids. We’re hearing front-line 
providers who live the daily reality throughout the province. 
And these are not isolated incidents as this government likes to 
claim. This is actually the sixth senior we’ve heard of in the last 
several months that has died as a result of neglect in seniors’ 
care because of short-staffing and the lack of minimum 
regulated care standards. 
 
Margaret Warholm, Jessie Sellwood, Lorne Rowell, Fern 
Chingos, Irene Hohne, and now this gentleman in Moose Jaw, 
and we’ve heard many other stories that haven’t been made 
public. Perhaps the government members aren’t bothered by 
these stories, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know, but they have to be. 
This is unbelievable and this is unacceptable, and it is 
heartbreaking to hear these stories, to think of these lives that 
have passed away, Mr. Speaker, so tragically. Does the Premier 
really think that these premature deaths in seniors’ care had 
nothing to do with chronic short-staffing? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, obviously we require and 
rely on the health regions to do an investigation when an 
incident takes place. Mr. Speaker, that investigation has taken 
place. In this instance, Mr. Speaker, the region has 
acknowledged that it’s a tragedy, but through their work in the 
investigation, they identified that it wasn’t an issue of being 
unsupervised or improperly supervised or an issue of neglect, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can say with all assurity that this side of the 
House, the members on this side of the House do not take these 
issues lightly. I certainly don’t as Minister of Health. Mr. 
Speaker, that is why this government, while not being perfect, 
Mr. Speaker, we have invested significant dollars in the last 
seven years, eight years now, to make enhancements to 
long-term care, to seniors’ care, Mr. Speaker. 



6872 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2015 

Mr. Speaker, we have done so on the capital side. We have 
done so on the support side. We have done so on the front-line 
side. We will be the first to admit and I will be the first to admit 
that more needs to be done, Mr. Speaker, but we take these very 
seriously and these types of incidents do guide our actions into 
the future, Mr. Speaker. So to the Leader of the Opposition, 
absolutely we take these seriously. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — But sadly, Mr. Speaker, and tragically for the 
seniors who are in care, they’re not taking actions that are 
serious. They’re not taking the steps to fix seniors’ care that we 
see. 
 
What’s important, Mr. Speaker, are the number of workers on 
the shifts at a given time, Mr. Speaker, the number of people 
that are present that can actually provide the care that is needed. 
Again, if this was a toddler who had died in a licensed child 
care facility, there is no way, there is no way that this 
government would be arguing that proper supervision and 
proper staffing isn’t a big part of the problem and a big part of 
the cause. 
 
We keep hearing about cuts, Mr. Speaker, to staff on each shift. 
And we hear about policies that, Mr. Speaker, are bringing 
short-staffing, like not filling sick time. And we hear this from 
across the province. 
 
In this year’s budget, Mr. Speaker, there was only $1 million 
for non-capital needs in seniors’ care, yet at the same time we 
see misplaced priorities. We see that this Premier has spent $3 
million on an American lobbyist. What a mix-up. What a 
tragedy to be spending dollars there when we know about the 
needs on the front lines. 
 
A vulnerable senior with dementia, he was not in a dementia 
unit. He wasn’t properly supervised, because of short-staffing. 
He ate laundry detergent pods and he died, tragically. This is 
the sixth senior that we’ve heard of publicly that has died 
prematurely in care facilities because of short-staffing. How can 
the Premier keep saying that these are isolated incidents and 
have nothing to do with staffing levels, have nothing to do with 
the need for minimum regulated care standards? 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Again, Mr. Speaker, the region did 
investigate this tragedy and reported back, Mr. Speaker, that 
they don’t believe that the issues were related to neglect or 
being unsupervised or improperly supervised, Mr. Speaker. If 
the Leader of the Opposition has further information, I know 
the region would be very interested in that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to what this government has done, 
this facility has the same number of residents that it did eight 
years ago when the NDP [New Democratic Party] were tossed 
out of office. But today what is different, Mr. Speaker, is that 
there is a 9 per cent increase in the number of staff at that same 
facility, Mr. Speaker. 
 

So if the member opposite believes that there is short-staffing 
today in Saskatchewan long-term care, I wonder what he 
thought of when his own party was the government of the day 
when there were nearly 800 fewer front-line staff working in 
long-term care for the same number of residents, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With respect to unfilled shifts, in this facility in the last three 
months there have been 8,365 shifts scheduled and 46 of those 
went unfilled, Mr. Speaker. That’s point five per cent. The vast 
majority of shifts are filled. That is the policy of the region and 
the policy of this facility. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, here’s what a registered nurse has 
told us who works at Providence: 
 

The only change we have seen in the past few years is a 
four-hour LPN position added on the evening shift in 
long-term care. This was accomplished by pulling the LPN 
from the geriatric assessment unit, replacing her with a 
CCA pulled from Maguire Centre, leaving both units not 
staffed appropriately. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these are the types of stories that come from the 
front lines. My question to the Premier: is this government 
suggesting that this nurse is not telling the truth? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again on 
behalf of . . . in the absence of the Premier, I’ll answer on behalf 
of the government. Mr. Speaker, the budget for staffing in this 
facility and in fact increasing the number of people, front-line 
staff that actually work in the facility, is up 9 per cent over the 
term of this government, Mr. Speaker. In addition to that, the 
board added 100 hours of additional care, care aid staffing after 
2007, and in 2011 they added 56 hours of nursing time, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to what in fact has also been put on 
the record, Mr. Speaker, I would like to clarify, the record of 
. . . the Leader of the Opposition said in this House yesterday 
that there was a threat that family resident council meetings 
would be cancelled, Mr. Speaker. That is not the case. The 
facility will not be losing their resident family council meetings. 
In fact it was this government that insisted that every single 
facility have one of those. The only issue that has been 
identified in the recent past, Mr. Speaker, was where employees 
should be smoking. But it was felt at the resident council 
meeting that that was more of an administration and 
management issue, and not something for the resident family 
council. So with respect to what the Leader of the Opposition 
brought up, I’m not sure what he’s referring to for meetings 
being cancelled. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, a grade 4 student in our 
province has put up a poster in his school. He’s selling 



April 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6873 

lemonade to raise money for his school. The poster says: 
 

There are a bunch of budget cuts next year and there will 
be less money to do arts and crafts, big events, and we will 
likely have fewer educational associates. There will be 
other cuts that we don’t know about yet.  

 
So this fourth grader is selling lemonade because this 
government is letting him down and his fellow students down. 
What does the Education minister have to say to this fourth 
grader? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, there has been an increase 
in each and every year to the overall operating grant for school 
divisions, over 31 per cent since November 2007. Total funding 
for pre-K to 12 [pre-kindergarten to grade 12] education is now 
nearly $2 billion. This funding is over and above our $948 
million record capital investment, and over and above the $878 
million in cumulative relief to education property tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the total budget for Education has grown by 112 
per cent since 2007. Mr. Speaker, in 2007, the budget was $943 
million, in 2014-2015, $2 billion. Mr. Speaker, there’s no cuts. 
There’s no reductions. There’s nothing taken away. And we’ll 
continue to work with the education sector to provide the best 
possible education for our students. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this Education minister 
can dismiss this fourth grader if he wants, and he can pretend 
that this lemonade sale isn’t just another sign of this 
government’s neglect of education, but perhaps he’ll listen to 
what the Chair of the Greater Saskatoon Catholic Schools says 
about this government’s decision to slash the funding enrolment 
increases, a cut of $15 million that are desperately needed. I 
quote, “But when we don’t receive the resources we need for 
those extra students, it’s a disservice to them and the future of 
our province.” 
 
Does the Education minister recognize that this government is 
doing a disservice to our students and the future of our province 
by cutting funding for enrolment increases, or does he 
stubbornly dismiss what educational leaders are saying as well? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the co-leader can say 
whatever he wants from the other side of the House but, Mr. 
Speaker, this is a government that has never ever given a 
reduction in funding for school divisions. In fact, it has gone up 
in each and every year. 
 
In 1993 and ’94, the NDP actually reduced the operating grant 
from the province. In 1995, they gave school divisions zero per 
cent. This was at a time when there was 20,000 more students 
in our education system than there are today. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re going to keep on funding education and we’re going to 
keep on funding it in an increasing manner, as opposed to the 
members opposite that continued to close schools, give zeros, 
give negatives. We’re not going in that direction. We’re going 

forward, not backwards. 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to remind members to refer to 
other members by their constituency name or their titles, not by 
some other terminology. I recognize the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that minister can get up 
and provide whatever sort of nonsense and spin he wants, but 
this cut of $15 million that supports enrolment growth doesn’t 
make any sense in our province, Mr. Speaker. The Chair of the 
Saskatoon Public School Division says, “. . . we are concerned 
that provisions to address the ongoing pressures experienced 
due to year-over-year . . . increases have been removed in this 
budget.” 
 
With the kind of record revenues this government has had and 
the draining of the rainy day fund and the debt that it’s been 
racking up, we should have some of the best schools in the 
country. But this government . . . 
 
[Applause] 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — They’re applauding their own failures in 
education, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But this government has wasted far too much on its misplaced 
priorities. Now we have educational leaders expressing major 
frustrations in a dire situation. And we have grade 4 students 
selling lemonade to try to blunt the impact of that government’s 
cuts, that government’s failures in classrooms. How can the 
Education minister possibly justify this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite talks 
about Saskatoon Catholic, four and a half per cent increase, 
more than enough to cover the costs of the collective bargaining 
agreement. Mr. Speaker, the same news release that the member 
opposite was quoting from, and I’ll quote a little bit out of it: 
“We appreciate the province made education a priority in the 
budget and we welcome the overall increase in education 
funding.” That doesn’t sound like a negative number to me, Mr. 
Speaker. That is a quote from Saskatoon Board of Education 
Chair, Ray Morrison. 
 
Then it says, it goes on to say, “The board chairs welcome 
statements from the Ministry of Education that funding 
enrolment growth will be a priority if money is available in 
mid-year.” Go on further: 
 

“Students are our top priority and we are committed to 
providing opportunities to all of our students,” Morrison 
said. “We believe in working together with the Ministry of 
Education to ensure quality learning for all [of our] 
students . . . and address the challenges resulting from our 
growing city and school enrolment.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue doing that type of thing. 
We’re not going to go ahead and cancel schools, close schools, 
and do the things that the members opposite did. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 



6874 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2015 

Besnard Lake Facility Evacuation 
 
Mr. Vermette: — The Besnard Lake Correctional Camp was 
closed last year because of a kitchen fire, but the renovations 
were completed in the fall. The camp was to reopen yesterday, 
but this government is keeping it closed for at least another six 
months. To the minister: why? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Besnard Lake 
camp is a reduced custody adult male facility located 1.5 hours 
north of La Ronge. In June 2014 a fire occurred in the laundry 
room of the facility which of course forced the evacuation of 
the offenders and the staff. Repairs to Besnard have been 
completed and this facility will open in the fall of 2015. 
 
The decision was taken to delay reopening to allow for officials 
to study Besnard and the programming as a part of a wider 
strategy of revitalizing our custody facilities across the 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — The male inmates who should be at the 
Besnard Lake camp are now crammed into the gym of the Pine 
Grove women’s centre. This is not helpful to prepare them for 
release and it is a safety issue and could be a matter of life and 
death. To the minister: how can she justify extending this for at 
least six more months? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, community safety is the 
number one priority for this ministry. In our custody facilities, 
Mr. Speaker, this means ensuring the safety and the security of 
the staff, offenders, and members of the public who may be 
visiting the centres. We are able to manage the significant 
counts with our current infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. The 
offenders that were in Besnard camp are being housed 
appropriately and effectively, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Over and over again that minister has shown 
that she does not know her file, and she has had to change plans 
over and over because she did not do her homework. Will she 
admit that keeping Besnard Lake closed is a mistake and will 
she reverse that decision today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, the answer is no. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

Provincial Budget and Public Debt 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
government doesn’t want to talk about the piles and piles of 

debt that it’s been adding. The media asked the member for 
Prince Albert Northcote about the Sask Party increasing the 
debt by billions of dollars, and here’s what she said, “. . . your 
question is increasing the debt. Now you’re getting into details 
here.” The paper printed that quote and then a Sask Party 
operative named Al Jurgens told the paper that this was an 
“ISIS style attack.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s way over the top and it’s disgusting. To the 
Deputy Premier: does the Saskatchewan Party government 
really think that it should not have to answer basic questions 
about the debt going up under his and their watch? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m sure the member opposite realizes that this is the second 
year of a summary financial budget. This is the second year that 
we’ve followed the recommendation of the Provincial Auditor. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can point out that in the budget documents, 
very clearly on page 76, there is something called the schedule 
of public debt, Mr. Speaker, all of the debt that the province of 
Saskatchewan has, whether it’s self-supported debt which is the 
debt of the Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. Crown 
corporations debt has been increasing because infrastructure 
building needs to be continued, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So as a result of that, Mr. Speaker, you can see on that page the 
complete list of public debt. You can also see, Mr. Speaker, that 
the debt that we inherited back in 2007, which is referred to as 
the operational debt, was $6.8 billion and today, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s $3.8 billion. 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I know that the Finance 
minister’s budget is absolutely indefensible. And it’s shameful 
that the Saskatchewan Party is adding so much debt, Mr. 
Speaker. But government MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] should be able to answer basic questions about the 
debt going up under the Sask Party. Governments need to be 
held accountable for their actions. It’s absolutely disgusting to 
say a journalist asking questions about debt and then posting a 
transcript, that this is an ISIS [The Islamic State of Iraq and 
Syria]-style attack. 
 
To the Deputy Premier: does he agree that governments need to 
be accountable for their actions like increasing the debt? And 
does he agree that it’s disgusting to compare journalism to 
terrorism? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, my job as Minister of Finance and our job as 
government is to disclose to the people of Saskatchewan all of 
the numbers, all of the accounting, and that is why we have 
moved to a summary financial statement, Mr. Speaker. The 
budget is there. The budget is there for the member opposite to 
review. 
 



April 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6875 

I note, Mr. Speaker, that a lot of material is published in the 
Public Accounts documents. And it’s interesting to note 
because the member opposite talks about, you know, the debt 
increase. And I want to point out to him that in the summary . . . 
the summaries have always been contained in the Public 
Accounts. Mr. Speaker, the last full year of the NDP, 
2006-2007, the debt of the . . . the public debt of the province 
was $11.035 billion, Mr. Speaker. $11 billion. 
 
I want him to recognize that, Mr. Speaker, because we have 
moved forward with construction in Crowns. We’ve moved 
forward with construction of 45 schools, as the Minister of 
Education announced, Mr. Speaker, over a period of time. And 
we’re moving forward with 18 more schools. We’re moving 
forward with replacing the North Battleford hospital, a facility 
that the NDP should have replaced 20 years ago. 
 

TABLING OF COMMUNICATION 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I have received a 
letter from the Lieutenant Governor which states: 
 

I hereby inform the Assembly of the membership of the 
Board of Internal Economy, effective March 25th, 2015: 
 

Hon. Dan D’Autremont, Chair 
Hon. Kevin Doherty (executive council nominee) 
Hon. Jeremy Harrison (executive council nominee) 
Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff (government caucus nominee) 
Doreen Eagles, MLA (government caucus nominee) 
David Forbes, MLA (opposition caucus nominee) 
Warren McCall, MLA (opposition caucus nominee) 

 
Yours sincerely, 
 
Vaughn Solomon Schofield 
Lieutenant Governor 
Province of Saskatchewan 

 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 817 through 906. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered responses 
to questions 817 through 906. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Federal Government Bill C-51 and Provincial Budget 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour and a 
pleasure to rise in the debate today, an important one as we’ve 
come to realize that we are, as Canadians, in a very challenging 
world that now tragically includes terrorism. And this is a 
significant shift and has been over a few years. But of course, 
no one in Canada can deny the tragic events of last October 

with the deaths of Warrant Officer Patrice Vincent and Corporal 
Nathan Cirillo. 
 
It is clear though that there are many different paths forward as 
we tackle this issue and we look at how we can serve our 
communities, our country, and of course serve as role models in 
the world. Now the challenge for all Canadians and for our 
governments, and I include the Saskatchewan legislature and 
the Government of Saskatchewan, is how do we preserve the 
Saskatchewan and the Canada that we know and cherish and, at 
the same time, rise to the challenge of preserving safety for our 
communities. And this is no small thing because we know, we 
look to our past and we think about how Canada was perceived 
in the world as a leader when it came to human rights and a 
place that valued human rights and was the place that many 
people would seek to come to. 
 
Now the federal Conservative Bill C-51 does not meet this test. 
This is why I and my colleagues on this side of the House — 
and I actually hope both sides of this House — will support my 
motion that we express grave concerns about the federal 
government’s Bill C-51 because its terms unreasonably infringe 
upon the freedoms of Saskatchewan people and all Canadians, 
it lacks appropriate parliamentary oversight, and it undermines 
the integrity of our democracy. Now, Mr. Speaker, I will at the 
end of my remarks again read the full motion into the record 
and hand the motion in to the Clerks. 
 
I, along with many Canadians, have been watching the recent 
activities in Ottawa regarding Bill C-51 with much 
apprehension. And you know, at first, Mr. Speaker, many 
Canadians, and it was shown by the polls, supported the bill 
because it’s something that really many people are thinking a 
lot about these days, and so the polls were that people felt that 
we needed to do something. 
 
But when the details in this omnibus bill — and I understand 
that there are some five different bills really bundled together 
— really became apparent, it was clear that it was not from the 
kind of Canada that we’ve come to love and cherish. And this is 
truly unfortunate that again the Harper government would tend 
to bundle these bills together as an omnibus bill. But we are left 
to wonder, is this bill fearmongering or worse? Is it about 
politicking for the next federal election? Clearly there are better 
paths forward to meet the public demand for security in our 
communities, our province, our country, and in fact the world. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about two stories that are 
really meaningful, and they speak to me about how wonderful 
Canada truly can be and how wonderful our province is when 
we are at our best. And the first is about a meeting that my 
colleague from Nutana and I attended on Remembrance Day 
long weekend at Station 20 West in 2012. It was a teach-in 
about another Harper omnibus bill. This one was Bill C-45, the 
navigational waters Act, but really it was much more than that 
and what was happening there. 
 
But four amazing women from Saskatoon in this province 
organized this group, and then something, something very 
special happened. A special energy amongst the Aboriginal 
community and its allies morphed into Idle No More. And that 
winter was a very special winter as groups across Canada, in 
fact around the world, they danced, they met and protested and 



6876 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2015 

engaged in civil disobedience and continue to do so, Mr. 
Speaker. But I wonder if that could happen today with Bill 51. I 
don’t think so. The chill that this bill creates throughout the 
country is something that we should be, we should be 
challenging. 
 
And the second story is one of Zarqa Nawaz, no stranger to this 
city or this building. In fact we know that Zarqa was here in 
December 4th, meeting with the government side. But I listened 
to her testimony on Bill 51 on March 26th, just last week. And 
she was talking about it, and she’s an amazing storyteller. It was 
a very personal narrative about why she feels so strongly about 
being identified as a Canadian. She was in Paris and apparently 
a friend of hers asked her and found it really odd that she 
identified more as a Canadian than as a Muslim. And then she 
thought that was a strange question because it was just natural 
to her. 
 
She was born and lived until five in the city of Liverpool in 
England, but the family came over here. Her dad actually 
helped build the CN Tower as an engineer, and then they 
moved out here. And talked about what really concerns her 
about Bill 51. She says it will tear at the fabric of what it means 
to be Canadian. And her story from being a child in Liverpool 
and coming to Canada is one that we all lived with because, 
except for the people here in this House who are indigenous, 
First Nations, the rest of us have come as immigrants. And she 
makes that point. She makes that point. It’s a very important 
point, that we are all, except for the indigenous folks, really 
immigrants. 
 
But she’s deeply concerned about Islamic-phobic potential in 
the sentiments that are behind Bill C-51. Those are powerful 
unique experience about how our world can change, but could 
they under Bill 51? This is really, really the concern. 
 
And you know, and as I said, in fact Zarqa was here, and many 
members of the Islam community came here on December 4th 
and, I understand, met with the government side. In fact we 
introduced them in the House. They were introduced in the 
House on December 4th. And then the news story in the 
Leader-Post talked about Muslims being proactive in crisis 
intervention and how they really feel strongly. The Muslims 
feel very strongly about this issue as well, as we all do. But 
there are, as I said, many paths to restoring security and safety 
in our communities. But Bill 51 really oversteps this, and I may 
go back and talk a little bit about this further on. But there are 
solutions, there are solutions, but Bill C-51 is not the one. 
 
So we talk about the serious work in our communities regarding 
de-radicalization and strengthening mental health services for 
youth and young adults because what we’ve seen, especially in 
the situation in October, whether it’s radicalization and the fact 
that the lone wolf attacks really speak to the need for mental 
health services. While there are many deficiencies in Bill C-51, 
and we know that there were last-minute amendments, but 
clearly it was too little, too late, and how they really didn’t 
address the issue of oversight, didn’t address the issue of 
privacy rights, and the general language around terrorism really 
is a cause for concern. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that 45 out of 49 witnesses called for 
significant changes to this legislation, criticizing the lack of 

parliamentary oversight for CSIS [Canadian Security 
Intelligence Service], lack of resources for addressing 
radicalization, the wide-ranging and dangerous provisions that 
criminalize the promotion of terrorism, when they’ve used the 
word generally. 
 
And the people that have opposed Bill C-51 — and I know my 
colleagues on this side of the House will speak more 
specifically about this — but we know National Chief Perry 
Bellegarde of the Assembly of First Nations called for this bill 
to be thrown out. Former prime ministers Chrétien, Martin, 
Clark, and Turner also called for the bill to be turned out. The 
Canadian Bar Association, Roy Romanow, Ed Broadbent, 
Zarqa Nawaz, Amnesty International, the Canadian Civil 
Liberties Association, the Canadian Muslim Lawyers 
Association, and the National Council of Canadian Muslims 
have all called for the end of Bill C-51. 
 
And this is because they see real problems. They see real 
problems with this. And one includes the fact that, one, is that 
C-51 includes a clause that makes it an offence to promote 
terrorism in general. And such vague language has the potential 
to chill freedom of expression, and that really is a serious 
concern for Aboriginal activists, environmentalists, civil 
libertarians, and others that the government disagrees with, who 
may actually be labelled by the federal government as terrorists. 
 
And so this is a real issue. And again, I’ve been reading the 
Hansard from Ottawa, and the whole discussion around 
oversight for CSIS versus review. The government will say that 
it actually has oversight, but actually it doesn’t have oversight. 
It has review. And we know that the process now is actually 
flawed. In fact we know that former Premier Romanow’s. . . 
[inaudible] . . . identified significant deficiencies in the current 
review process. 
 
[11:00] 
 
But there is a difference between oversight, ongoing oversight 
like there is in the UK [United Kingdom] or the US [United 
States]. We know they have a much rigorous process for 
oversight that involves the parliamentary offices. And this is not 
the case now, that the current review process is appointees from 
the Prime Minister and actually reviews issues after the fact. 
And this is a real, real problem. 
 
So we have some real concerns, and we ask that the Sask Party 
really should stand up to the Conservatives and Liberals and 
oppose this bill because this does not make Canadians safer or 
does it reduce the threat of terrorism. 
 
Now we know that we really want to do what we can to make 
our communities safer, and we really want to make sure that 
really what we want is legislation that is not designed to create 
fear and pit Canadians against each other. Instead of uniting all 
of Saskatchewan people, Muslims and non-Muslims, the 
Conservatives really in many ways have chosen to stoke fear 
and stereotypes about Muslims that divide people. 
 
And we see this again, how this government is ramming 
through another piece of legislation. The federal government is 
ramming through Bill C-51 through parliament and then 
committee this week — I understand it may be in the Senate 



April 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6877 

today — without really proper debate. And you know, and as 
I’ve said, as Canadians become more and more aware of what 
C-51 actually does, we know the support for it is actually 
declining. We’ve seen that in recent polls and the letters and 
calls that we know that we’ve been getting. 
 
I want to read a bit about what Romanow and Broadbent had 
said in their submission, and they say: 
 

Terrorism is a threat throughout the world, including 
Canada. We cannot adopt a passive attitude toward it. We 
must invest in discovering terrorist threats and in stopping 
them. But national security also means defending our 
democracy, and that depends on holding the loyalty of 
citizens and maintaining their confidence in a just and 
stable government. This requires tolerance for diverse 
opinions, respect for personal integrity and timely and 
effective accountability for governmental conduct, 
including security operations. Shortchanging these will 
only weaken our strength as a nation — and our security. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I think this quote says it all, really. We have to do 
something, and we are saying and nobody at the federal level is 
saying, stop; don’t do anything. But people are putting forward 
reasonable solutions to this challenge that we have in Canada. 
We’re all part of this global community and we must do 
something about terrorism, but this Bill C-51 actually goes too 
far and it changes the Canada that we have come to really 
appreciate. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about some of the 
things that have given us hope. You know, it’s interesting. I just 
want to say that as we look around the world, clearly we are not 
an island to ourselves. And I just think about the Nigerian 
election that just happened this past weekend and what 
happened there where we saw . . . And everybody was 
wondering how that would happen in terms of they knew the 
election was going to be very close, the election in Nigeria was 
going to be very close. 
 
And this is a quote from The Globe and Mail: “It was a historic 
moment, heralding a new era here. Mr. Jonathan became the 
first Nigerian leader . . . to accept democratic defeat . . .” This is 
very significant, Mr. Speaker. There are ways to respect the 
democratic processes and our rights that we hold near and dear. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I would like to read into the record the 
motion: 
 

That this Assembly expresses grave concerns about the 
federal government’s Bill C-51 because its terms 
unreasonably infringe upon the freedoms of Saskatchewan 
people and all Canadians, it lacks appropriate 
parliamentary oversight, and it undermines the integrity of 
our democracy. 

 
I do so move. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Centre: 
 

That this Assembly expresses grave concerns about the 
federal government’s Bill C-51 because its terms 

unreasonably infringe upon the freedoms of Saskatchewan 
people and all Canadians, it lacks appropriate 
parliamentary oversight, and it undermines the integrity of 
our democracy. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased and more than a little surprised in this debate this 
morning. I’m surprised that after two weeks, just after two 
weeks after the most important document that the province of 
Saskatchewan and the Government of Saskatchewan puts out, 
the provincial budget, here we are standing this morning, 
talking to a NDP motion about a federal piece of legislation. I 
suppose I’m to assume that there’s nothing in the budget or 
estimates that the NDP could find fault with, so they had to go 
hunting like an Easter hunt all across the country to find 
something. Clearly our provincial NDP still do not have a plan 
and are now looking to their federal counterparts for a little 
inspiration. You know, in my mind that’s a real injustice to their 
constituency but, Mr. Speaker, because it is the motion, as 
confusing as it is, I will speak to it. 
 
Personally, and I want to emphasize personally, I want the laws 
governing terrorism in our country strengthened so that the 
security of our beloved Canada is increased. I want to watch the 
news in the evening and see that a terrorist is jailed before 
innocents are killed. I’ve had the opportunity in the last 24 
hours to talk to some who work in security, some who sit on 
police commissions. They want either the amended C-51 that 
was changed yesterday or a bill that’s very, very similar to it. 
 
At one point, I was Chair of the police commission in Melfort. 
And I remember asking the constable, the fact that a lot of 
people in Melfort knew where the drug houses were, why didn’t 
the police raid them? And the constable told me that there is so 
much background work that has to be done in order to make, 
get a search warrant, that by the time they get it, the people are 
gone. Another person that I talked to that I would call a security 
expert told me that often it would take up to 80 pages of 
information to get a search warrant of people they suspect to be 
drug dealers. There comes a point where we are protecting the 
wrong people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last October 22nd when terrorism struck in the 
Tomb of the Unknown Soldier on Parliament Hill, our security 
was shaken from sea to sea to sea. And that day I looked at the 
Saskatchewan legislature, and in the legislature it was very 
unique that day. It was the Throne Speech. We had 51 
representatives from various countries around the world in the 
gallery that day. We had leaders of the municipal governments 
from right across the province. We had judges from our judicial 
system, ceremonial guard, business and labour leaders, and the 
Saskatchewan members of the Legislative Assembly and our 
families. And I wondered what a target that would be. 
 
In talking to people involved in security, both within these walls 
and outside, they feel that more has to be done. What we as 
Canadians face today is different than we have ever faced in the 
past, so I think that our tactics and our techniques have to 
change and be better. 
 



6878 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2015 

Terrorism does exist in Canada even if the leaders of some 
parties have trouble getting that word out of their mouth. But 
just six weeks ago, there was a threat made for the West 
Edmonton Mall and I was, like all Canadians, a little horrified 
that a threat would be made. But I was maybe a little concerned, 
more than most, because the Melfort cheerleading team was 
going to the West Edmonton Mall to compete. And I’m very, 
very proud that they showed leadership in going to the West 
Edmonton Mall even after that threat was made. Yes, there was 
a concern, but as Canadians we can’t hide from it. We must stay 
strong and that leadership was shown by that cheer team. And 
for interest’s sake and to put it on the record, out of 150 teams 
there, Melfort placed fourth. So . . . yes. 
 
So on the topic of security, I think about airport security. And I 
think that, oh two months ago I was in a busy airport and I had 
to stand in line for an hour and a half to go through security, 
and I hated it. However, that shouldn’t be taken as a complaint, 
just a fact. I believe when I get on an airplane, I know myself, I 
know April, that we’re not going to do any damage. It’s the 
other 137 people beside me that I want checked out. And I’m 
okay in having to wait for an hour and a half just to know that 
I’m safe when I get there. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we can’t talk about terrorism without talking 
about ISIL [Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant]. I wonder if 
the members opposite agree with their federal counterparts in 
opposing a military intervention. Seems to me when there’s an 
organization that burns people alive while they’re locked in 
cages, an organization that kills thousands, an organization that 
beheads hundreds, that rapes innocent women and children, and 
kills the children, do we have to do more than buy them lunch 
and a blanket if they survive? I think we do. Some would say 
that because we are there militarily, we started the war. That’s 
just plain ridiculous, to suggest that ISIL would form a country 
or caliphate, kill everybody within that country that doesn’t 
agree with their particular brand of religion, collect wealth and 
military strength, and then sit back and leave the Western world 
alone, because hating us and our culture is what they’re made 
of. 
 
I believe the federal NDP has some remnants, because it’s 
election year, has some remnants of a policy on something, on 
anything, unlike the NDP in this province. But honestly, is their 
plan to feed the refugees and everything else will work out in 
the end? Is that their plan? Because yesterday ISIL attacked a 
refugee camp, took over 50 per cent of it. I wonder if they’re 
worried today about the sandwich or if they would like some 
defence. 
 
In trying to figure out why a motion from the Parliament of 
Canada would be so important to the Saskatchewan NDP, let 
alone the member from Saskatoon Centre, a constituent asked 
me if maybe the provincial NDP was campaigning for Thomas 
Mulcair, as the federal NDP was not allowed to open a 
constituency office paid for by taxpayers in the province of 
Saskatchewan where they have no members. Huh. Is the official 
opposition in the province of Saskatchewan going to be the 
Saskatchewan mouthpiece for the federal NDP? Are the 
members from across the aisle going to run the federal NDP 
campaign from within these walls? Can we look forward to 
such intelligent motions in the days and months ahead? 
 

You know, and then I got thinking, what else could they be 
talking about? Our Finance minister introduced a budget just 
two weeks ago. Not a single . . . There were two questions — 
stand corrected — two questions today on the budget for the 
first time. Could they not talk about their plans for a better 
Saskatchewan? After eight years of sitting in opposition, they 
must have plans for a better Saskatchewan. We haven’t seen 
them — not a plan, not a program, not a platform, nothing. The 
last platform they had was four years ago, the tree book written 
by the Official Opposition Leader. Since then, nothing, so 
maybe our plans are the right plans. 
 
[11:15] 
 
So in this legislature let’s talk about Saskatchewan. Let’s talk 
about how we continue to make this province better, Mr. 
Speaker. And let’s not follow the members opposite down the 
rabbit hole and forget about the people that put us in these seats. 
Mr. Speaker, I will not be voting in favour of this motion. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I am 
glad to join debate today on this important resolution and glad 
to follow the lead of our member from Saskatoon Centre who 
has brought this motion forward. And I guess what I’d like to 
say is, off the top, Mr. Speaker, certainly I’m a legislator in the 
Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly but I’m also a Canadian. 
And in terms of being from Saskatchewan and being a 
Canadian, we have a long, proud history in this province of 
Saskatchewan: citizens that recognize the contribution that they 
could make in terms of human rights and freedoms, and from 
both sides of the political aisle throughout the history of this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think of the 1947 Saskatchewan Bill of Rights that was 
brought in by the CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation] government then headed by Tommy Douglas. I 
think about the role that Frank Scott, the long-time dean of law 
at McGill law school, the role that that individual played in that 
particular document. I think about the 1960 Canadian Bill of 
Rights being brought into effect by John G. Diefenbaker, Mr. 
Speaker, a Progressive Conservative politician of some renown 
in this province and then prime minister of the country. 
 
I think about the Charter of Rights and Freedoms in 1982 in 
which then premier, Allan Blakeney, and then attorney general, 
Roy Romanow, played a definite role in the patriation of the 
Canadian constitution but also in the establishment of the 
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. 
 
And you know, those are just the highlights, Mr. Speaker, but 
there have been many passes where Saskatchewan people have 
stood up and spoke about what it means to be a Canadian and 
how that should be reflected in our Charter of Rights and 
Freedoms, how that should be enshrined in law not just at the 
provincial level, Mr. Speaker, but on the federal level as well. 
 
And given that background, it’s no surprise that we’ve seen 
Saskatchewan people again coming to the fore in terms of the 
commentary that’s been provided around the shortcomings of 
Bill C-51. And again, Mr. Speaker, I always . . . For 



April 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6879 

governments that would come forward with the proposition that 
they’re there to defend your rights and your freedoms by taking 
them away or by curtailing them, Mr. Speaker, that bears 
examination. That bears commentary. 
 
And when we see the federal Conservatives, Stephen Harper 
government coming forward with Bill C-51, what do the people 
that know constitutional law, what do people that know security 
matters, what do they have to say about this piece of 
legislation? And again in that context, Mr. Speaker, what do 
Saskatchewan people have to say about that legislation? 
 
And in recent days we’ve seen — which I’d like to quote at 
length because it certainly deserves it — we’ve seen a letter 
that, a public letter that was brought forward over the names of 
Ed Broadbent and Roy Romanow, again two individuals that 
have given much of their lives to the welfare of Saskatchewan 
and Canada. But two individuals that know what they’re talking 
about when it comes, not just to matters of constitution or to the 
Charter of Rights and Freedoms, but as well as regards the 
Canadian security intelligence system, Mr. Speaker, or what 
happens with CSIS. 
 
So I’d like to quote at length from the letter entitled, Parliament 
must reject the anti-terror bill, Ed Broadbent and Roy 
Romanow: 
 

We are writing to add our voices to the rising chorus of 
opposition to Bill C-51, Prime Minister Stephen Harper’s 
draft legislation extending the powers of Canada’s 
intelligence agency. 
 
This bill should be withdrawn, or defeated in Parliament. 
 
Terrorism is designed to provoke governments into 
making damaging mistakes. It is conducted through 
brutality and rooted in the belief that killing ordinary 
citizens will cause nations to abandon their most basic 
commitments. 
 
Terrorism demands a sustained and effective response. 
Resources must be allocated to enable police and 
intelligence agencies to find its perpetrators and to 
discover potential terrorists. Those who are guilty of 
offences must then be brought to justice. 
 
Canada already has the mechanisms, practices and laws 
necessary for dealing with terrorism. These include 
surveillance, immigration controls, preventative detention 
and incarceration for criminal activity. 
 
As we have recently seen, our system of national security 
is not perfect. But this is not due to the inadequacies in our 
security legislation. It is the result of overworked and 
underfunded police and security services. 
 
The Harper government has been effective in piling up our 
security anxieties. But actual material and strategic 
support for pursuing security needs have not been this 
government’s priority. 
 
Instead of a considered statement in Parliament and a new 
and better plan, the Prime Minister spoke at what can only 

be described as a political rally to announce new threats to 
the rights and liberties of Canadians. 
 
The government subsequently presented us with Bill C-51, 
an intemperate terrorism bill that will remove reasonable 
restraints on Canadian security authorities but give them 
no new resources or strategies to more effectively do their 
real work. 
 
The bill attacks the civil rights of all Canadians, and places 
the protections guaranteed by the Charter of Rights and 
Freedoms under the shadow of wider powers to interfere 
with lawful and legitimate conduct. 
 
The general tenor of the bill is to expand the definition of 
threats to national security and add to the powers of the 
Canadian Security Intelligence Service. 
 
Any interference with financial or economic stability 
could now be considered to violate national security. Such 
activities are a daily occurrence and in truth could include 
just about anything. 
 
Other new national security offences include influencing 
any government in Canada by unlawful means or 
“interfering with infrastructure.” Neither of these is a rare 
practice. Neither is necessarily connected to terrorism. 
 
And now persons can be held in custody as a preventative 
matter if officers believe that a terrorist activity “may” 
occur. This makes detention a matter for the purely 
subjective views of security officials. 
 
CSIS has now been given powers to engage in the active 
disruption of activities that it believes threaten the security 
of Canada, a power that was once illegally exercised by 
the RCMP and which led to the creation of CSIS with the 
mandate to focus exclusively on intelligence gathering — 
not to engage in activities that would otherwise be illegal. 
As the recent unfortunate history of intelligence agencies 
in the United States and Britain shows, we should be wary 
of this expanded mandate for our country’s intelligence 
arm. 
 
The exercise of security powers must be made subject to 
review by an open, publicly observed review process. The 
work of the current oversight agency, the Security 
Intelligence Review Committee, while valuable when 
properly staffed, takes place below the radar of public 
knowledge. The new bill is defective in not establishing a 
public process for assessing whether the exercise of these 
powers respects the entrenched rights of Canadians and is 
safe for Canadians. 
 
Terrorism is a threat throughout the world, including 
Canada. We cannot adopt a passive attitude towards. We 
must invest in discovering terrorist threats and in stopping 
them. But national security also means defending our 
democracy, and that depends on holding the loyalty of 
citizens and maintaining their confidence in a just and 
stable government. This requires tolerance for its diverse 
opinions, respect for personal integrity and timely and 
effective accountability for governmental conduct, 



6880 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2015 

including security operations. Shortchanging these will 
only weaken our strength as a nation — and our security. 
 
The Prime Minister should withdraw this bill. If it is not 
withdrawn, Parliament should vote it down. Possibly, then, 
a more limited and focused statute would be worth 
debating. 
 
Security agencies may feel that their present powers 
constrain their ability to protect Canada. But let us have an 
open discussion of this claim within Parliament and its 
committees before rushing to impose politically motivated 
“solutions.” Our rights as citizens are at stake. 

 
And that concludes the letter, Mr. Speaker. Again it’s words 
that are worth heeding and words that come forward from two 
individuals that have literally lifetimes of work in terms of the 
constitutional and legal framework that we enjoy so well here in 
Canada, the rights and freedoms that are so hard won. 
 
You know, certainly my colleague had referenced the great 
words of Zarqa Nawaz. I think of the work being done by 
Assembly of First Nations Chief Perry Bellegarde saying that 
the whole bill should be gone. I think these are Canadians that 
are from Saskatchewan that we would do well to listen to in this 
debate, Mr. Speaker, and that the federal government should 
listen up as well. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It gives 
me great pleasure to stand up and speak against this motion. I 
think the timing . . . it’s ill-timed in that respect. This Bill C-51 
has been sent back for revision, so for us to be even standing 
here and debating what hasn’t been released doesn’t make any 
sense. So because of that I think what we should be focusing in 
on is, let’s talk about things that are real, things that are 
happening today here in our province. 
 
You know, this is the first private members’ day after the 
budget, and this would have been the perfect, the perfect 
opportunity for the members opposite to stand and talk about 
maybe some of the issues they didn’t disagree. Somehow that 
doesn’t happen. In fact they bring forward a motion that is 
probably ill-founded, in that it’s gone back for revision, and we 
would like to be able to see it before we debate it. 
 
So I would like to talk about some of the positive things that are 
happening in this province. We had a budget that was brought 
down. It is a balanced budget. It’s a budget that has no tax 
increases, but it also has incentives within it that in fact the 
members, especially the members from Regina, should be 
interested in. I know that they’re, you know, standing up and 
speaking to this budget today. Now if they want to speak about 
the federal bills, maybe they should seek a federal nomination 
and then run and become an MP [Member of Parliament]. But 
right here in this House, people have elected us to bring forward 
and talk about legislation that is relevant and pertinent to them 
today. So in fact, that’s why I think it’s really important we 
should be talking about the economy. That’s what each and 
every person is talking to me about. They’re talking to me about 
jobs. 

You know, this past week I had the opportunity, along with the 
Premier and members from Regina Dewdney and Regina Walsh 
Acres and the Minister of the Economy, to be at Evraz. And 
Evraz made an announcement that makes it the largest single 
investment, of around $200 million here in their facility in 
Regina. Now what does that mean? That means jobs, but it also 
means that there’s a secure aspect to this for that steel mill 
because Evraz was at a point where they had to make a decision 
whether they were going to continue the way they were or 
whether they were going to . . . They had to make a decision on 
what options they had for them. So they have now decided to 
increase and ramp up what they’re doing at Evraz place. 
 
So in fact there’s going to be 40 new jobs that are going to be 
the result of this kind of investment. And during the 
construction, there’s going to be 1,100 more new jobs that are 
going to be undertaken during construction. So, Mr. Speaker, 
this is what the people in my constituency want to talk about. 
Yes, they’re very concerned about security but, Mr. Speaker, 
they want job security. That’s what they want to talk about. 
 
They want to know that in fact their children are going to be 
able to continue going to a good school. And guess what? Mr. 
Speaker, in my constituency, we’re going to be building a new 
school. We’re going to be building one of the new joint schools, 
and in that school there’s also going to be 90 new child care 
spaces. Now I know this past week, the members of the 
opposition, boy, during question period, they were just about 
setting their hair on fire. But were they asking real good 
questions? No. They were ramping it up, torquing it up, but in 
fact asking questions of the government that in fact each and 
every one of us would like to have been able to share about the 
budget. But that didn’t happen, in fact. So I think it’s really 
important that as members it’s incumbent on us to now talk 
about what people in Saskatchewan want to hear. 
 
[11:30] 
 
They want to hear that there are no new tax increases because, 
Mr. Speaker, each and every person in Saskatchewan wants to 
be able to know that they have elected a government that is 
fiscally responsible, that we’re prudent so that the money they 
do pay in taxes is being spent to the best way possible. 
 
So we know that this was a tough budget, and we had to control 
spending. But we made sure that in fact the decisions that were 
being made were going to ensure that we were going to keep 
Saskatchewan strong. So the decisions to ensure that continued 
spending in infrastructure, well that is what people expect from 
this government. They want to make sure that we are looking at 
job creation. 
 
This announcement at Evraz, that’s job creation. That’s 
ensuring that one of the largest employers in this province is 
going to stay here, is going to produce product. I mean the 
members opposite had a buy Saskatchewan day. Well this is a 
good Saskatchewan story because what are they producing? 
They’re producing steel here in Saskatchewan. And then we 
have the member, the critic opposite who talks about the 
environment. Well guess what? The steel that is being produced 
here is from recycled products, so this is hitting it on every high 
point. 
 



April 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6881 

Why are they not talking about things like this? They should be 
talking about what is happening in this province, the good 
things that are happening in this province. But no, they want to 
talk about a bill that in fact isn’t even being discussed until it 
comes back from being revised . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
They are. A member on this side said, “I think they’re a little 
out of touch.”  
 
They are out of touch because one of the things we had was a 
balanced budget with no new taxes. And you know, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, when I go and talk to the constituents in Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley, they say to me, keep up the good work. 
Keep making sure that Saskatchewan keeps moving forward. 
We want a strong economy. Yes, we want to feel safe in our 
communities, and we’re ensuring that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a time when we should be talking 
about the economy. This is a time when the members opposite 
should be asking relevant questions. This is a time when they 
should be bringing forward a motion for debate that is 
happening here right now, talking about the budget, talking 
about the economy. But you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because they have no plan it’s pretty difficult for them to come 
up with their own motion. They’re just kind of parroting what 
. . . Well they’re kind of joined at the hip with the federal NDP 
under Mulcair, you know. And talk about a sinking ship over 
there — both sides, be it provincially or federally. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a strong economy here. We have 
a province that continues to move forward. We are investing in 
our people. We are investing in our infrastructure. We’re 
investing in good jobs right here in the province, unlike the 
opposition. They have no plan. They bring forward a bill that in 
fact is under revision so why they even brought it forward . . . 
They had every ample opportunity to make a change, bring 
forward something that’s relevant today. Did they? Absolutely 
not. 
 
They ended up bringing . . . You know, do they even know 
what this bill is about? I’m not sure. Because you know what it 
really is about? It’s coordinating information between 
departments. That’s what it’s about. Meanwhile they’re kind of 
setting their hair on fire, getting everybody all ramped up, 
thinking there’s going to be guns in the streets and police on the 
streets and things like that. That’s absolutely not what this bill 
is about. This bill is about ensuring that people in Canada are 
going to be safe and secure. 
 
But you know what? It’s ill timed for them to be bringing 
forward this motion. I cannot support this motion because it’s 
gone back for revision. They don’t even know what they’re 
bringing forward in that case, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because this 
is a motion that is ill founded at this point in time. We do not 
have all the relevant information. They should go back to the 
drawing board, put together a plan for people in Saskatchewan, 
and then bring forward questions and debates based on that, not 
on some scare tactics that their federal leader has kind of 
handed down to them and expect us to all turn around and say, 
this is a good motion. Absolutely not, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I could never support something like this. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 
in proud support of the motion being presented by my colleague 
from Saskatoon Centre. And, Mr. Speaker, for the record I 
wanted to read the motion once again so the Saskatchewan 
Party government can finally find their courage to stand up to 
the federal Conservatives and say that these are Saskatchewan 
people’s rights that are being trampled upon. This is the security 
for all of the nation. Nobody is arguing those points, Mr. 
Speaker, but these are Saskatchewan people’s interest that we 
must maintain as a provincial government and which the Sask 
Party is not prepared to do, Mr. Speaker. And the motion today 
simply reads this, Mr. Speaker. I think it speaks volumes of 
what we’re trying to do here. And the motion reads: 
 

That this Assembly express grave concerns about the 
federal government’s Bill C-51 because its terms 
unreasonably infringe upon the freedoms of Saskatchewan 
people and all Canadians, it lacks appropriate 
parliamentary oversight, and it undermines the integrity of 
our democracy. 

 
It’s really important for people to know that yes, overall the 
people of Saskatchewan and people and the Canadians 
generally want to see freedom and not feardom when we talk 
about making sure that the country as a whole is viewed 
throughout the world as a country that are consisting of 
peaceful people, assertive people, productive people, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And what you see happening here is the federal government 
simply politicizing the process. And this is why I go back in my 
earlier statement where we’re seeing evidence that these guys 
are simply pushing the whole notion of feardom versus 
freedom. That’s one of the quotes, Mr. Speaker, from 
parliament, in the sense that many people have grave concerns 
about why Bill C-51 simply is not going to do what it’s 
intended to do. 
 
I stand here today, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve mentioned time and 
time again, I’m very proud of the military service of many of 
my family members. And I shared stories of how my father who 
was a World War II vet would sit around with us as young boys 
and explain to them, explain to us exactly what was involved 
with some of his travels and some of his experiences as a 
member of the Canadian Armed Forces. 
 
And he spoke about the many people that died on many of the 
beaches, and spoke fondly about his sergeant, of how he really 
respected and admired his sergeant. And when he went back, 
Mr. Speaker, on a tour of Normandy, I think he went to find the 
grave of the sergeant who perished during those battles. 
 
And he was a very proud man, my father was, and he was very, 
very strong, but this guy had his hero. And you know how as 
you grow up and you’re a young man, your father is your hero; 
well he was my hero. And then when I found out who his hero 
was, and the fact that he searched for this individual’s grave and 
paid a lot of respect to his sergeant, and prayed for him, Mr. 
Speaker, it really, really, it really shows the amount of 
incredible sacrifice and commitment that these men and women 
had for each other in defending Canada overall when it came to 
World War II. 
 



6882 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2015 

Now many of my family members, as a result of some of the 
pride we see and the courage that my father had and certainly 
the admiration that many people in the community had towards 
him and all the other veterans, it was something that would 
really instill the sense of confidence in us but also made us 
realize that we in Ile-a-la-Crosse, in Canada, in Saskatchewan 
owe a great debt to the many veterans and people that serve 
today and the veterans of many world wars that have happened 
time and time again. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that my father spoke about 
— and as a result of that, many of my family members joined 
the military — he spoke about the whole notion of democracy 
and making sure that we enjoyed and appreciated the freedom 
that many of his colleagues, including his sergeant, paid for for 
us so we can enjoy the freedoms and the opportunities to have a 
good country, to live in a good country, and to appreciate the 
good country like Canada and like the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And that’s why this Bill C-51, Mr. Speaker . . . It really irked 
me one day when I was watching, when I was looking through 
some national newspapers when I saw a picture, somebody 
drew a picture of Prime Minister Harper holding his hands up in 
the air with a masked terrorist, and the caption underneath that 
picture — as both of them are rising, holding hands and rising, 
or holding each other’s hands up in the air, the Prime Minister 
and this masked terrorist — and the caption underneath read 
“running mates.” That’s what the caption read. 
 
And I think the national paper that ran that cartoon really 
depicted exactly what this is about. It is not about defending the 
freedom, and it’s not about appreciating veterans and people 
that served in the military, Mr. Speaker. It is all crass politics. 
And that’s the shameful act on behalf of Canadians that the 
Prime Minister has undertaken as well as the Conservative 
government. 
 
And it really irks me, Mr. Speaker, when I see the 
Saskatchewan Party government sitting in their chairs, not 
speaking up for what I think many families and many veterans 
and many people that paid a sacrifice that was intended to do, is 
to respect the democracy that was handed to us and to enjoy the 
freedom that came on the backs and the lives of so many men 
and women over time, Mr. Speaker . . . That’s not why my 
father served the country, to have somebody politicize the 
process that we see under Bill C-51, Mr. Speaker. Not in the 
least bit did any of them ever talk to me about saying, this is 
important that we politicize the process, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s why, when Saskatchewan people’s interest, when 
Saskatchewan people’s liberties and freedoms are being 
threatened by a federal government that is simply politicizing 
the process, politicizing the process, Mr. Speaker, and pushing 
feardom as opposed to freedom, this is fundamentally the 
wrong thing to do, Mr. Speaker. It is fundamentally the wrong 
thing to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when you look at some of the evidence that we see, some 
of the evidence in how the federal government has not afforded 
many of the veterans that need critical help, I think it’s over $1 
billion a year that the Department of Defence sent back that was 
earmarked to support many of our veterans and many people 

that served in the military, Mr. Speaker. The federal 
government didn’t afford them those supports and instead saved 
on the backs of many of our veterans and people that served in 
the military that had many challenges after their service, Mr. 
Speaker. So when you see that kind of process unfolding, when 
you see this kind of the visual that many Canadians see of this 
federal government really not doing a service to the people that 
served the country, Mr. Speaker, I begin to really get angry and 
it really offends me when you see some of these processes 
undertaken. 
 
And all we see the Sask Party do, Mr. Speaker, when the rights 
and privileges and freedoms afforded to the Saskatchewan 
people are infringed upon, we see the Saskatchewan Party 
government talking nonsense, Mr. Speaker. They should be 
standing up for the people of Saskatchewan and they should be 
defending the notion of democracy and ensuring that the federal 
government does what they’re supposed to do, Mr. Speaker, 
and that is to promote a peaceful yet functioning Canada, which 
I don’t think will occur under this particular bill. 
 
Now many people have indicated time and time again, many 
scholars and many legal people and many Aboriginal people 
where they’ve spoken about the intent of the bill, nobody is 
arguing that we shouldn’t defend Canada. Nobody’s arguing 
that at all. But the most important thing is they’re saying we 
should trust the process but give the opportunity to be verified. 
Trust but verify are some of the phrases that I’ve picked up 
from some of the discussions and some of the comments made 
by many people involved with this bill. Trust but verify, and we 
don’t see any evidence that this is going to be verified by a 
good, solid process. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the First Nations also spoke. I think Chief 
Perry Bellegarde spoke about the effort that they’re going to 
undertake as First Nations people to go through the courts 
because the courts are separate from the politics and parliament, 
Mr. Speaker. And we urge the integrity of the courts to strike 
down this law because it’s unconstitutional, it is unnecessary, 
Mr. Speaker, and it is undeserving of the many sacrifices made 
by men and women throughout the years that have served their 
military and served our country with distinction. And all we’re 
getting from the Saskatchewan Party government is their effort 
to try and change the channel and not deal with the issue at 
hand, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Terrorism is something that we do not support. Terrorism is 
something that we should not tolerate, Mr. Speaker. Terrorism 
is not something that we should accept as a people. Nobody is 
saying anything of that sort on this side of the Assembly. But 
what we should not accept is to use the Canadian military 
service as a political pawn in this larger game, Mr. Speaker. It is 
shameful for the federal government to do this, Mr. Speaker, 
and it is especially shameful that they’re not giving any 
opportunity for people to participate in a very well-thought-out 
plan on how we respond to the threat of terrorism without 
breaking Canada’s freedom. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, the message from the NDP, it is about 
freedom; it is not about feardom. And it really shames me today 
to see our federal government playing on the politics of 
terrorism on the backs of many people that serve our country. 
 



April 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6883 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to join 
in this debate, a debate that I believe is more of a federal issue, 
and I can understand possibly why they’re bringing it forward. 
Let’s face it. Tom Mulcair is starting to run their party. They’ve 
been in trouble federally in this province; they haven’t elected a 
member. And when they come up with motions like this and 
what they’re doing in Ottawa, they’re probably not going to. 
And I can tell the members opposite that if they keep following 
what Thomas Mulcair is telling them, they’re not going to elect 
any members over on that side. 
 
At least a previous leader, Dwain Lingenfelter, I think at least 
he stood up a little bit against the federal — I’ll call them what 
they call each other — brothers and sisters. He used to stand up 
a little bit. Their leader right now and the members there, don’t. 
They take their marching orders from Thomas Mulcair because, 
you know, why we’re discussing a strictly federal bill . . . We 
just passed a budget, you know, and it’s a good budget and 
apparently they don’t . . . They must think so, because they 
don’t want to even discuss it on private members’ day. 
 
You know, and I’ll touch on some of the highlights of this 
budget as we move forward, you know. It’s a balanced budget. 
It’s something that the constituents have always asked for. It’s 
no tax increases. That’s one of the biggest things. They say, 
always look internally. Every constituent says, you know, look 
to yourselves first, which this government has. You know, 
where the NDP, it was the first thing when they ran a little bit of 
trouble, always increase taxes. 
 
Infrastructure. We’re doing $8 billion in infrastructure since we 
formed government, more than double the investment of the 
NDP over the same period; $1.3 billion for core infrastructure 
in 2015 and ’16, largest infrastructure investment in 
Saskatchewan history and a 50 per cent increase over last year; 
248.5 million for K to 12 schools, up 150 million; 157 million 
investment for initial construction costs for nine joint-use 
schools in Warman, Martensville, Saskatoon, and Regina. 
 
The members opposite constantly get up and say the education 
system is crumbling. Well we’re trying to fix what they left us. 
This is how we’re dealing with it, and I don’t hear them ever 
saying one good thing about the nine schools that we’re 
building. You’d think one of them would say, you know what? 
That’s a step in the right direction. You know, we do need 
schools. And I’ll admit maybe they ran some tough budgets. 
They had some tough years, but near the end they could have 
looked at it or they could have said, okay, now at least you’re 
trying to do something out there. Not one word on that. Not one 
word on that. 
 
And I’ll tell you what, when you go door to door — and I’ve 
gone in this city; I’ve gone in rural Saskatchewan door 
knocking — you know, they’ll mention that. They’ll say, you 
know what? I have yet to hear a plan from the NDP, not one . . . 
what they would do, just always complaining. 
 
Well I’ll tell you what, if you’re going to run in the next 
election, I’ll give you some advice. I’ll give some advice to the 
members opposite. You better come up with a plan. You better 

not just go to Thomas Mulcair and let him write your plan 
because you will end up in more trouble than you did when 
Lingenfelter ran, wrote your plan. The Leader of the Opposition 
helped Lingenfelter write his plan. He signed off on that. Now 
either — you’ve got two options — either you’re either waiting 
for Lingenfelter to come back and help you, or you’re letting 
Tom Mulcair write that plan. I’m not sure which, but I’m telling 
you something right now, Mr. Speaker. You better, the 
members opposite better start coming up with a plan. 
 
You know, as we go: 211 million to start construction on the 
Regina bypass, 19 million to start construction on twinning 
Highway 7 from Saskatoon to Delisle, 14.7 million continued 
construction investment on the Estevan truck route, 23 million 
to continue twinning Highway 16 from Saskatoon to Clavet, 
74.5 million for municipal infrastructure. The plan’s to invest 
more than 400 million over the next four years. 
 
Two billion for Crown infrastructure; 5.5 billion in total 
spending for health care; 157 million for the Saskatchewan 
Cancer Agency, up almost 100 per cent, almost up 100 per cent 
since 2008 — those are the issues that the people of 
Saskatchewan are worried about. Those are what they feel we 
should be debating in this House, not some federal issues. 
 
I’ll tell you what, when you go door to door, I never got a lot of 
. . . on this bill. You know, I got what we’re doing and what 
needs to be done in the future, and to keep working. And that’s 
what we’ve been doing as we move forward, coming up with a 
plan. Education, 3.7 billion in total spending for education 
including 53 million extra for child care spaces . . . or 53 
million total, an increase of 2.2 million. 
 
You know, if the members opposite want to talk about fighting 
terrorism, we’re happy to do that. You know, we fully support 
the mission to fight ISIS, one of the most brutal regimes. If they 
ever got to be in power . . . to think what would happen if they 
ever got control of a country. And you know what? The dealing 
with that mission is just . . . The Middle East and the partners 
are just asking help from Canada just to be part of that coalition 
to try to stop that, to try to stop what’s been happening in the 
Middle East and in Nigeria where they’re kidnapping, raping, 
killing. 
 
These are terrorists that aren’t in it for the religious reasons. 
They’re not in it for political reasons. They’re just wanting to 
take over a country and run one of the most brutal regimes we 
would’ve ever seen. It would be more brutal than any regime 
we’ve ever had in history if they ever got control of a country. 
 
And all they’re asking us is to be part of a coalition to extend 
air strikes to try to destabilize them as they’re moving forward 
into Syria, into Iraq, and also now into Nigeria and places. If we 
don’t stop them, if we don’t try to help them countries, I don’t 
know how you can look them in the face, people down in the 
face years from now when there’s possibly millions killed there 
if we don’t try to stop it. 
 
Their federal counterpart voted against that, and I can’t 
understand that. I’ll tell you what, when I take that door to door, 
I’ve had NDP members ashamed, literally ashamed of that, and 
that’s going come back to haunt you. And it’ll also come back 
to haunt the provincial party at that end, you know, as we move 



6884 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2015 

forward. 
 
You know, even this bill, the one we’re debating, one of the 
most important things in it is the transfer of information 
between federal agencies, and that needs to be done. Agencies 
can’t operate in silos, whether it’s the police, whether it’s CSIS, 
or whether it’s the border security. Sharing of information of 
known terrorists, that’s what the main concern of this bill is. 
That’s the main concern of it. 
 
How can we stop the events that have happened in the past? 
You look at what happened in Ottawa. I’m not saying that this 
bill would’ve stopped it, but we have to address that. 
 
This is the reality that we’re living in in this country right now. 
There is going to be homegrown terrorism. There is going to be 
terrorists from other countries that are going to target us. You 
can mention about the malls, the Edmonton west was actually 
mentioned. They are looking at attacking Canada. They’ve 
mentioned it. They are talking about that, of doing raids here. 
And there is, whether we like it or not, and it shames me to 
know that there is homegrown terrorists wanting to, you know, 
kill people in this country. 
 
The sharing of information, if that helps, about known terrorists 
back and forth, I think we need to do whatever we can to try to 
control that. I think we need to work towards that. 
 
And I’m not sure. I’m pretty sure that federally, you know, 
they’re just trying to grandstand on this. The security of this 
great country should be what we’re worried about. 
 
There’s amendments to the bill. There’s been issues raised, and 
I think the federal are going to adjust them. You know, they 
have been to certain amendments. But the main thrust of this 
bill, the main thrust of it is to save people’s lives, and I think 
that’s the most important thing that we should be looking at and 
dealing with here on this. 
 
And I wish, I just hope that the provincial NDP will tell 
Mulcair, you know what? We’re not going to play your political 
games. We’re going to maybe deal with Saskatchewan issues 
and represent Saskatchewan people. Because I’ll tell you what. 
When it comes to terrorism and fighting terrorism across the 
world and in Canada, they’re for it. The constituents and the 
people of this great province want to do what they can. Because 
I’ll tell you what. It sickens a lot of people when they see 
what’s happening in the world and that Canada . . . that there’s 
certain members of the NDP that won’t try to help to stop that. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Time for debate has expired. 
Questions. I recognize the member from Cut Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Doke: — Mr. Speaker, unfortunately terrorism is a reality 
not just across the world but here in Canada. We saw this reality 
last fall with the deaths of Corporal Nathan Cirillo and Warrant 
Officer Vincent. It is imperative that our country stands against 
the ideology of actions of ISIL. We commend the federal 
government for recently voting to extend the mission against 
ISIL. Both the Liberals and the NDP voted against protecting 
our country. 
 
To the member from Athabasca: are you going to stand against 

terrorism and support our troops fighting against ISIL, or are 
you just going blindly and follow the party line? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I will stand again to fight 
against terrorism and protect our country. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you much, very much, Mr. Speaker. 
You know, we know that five former Supreme Court justices, 
seven former federal ministers, and four former prime ministers 
including one Conservative are all worried about the harmful 
effects of Bill C-51. This bill undermines public safety and 
human rights right here in Saskatchewan, right here in 
Saskatchewan. The government members seem not to want to 
talk about that, but I want to know. Does this concern, does this 
have any concern for the member for Regina Qu’Appelle 
Valley? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. You know, 
I’m going to reject the premise of his question because, as I said 
in my comments, that for them to bring forward this bill, a 
motion on this bill, is unfounded. This bill has gone back for 
revisions, so they don’t even know what’s in it. To bring 
forward a motion that in fact . . . How could we have a logical 
discussion about something that we don’t have all the relevant 
information? So because of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m 
going to reject the question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s very 
clear that the members opposite have no vision or leadership 
within their provincial party. This is why they’re taking their 
marching orders from the federal party. On the first private 
members’ day after a provincial budget, they have no provincial 
policies that they want to discuss on a private members’ day to 
put forward a motion based on provincial policy ideas. 
 
So my question to the member from Regina Elphinstone: seeing 
there’s no leadership within their provincial party right now, at 
the next convention will he be supporting the member from 
Massey Place or the member from Rosemont as the next leader? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — This brings to mind the old adage: ask a silly 
question, Mr. Speaker, get a silly answer. So I’ll try to refrain 
from providing a silly answer, but I guess this is part of the 
point of the exercise. 
 
We know that this government has a very close relationship 
with the Harper Conservative government. That member in 
particular has drawn a salary working for the Harper 



April 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6885 

Conservative government. So how is it that when you’ve got a 
bill before the federal parliament that poses a number of 
dangers to Saskatchewan people’s rights and freedoms . . . 
What is the position of that government when it comes to 
reining their pals in the federal Harper Conservative 
government in? Has that government stood up for the people of 
Saskatchewan, or have they just rode along in the hip pocket of 
the Harper Conservative government as per usual? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Five former 
Supreme Court justices, seven former federal ministers, and 
four former prime ministers including one Conservative are all 
worried about the harm that Bill C-51 will cause. This bill 
undermines public safety and human rights right here in 
Saskatchewan. It lacks an effective oversight mechanism for 
CSIS. Does any of this concern the member from Melfort? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. You know, 
we sit in this House and we’re talking about a federal motion, 
and they’re saying that it affects us. Well of course every 
federal motion affects us. But I believe the Parliament of 
Canada has a sober Chamber of sober second thought — maybe 
they have one too many — and we are not it. We are the 
provincial Legislative Assembly. 
 
And I wonder in my mind when we go back to some laws that 
we have, like the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] and 
the Armed Forces being able to carry weapons within Canada. 
If we have laws that say, no they can’t, just take us outside and 
shoot us. Because we know our democracy. We know the way 
things work. And they would love to change it and think of the 
world’s worst ideas — but not going to happen. 
 
[12:00] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
world is being held hostage by terrorists. I’ve been behind the 
Berlin Wall. I’ve been through armed Checkpoint Charlie. I’ve 
been to the memorial at Dachau where it professes, “never 
again.” I’ve seen first-hand the result of terrorist oppression 
and, make no mistake, Mr. Speaker, Hitler was a terrorist. And 
we have all seen, first-hand, terrorism in Canada. Yet the 
members opposite would oppose an Act aimed at ensuring the 
safety of our citizens and our democracy. 
 
To the member from Saskatoon Centre: do you support 
protecting our way of life and our people, or do you support 
terrorism? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A very 
important question, and of course I think what we have to do is 

make sure we fight terrorism in sustained, effective means. I 
want to quote from Ed Broadbent and Roy Romanow, who 
happens to be from Saskatchewan, but this is what they say: 
 

Terrorism is designed to provoke governments into 
making damaging mistakes. It is conducted through 
brutality and rooted in the belief that killing ordinary 
citizens will cause nations to abandon their most basic 
commitments. 

 
And that’s what’s happening, Mr. Deputy Speaker, through Bill 
C-51. That’s why it’s not a good bill. We need to do a better 
job. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, Zarqa Nawaz, the creator of 
Little Mosque on the Prairie appeared at the committee meeting 
for C-51, and she said she’s concerned that the government is 
stoking fear and driving wedges between people instead of 
focusing on working with the community leaders and local 
mosques on deradicalization. Doesn’t the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley think that that would make more sense? 
Shouldn’t we focus more on deradicalizing youth here at home? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
I’d like to thank the member opposite for the question. In fact 
Zarqa is a very good friend of mine. I do spend a lot of time 
within the Muslim community talking to different members, 
and yes I do understand it very fully. 
 
But you know what really concerns me is the members opposite 
blindly buying in to their federal counterparts. They then turn 
around and state in a question here, do you just follow with 
your federal . . . We’re not adjoined federally. The 
Saskatchewan Party is a stand-alone party. Many of us happen 
to be federal Liberals or federal Conservatives but, Mr. Speaker, 
we have our own mind. And one of the things we are concerned 
about is the economy, is ensuring that Saskatchewan has a 
strong economy and is moving forward, Mr. Speaker, so that 
good jobs are provided for people, especially newcomers here 
in this province. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I’m very disappointed in this debate. I really wish we 
could hear some plans as to what the New Democratic Party 
would do or what they are getting their instructions from their 
federal party on what to do because they don’t seem to have any 
vision on their own. 
 
What I would like to know again is from the member of 
Athabasca. Does he stand up for Canada and for the people of 
Canada, all the people of Canada, or does he stand up for 
terrorism? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 



6886 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2015 

Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, that’s an absolutely pathetic 
question, Mr. Speaker. Of course nobody in any part of Canada 
supports terrorism, Mr. Speaker. Nobody within the New 
Democratic Party support terrorism in any way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I support the men and women that have served this great 
country over history. I will continue supporting the Armed 
Forces, Mr. Speaker, because they’ve got an incredible job 
ahead of them, Mr. Speaker. The Armed Forces of Canada 
throughout history, especially the World War II, were 
considered one of the best fighting forces throughout the world, 
Mr. Speaker. We should not do a disservice to them by 
politicizing the process, as I’ve indicated. We should honour 
them for the rest of their lives by giving them proper support, 
respect, and cherish the one thing that they gave their life for — 
freedom. That’s what they gave their life for, freedom that we 
enjoy today, Mr. Speaker, not politics, not crass politics, 
especially silly questions like that that was just posed by that 
member, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In terms 
of the member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley saying that 
she’s a friend of Zarqa Nawaz, would she do her the respect . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Time for the 75-minute debate has 
expired. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 1 — Boundary Dam Integrated Carbon 
Capture and Sequestration Project 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Ms. Eagles.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from The 
Battlefords. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I’m very 
pleased to be able to stand today and speak in favour of the 
motion proposed by our colleague from Estevan. And just 
before I begin, Mr. Speaker, I would like to read the motion 
back into the record so we know what we’re talking about here 
this afternoon. And the motion reads as follows: 
 

That this Assembly supports this government’s 
commitment to the Boundary dam integrated carbon 
capture and sequestration project. This innovative facility 
is the first of its kind and is a tangible step in addressing 
the production of greenhouse gas emissions worldwide. 
Further its innovative technology supports Saskatchewan’s 
resource industry which is vital for the prosperity of our 
province. 
 

And I’ll talk a little bit more about that later as well. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Boundary dam 3 is unquestionably and 
without a doubt one of the best innovative technologies for 
clean coal power production in the world, in the whole world, 
Mr. Speaker. So today I’d like to talk about three different 
things, Mr. Deputy Speaker. First of all, I’d like to talk a little 
bit about SaskPower’s record in our province and the recent 
statistics from Boundary dam 3 because, as you know, our 
Boundary dam 3 project is up and running now. And then I 
would like to talk a little bit about what other people are saying 
about our Boundary dam 3, and then finally, in particular, what 
other power producers in other jurisdictions are saying about 
Boundary dam 3. 
 
I think everyone here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, knows that 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation has been providing power for 
this province since 1929. Their providing of power and their 
mandate in this province is to provide reliable, safe, and 
affordable power to the customers they serve. And presently 
they serve about 500,000 customers in this province, and they 
maintain 152 000 kilometres of power lines in this province. 
Because our province is vast and our population is scattered in 
some areas, that is definitely a challenge for them, and that’s 
why we’ll see in our budget again this year that SaskPower is 
committing approximately $1 billion in infrastructure to catch 
up on deficit that’s been left to them. And I’ll talk a little bit 
more about that later when I touch on some things from our 
budget here today. 
 
SaskPower produces in excess of 4000 megawatts of power in 
this province. And I’d just like to give you a little bit of a 
breakdown of where that power comes from, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Nine hundred megawatts of that power comes from 
hydro, from seven different hydro stations throughout the 
province here in Saskatchewan. Two hundred twenty-five 
megawatts of power comes from wind from two different 
facilities, wind farms here in Saskatchewan. Fourteen hundred 
megawatts of that power comes from five stations producing 
power from natural gas. And from three coal-fired power plants, 
1500 megawatts of power is produced in this province. So you 
can see that we’re still in excess of 40 per cent of our power is 
being produced from coal-fired plants in this province. And, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s not unlike other jurisdictions in the 
world. United States of America, for example, also get about 40 
per cent of their power through coal-fired plants. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re all concerned about the effects of 
carbon dioxide emissions in our world today, and that’s why 
several new regulations are being proposed that are going to 
affect how our power plants have to produce power in the 
future. And that’s why Saskatchewan Power Corporation has 
taken the initiative to develop such a world-leading, high-tech 
edge, carbon capture sequestration program down at Boundary 
dam 3. And that’s why they took it upon themselves to, along 
with Saskatchewan Power Corporation and this government of 
course, to retrofit a 55-year-old power plant at Boundary dam 3. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, here in Saskatchewan at current 
consumption levels, we have enough coal in this province for 
about 300 years’ supply. And that coal is a very reliable source 
of fossil fuel. It has a stable price. It’s available close at hand, 
and it is within our own jurisdiction. It is an owned resource of 



April 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6887 

the people of Saskatchewan. And those three factors I think are 
very important in the decisions that were made to go on with 
our coal-producing power at Boundary dam 3. 
 
And by our carbon capture, our CCS [carbon capture and 
storage] plant in Boundary dam, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s a 
double-edged sword. That’s a twofold, win-win situation for 
this province and for all residents of this province and in fact 
residents of the world because we are limiting our CO2 
emissions from that plant. But on the other side of that coin, it is 
also important to note that because we are capturing that CO2 
we are able to commercially sell that CO2 again. It’s also 
helping the economy and helping oil production enhancement 
in that area. So it’s a double win for us. 
 
And I think for that reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is why the 
National Geographic magazine named Boundary dam 3, and I 
quote, as one of “10 Energy Breakthroughs of 2014 That Could 
Change Your Life.” And it can. And now our Boundary dam 3 
plant is up and running, and it has been since October the 2nd 
of 2014. So the project is generating vast amounts of data that 
previously were not available to engineers and scientists all 
around the world. And because of the consortium that 
Saskatchewan Power has developed, this technology, this data, 
this information is available to other jurisdictions throughout 
the world, and we’re encouraging people to join our consortium 
and share in that information. 
 
For a long time people were saying that carbon, that CCS won’t 
work, and there’s no proof that it does work. Well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, they can no longer say that. Boundary dam is up and 
running. We have the hard facts available, and Boundary dam is 
being effective. 
 
I would just like to share one quote here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
on that note. This is a quote that was taken from the Pipeline 
News in October of 2014, and I’ll just read you that quote: 
 

Saskatchewan could have done other diversified projects, 
especially in smaller distributed renewal projects. That’s 
what we would like to see in the future, reducing our 
reliance on coal and looking to hydro, biomass, all of 
those things. 

 
And that quote comes from the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana, the NDP critic for the environment. And this article 
goes on to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the “NDP isn’t convinced 
clean coal is worth the money or that it will work.” Mr. 
Speaker, we now know it will work. And there’s two things 
about this quote that kind of disturbed me a little bit. Number 
one, yes, you burn biomass and that’s green. That’s a renewable 
resource. But also when you burn that biomass you’re still 
emitting CO2 emissions. So you still need to have a way of 
capturing that CO2 and not letting it go off into the atmosphere. 
And again I’ll talk a little bit more about that later on, some 
findings from some other technologies that are being developed 
to capture that CO2 from biomass plants. 
 
The data that’s being collected already from Boundary dam 3 
not only is going to be shared with other jurisdictions, but it’s 
going to be used in the future here in the province. And because 
of the data and because of the efficiencies of that plant, we’re 
estimating that in the future plants of this nature will be built 

and we’re going to be able to build them at about 30 per cent 
less cost than what this plant was initially costing us to build 
and to launch. So there’s extra savings there as well as some 
other things, and not only for other jurisdictions in the world 
but for our own jurisdictions. I know Saskatchewan Power is 
looking at other ways of limiting the CO2 emissions on other 
plants. And down the road I’m sure we’re going to hear more 
about that. 
 
Last fall, October the 2nd was I think a monumental day in this 
province. That’s the day that we launched Boundary dam 3, 
And there was 250 people from many countries around the 
world that were at that opening, attended by our Premier and 
our Energy minister and numerous other MLAs, officials. And 
I’d just like to share a quote with you from the executive 
director, Maria van der Hoeven from the International Energy 
Agency. She said, the launch represents “a momentous point” in 
the history of development of CCS.” I think she pretty much 
summed it up very well in what she said about our plant being 
launched that day. 
 
[12:15] 
 
Another foreign ambassador to Canada described Boundary 
dam 3, and I quote, as “the Mount Everest of technology.” The 
Mount Everest of technology — that’s a pretty great accolade 
coming from a foreign ambassador to our country. He realized 
the value of what’s being done there. 
 
As I mentioned, on October the 2nd last year, 2014, we 
launched that plant. Since that time, we’ve been collecting data, 
and some of the data is indicating that this plant is running even 
more efficiently and doing better than what we had envisioned 
it was going to do.  
 
I’d just like to share a couple of stats that were available. These 
are from February the 11th of this year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so 
the plant was up and running for about 130 days at that time. 
Initially we had forecast and projected that Boundary dam 3 
could produce about 110 megawatts of power. We’re happy to 
report, and SaskPower is happy to report, that in fact we are 
getting 120 megawatts of power from that plant, so 10 
megawatts more than what they had initially forecast. 
 
We had forecast initially, that the purity of the CO2 captured 
was going to about 95.5 per cent, when in fact the tests have 
now come back, as of February the 11th, we’re capturing 99.99 
per cent pure CO2 from that plant. 
 
We projected that we would capture approximately 1 million 
tonnes of CO2 from that plant. And since it’s been under, since 
we started up on October the 2nd, we have now captured 135 
000 tonnes. And happy to report that we are on track to capture 
that million tonnes for the year of 2015. 
 
We mentioned that we’re capturing the CO2. We’re saving it 
from going into the environment. But on the other side of it, we 
are able to sell that CO2 for the enhanced oil recovery in the 
Cenovus Weyburn and Midale oil field. Because this CO2 is 
very crucial in increased, enhanced oil recovery in that field, it’s 
a very marketable product and it’s adding to the income 
available from this plant and helps cut down our cost, of course, 
on the other side. It is being transported to the Cenovus field by 



6888 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2015 

way of a 66-kilometre pipeline that’s running into that field. 
And because of the efficiencies, it is being produced into there 
right now. 
 
And the efficiency of this plant I think is worthy of noting as 
well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Initially when the projections were 
made, we thought the gross power produced by this plant would 
be approximately 130 megawatts, and that’s approximately 
what it’s running at, but as I mentioned earlier, we thought that 
the net production would be 110 megawatts, which in fact it is 
now 120. So our parasitic load from that plant is actually 10 
megawatts less than what we thought it would be and very 
efficient in terms of what some other plants are doing. And 
again I’ll talk a little more about that later when I compare it to 
some other plants that are doing similar carbon capture to what 
we are doing here. So because of that efficiency, we have less 
parasitic load than what we had anticipated. 
 
I mentioned that we’re going to take 1 million tonnes of CO2 
gas out of the atmosphere every year because we’re capturing it. 
And that is great for our business. That’s great for our province. 
This power plant is going to produce about 150 tonnes per 
gigawatt from that plant. Just to put that into perspective, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the proposed legislation proposed by the 
Obama administration in the United States which may come 
into effect later this year, they are saying with new coal-fired 
plants that are being built in the States they want to see the 
emissions to be less than 450 to 500 tonnes per gigawatt. Ours 
is at 150 tonnes per gigawatt, less than one-third of what the 
guidelines are going to be proposed for coal-fired plants in the 
States. I think that’s a great testament to the technology and 
engineering that’s gone into this plant. 
 
And I mentioned earlier this is a twofold benefits from this 
plant: number one, of course, reducing the CO2 emissions, but 
then the sale of the previously emitted greenhouse gases that 
were going into the atmosphere. And I talked about the CO2 
that’s being saved as well, and there’s also other gases and 
other effluents that we’re catching from that plant. 
 
The main source that’s using our CO2 right now, of course it’s 
transported by that 66-kilometre pipeline that goes into the 
Cenovus field at the Weyburn-Midale field. And that field of 
course has been using CO2 flooding for that field for several 
years now, and they’ve done extensive testing on the safety of 
that use. Up until this point they’ve been drawing their CO2 via 
about a 300-kilometre pipeline from Beulah, North Dakota from 
a plant of theirs down there. So they can now get own-source 
CO2 from our plant here. 
 
And I think that we all know the importance of oil production in 
this province, Mr. Speaker. Our province is the second-highest 
oil and gas producing province in Canada, and it’s very 
important to our neighbours to the south; 365,000 barrels a day 
of oil is exported from Saskatchewan into the United States and 
it is a major part of our economy. Thirteen billion dollars worth 
of crude was exported last year, and that is 14 per cent of the 
total petroleum production in Canada, just comes out of this 
province. 
 
And I think recently we’ve heard about the importance of that 
oil industry to our economy here in Saskatchewan, certainly to 
our budget. And because we are the seventh-largest exporter of 

oil and gas to the United States, larger even than Nigeria, and 
we heard that country talked about here earlier on . . . Nigeria 
and Kuwait export less petroleum products to the United States 
than we do. 
 
So I’d just like to talk about some of the ramifications and the 
importance of this oil industry to this province of 
Saskatchewan. Two weeks ago on March 18th we just saw a 
balanced budget presented by our Finance minister, and the 
eighth balanced budget that this government has tabled. And I’d 
just like to lend my voice to all of my colleagues in thanking 
certainly that Finance minister but also treasury board and all of 
the other cabinet ministers in this government for holding the 
line on expenses. With a $14.28 billion budget and a $14.17 
billion of expenses, they held the spending to only 1.2 per cent, 
and I think that’s very, very worthy of note. And I would like to 
thank the Finance minister for his work and certainly for being 
a mentor of mine and for the guidance and leadership that he’s 
shown to all of us here. 
 
Only three ministries, Mr. Speaker, account for approximately 
73.2 per cent of the total budget, and their budget was up by 1.9 
per cent. But all other cabinet budgets, all other ministries’ 
budgets were actually down by point six per cent in this budget. 
 
This is a budget that didn’t raise taxes. We didn’t go back to the 
taxpayers of this province looking for more money. We found 
ways to be efficient, to be more efficient, and I’m going to talk 
a little more about that, and this is one of the ways we’re doing 
it. 
 
And one of the things of course in this budget that was very 
important to me, Mr. Speaker, was the announcement of $129 
million of our capital expenditures for our Sask Hospital in 
North Battleford. This is so important to the residents of our 
current Sask Hospital, to the employees, to the residents that are 
in there, and also to all the people in The Battlefords. And I 
thank the Finance minister and those involved for the 
opportunity to speak about that here today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I talked about the importance of oil revenues to 
our province. I think fully 17, approximately 17 per cent of our 
revenue last year came from or will come from non-renewable 
resources, and those resources are certainly important. And 
whatever we can do to help increase the oil production, 
decrease the cost of producing that oil, is very important to all 
of us. And I think in recent times we’ve seen what the price of 
oil has done recently. It has gone down, so we can only imagine 
the decisions I guess that the oil companies have to make as 
well. And the price of oil being down, I think the oil companies 
are very happy to have an alternative method to extend the life 
of some of their oil wells, to increase the production of current 
wells that are going on. And this is one way that certainly that 
we can do it. 
 
And I would just like to mention here that this is not only 
important in the Weyburn-Midale field. Some years ago, a 
couple of years ago I think it was probably, my good friend and 
the member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster and I, along with the 
current Energy minister at that time, had an occasion to attend 
the grand opening of the Pikes Peak thermal SAGD 
[steam-assisted gravity drainage re oil extraction] plant in the 
Lloydminster area. 



April 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6889 

And of course that day we spent some time with the Husky 
officials up there, and they were talking about of course the 
SAGD plant, but also they were talking about they’re also 
working on injecting CO2 into their field in the Lloydminster 
area. But the problem there was, they’re capturing the carbon 
from their refinery at Lloydminster, but then it has to be trucked 
to the field to be injected. 
 
I think because our Midale field is close enough to the 
Boundary dam 3 plant, we are able to pipeline it, as I’ve said, 
by a 66-kilometre pipeline over to the Midale field to be used. 
So I would just like to take the opportunity to commend the 
Husky engineers, Husky officials, and the Husky company 
itself for taking the initiative to start using CO2 in that area 
because they realize the importance of how much CO2 injection 
and the flood in the field can enhance their production. 
 
And if my memory serves me correctly, Mr. Speaker, I think 
they were talking about some of the wells in that area, and I 
think they’re fairly deep wells where they were getting about 6 
per cent of the oil that they knew that was down there. And by 
this injection, they were able to increase that to approximately 
22 per cent at that time. And I’m sure with the technologies that 
are evolving every year, I’m quite certain they’ve likely got that 
higher. 
 
So there’s a ripple effect to this as well, Mr. Speaker. We’re not 
only taking out carbon dioxide that’s being emitted from the 
Boundary dam 3 plant. Because oil companies can now increase 
the life of their wells, can increase the productivity of the 
extraction from existing wells, they don’t need to drill as many 
more wells, and of course we know that’s a costly business. 
There’s environmental ramifications of doing that, having big 
rigs running down the road, drilling more wells. So it’s not only 
the carbon that we’re capturing from that plant, it’s the carbon 
that we’re saving because they don’t need to drill more wells. 
And again that’s a win-win situation for all of us. 
 
The carbon dioxide that we don’t use, that isn’t needed in the 
enhanced oil recovery, of course we’re going to be storing it in 
our Aquistore project which is being overseen by the Petroleum 
Technology and Research Centre. And that is their project to 
make sure the carbon dioxide is stored deep in the ground, 
safely stored. And the cavern that they’re using is 3.4 
kilometres below the surface of the earth and because of the 
hard rock formations above it and around it and below it, it is 
being stored safely and can be monitored so that we know that 
it is. 
 
Now we talked about the carbon dioxide that we’re capturing 
from this plant, Mr. Speaker, but we’re also capturing other 
products that do have economic value and can add economic 
value to the production from that plant. And I’d just like to 
mention the second product that we’re completely eliminating 
from being emitted into our atmosphere, and that’s sulphur 
dioxide. And we’ve proven that we can actually capture 100 per 
cent of the sulphur dioxide and we can convert that into 
sulphuric acid which again has commercial value. And we 
know from the data that’s being captured from our plant already 
that there’s about 60 tonnes per day of sulphur dioxide that we 
can capture. That’s about one and a half tanker loads per day 
that we’re able to sell, and it’s being sold for things like to be 
used in water treatment plants, to be used in labs. It’s used for 

pest control. So approximately 5000 tonnes of the SO2 is being 
captured and turned into sulphuric acid. 
 
And the third thing that we can eliminate from going into our 
atmosphere, Mr. Speaker, is fly ash. We are now capturing fly 
ash from this plant as well, and it again has a commercial value 
and is being sold and used as an additive to Portland cement in 
making concrete. And this product can be worth as much as 
between 22 to $50 a tonne, depending on the quality of it. And 
we are able to capture about 31 kilograms per megawatt hour 
that we’re producing out of that plant. And because of that 
again there’s a ripple effect here, Mr. Speaker. We believe that 
since we’ve been capturing this, when we reduced the CO2 
emissions obviously from Boundary dam 3, but also we reduce 
probably 170 000 tonnes of CO2 that would have been produced 
in the making of this Portland cement to make concrete, so 
again, a win-win effect because of that ripple effect. 
 
[12:30] 
 
So I’d just like to sum up a couple of lines here about Boundary 
dam 3, and then I’m going to move on and talk about another 
aspect here. Boundary dam 3 is now producing power 10 times 
cleaner than it was prior to the launch. Compared to natural gas 
production of power, it is now four times cleaner than what 
natural gas being used to produce the same amount of power is. 
And because of the commercial value of the products we’re 
selling from Boundary dam, we’re estimating that with the sale 
of the CO2, the SO2, and the fly ash, that the cost of producing 
that power by coal is going be approximately equal to what it 
would be if we were using natural gas. And I think that’s 
another great aspect of this power plant. 
 
Another thing I’d like to share here today, Mr. Speaker, is some 
quotes about what other people are saying about our Boundary 
dam 3. And I would just like to, you know . . . I mentioned two 
quotes earlier on, but I’d just like to start off with a couple of 
quotes. And first of all I’ll just go back in time a little bit here. 
I’m not going to be like the member from Athabasca and go 
back into the ’70s or the ’80s or the ’60s or what he raves about. 
I’m only going to go back I think probably about eight years. I 
think it would be eight years, yes. 
 
And this first quote I have here is from the David Suzuki 
Foundation, Mr. Speaker. And here’s what the Suzuki 
Foundation had to say with reference to Saskatchewan: the 
highest greenhouse gas emissions “of any province or territory 
on a per GDP basis.” Highest greenhouse gas emissions — that 
was the record of that NDP government when they were in 
power. 
 
Another quote here from about that same time: this is from the 
Sierra Club of Canada on the real report card from 2006, Mr. 
Speaker, and I quote, “. . . an environmentally regressive 
Premier and cabinet whose NDP orange verges on brown.” 
That’s from the Sierra Club. The NDP orange verges on brown. 
 
Another quote from the Saskatoon StarPhoenix, April 7th, 
2007, and I quote, 
 

During his tenure, the “green” in Calvert’s green and 
prosperous economy has been covered by a brown of 
emissions from SaskPower’s coal-fired power plants and 



6890 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2015 

are the third-biggest contributor to greenhouse gases in 
Canada. 

 
That’s what everyone had to say about what was being done 
under the former administration in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I’d like to just fast-forward a little bit, back to October the 
2nd of 2014 last year, when we commissioned the Boundary 
dam 3. And here’s a quote from David Hawkins, the director of 
climate programs, National Resources Defense Council, and I 
quote: 
 

To protect the climate, a large amount of the world’s 
existing coal-fired power plants will either have to be 
retired early or equipped with effective carbon capture and 
storage systems. SaskPower is showing that installing 
CCS on an existing coal plant is a real, viable option. 

 
A real, viable option, and that is being demonstrated by our own 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 
 
Another quick quote here from Graeme Sweeney, the chairman 
of the European technology platform for zero emission fossil 
fuel power plants. I quote, “We commend SaskPower and 
Canada for showing us all how it can be done.” 
 
Another quote here, and this is from Chris Severson-Baker, the 
managing director of the Pembina Institute. And I quote: 
 

. . . [Its] real significance is that it will be a global 
demonstration that CCS can be executed on a commercial 
scale. If greenhouse gas emissions are going to be reduced 
by major consumers of coal, such as China, or by any 
industry that consumes fossil fuels, CCS may be a solution 
and Boundary Dam may be its first commercial proof . . . 
[of that]. 
 

Another one from John Thompson, the director for fossil 
transition project in the Clean Air Task Force. And I quote: 
 

Today’s opening of the carbon capture and storage facility 
at Saskatchewan Power’s Boundary dam 3 power plant is 
a milestone in the global effort to curb carbon emissions. 
The successful start-up demonstrates that the technology 
to capture 90 per cent of carbon emissions is commercially 
available for power plants. 

 
This quote is from Brad Page, the chief executive officer of the 
Global Carbon Capture Storage Institute. And he said, 
Saskatchewan is number one in the world: 
 

Saskatchewan is number one in the world. This is an 
incredibly important event from our perspective. 

 
We’re now number one in the world in that. Previously we were 
number one in the world in the most greenhouse gases. We 
have come a long way in eight years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A final quote here. This is from Stuart Haszeldine, the director 
of the Scottish Carbon Capture & Storage. And he said, I quote, 
“Boundary dam is working proof for naysayers, including the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, that full-scale 
CCS on power generation now exists and works commercially 

to deliver electricity, with no subsidy.” He went on to say, he 
claimed the plant’s opening would “create ripples worldwide.” 
 
These are just some of the things that other people are saying 
about our Boundary dam 3 plant. 
 
And this is one from Morton Bertelsen from the Norway 
Business Daily. And we hear people quoting things that are 
going in Norway, and this is one that Norway is saying about us 
here in Saskatchewan. And I quote: 
 

Norway has been trying to build a CCS plant for several 
years. It has failed spectacularly. It went belly up. They 
pulled the plug after cost over-runs and delays. Now we’re 
here [being here in Saskatchewan] to learn how you 
managed to do what we didn’t do. 

 
People from around the world are looking at what we have 
accomplished here at Boundary dam, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit before I wrap up 
here about not only what other leaders are saying around the 
world about our carbon capture project at Boundary dam 3, but 
also what other power producers are saying, what other 
power-producing states and jurisdictions in the world are 
saying. 
 
I recently had the opportunity to travel to three southern states, 
to Mississippi, Alabama, and Georgia, along with my friend and 
colleague from Carrot River Valley and several other officials 
from here in Saskatchewan: two officials from Saskatchewan 
Power, Corwyn Bruce, the associate manager of the carbon 
capture and storage initiatives; Ian Yeates who is the 
vice-president of the carbon capture and storage initiatives; 
officials from the Ministry of the Economy; and officials from 
Intergovernmental Affairs. And we had an opportunity to tour 
several different things down in those three southern states, Mr. 
Speaker. Firstly we toured, we had the opportunity to tour some 
oil fields that have been flooding CO2 into those fields for 
several years to enhance the oil production. 
 
The first day of our tour we toured a field called the Denbury 
field near Tinsley. This field, Mr. Speaker, was first flooded I 
believe back in 2006. And when this company purchased this 
field, production was about 800 barrels per day, so pretty 
marginal production from that field. Since they’ve been able to 
flood it with CO2, the production in that field has increased to 
11,000 barrels per day. And because of — this is a relatively 
shallow field; the wells are about 3,000 to 5,000 feet — because 
of the enhanced oil recovery and the pressure caused by the 
CO2 being injected into that field, their cost per barrel is about 
$12 per barrel cost to produce this oil. And I think that was 
pretty important to them because this was a field that they’d 
invested a lot of money into to get it up and producing again.  
 
And the one thing that we all found very significant about what 
the officials at that field talked to us about was their concern for 
the environment, their concern that the CO2 that was being 
flooded into this field was in fact being contained. And what 
they have done to ensure that this is actually being contained is 
they have drilled perimeter monitoring wells all around their 
field.  
 



April 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6891 

And this, of course, is a fairly large field. It’s about 8,000 acres. 
So they’re testing these wells. They have the monitor wells 
down there so they can tell if there’s any movement of the CO2 
and of course their number one concern is the environment. 
They don’t want the CO2 leaking into the groundwater coming 
back up through into the environment, but they’re also very 
concerned because the CO2 does cost them money. 
 
The CO2 for this field comes quite a distance from the Jackson 
Dome near Jackson, Mississippi and is piped quite a distance 
into that field. So number one, they don’t want to have the CO2 
moving underground, endangering any water systems, or 
getting back into the atmosphere, but also when they extract the 
oil from their wells in this field, of course there’s carbon 
dioxide comes with it. They actually have a process where they 
capture the CO2 again. They re-inject it so they’re actually 
recycling the CO2 that was captured in the first place. 
 
From there we toured another field called the Tellus field. This 
is a little bit smaller field; it’s about 2,000 acres. They’re using 
the same sort of technology, but the wells in this field, Mr. 
Speaker, are quite a bit deeper. They’re between 12 and 13,000 
feet. So their cost even with the CO2 flood is substantially 
higher than what the Denbury field was, but it’s still certainly 
well within the range that it’s economically feasible to go ahead 
and keep producing this field. Their cost is about $35 per barrel. 
 
This field started being flooded in 2010, so it’s been flooded for 
five years. And the CO2 from this field also comes from the 
Denbury line. An offshoot of that line comes down to the Tellus 
field. And because of the depth of the well and the depth of the 
formation, they’re using one injection well for each of four 
production wells. And then they as well have monitoring wells 
down on the perimeter of their field so that they can keep track 
if there’s any movement of the CO2 gas. 
 
The next day, Mr. Speaker, was probably one of the most 
important days of our tour. It was an opportunity for all of us to 
tour the Kemper County energy facility. And this is an energy 
facility that’s been talked about all around the world I think, 
certainly all around the United States. The Energy Council has 
been looking at this Kemper County plant for several years. I’d 
just like to talk about it a little bit and compare it to what we’re 
doing here at Boundary dam. And the officials at the Kemper 
County plant were very excited about having the opportunity to 
quiz our two experts, our two engineers from SaskPower that 
had travelled with us, and comparing notes on what they’re 
doing in the Kemper plant and what we’re doing in the BD3 
[Boundary dam 3] plant. 
 
And I think I’d like to point out first one of the major 
differences between what’s being done, why our plant is being 
called the first and largest in the world. There’s two different 
technologies involved. Our Boundary dam plant burns a lignite 
coal, what we call our lignite coal. It’s a little softer coal. But 
they also burn a lignite coal down there, but it is even softer 
than ours. It’s very high in moisture; some of their lignite coal 
down there has as high as between 40 and 45 per cent moisture. 
 
So they use a process called gasification. So the CO2 that they 
capture is called a pre-combustion carbon capture, whereas ours 
is a post-combustion. We burn our coal to create the heat to turn 
our turbines. We take the CO2 gas off that coal that’s being 

burned. Whereas at this plant, because of the nature of their 
lignite they, under high heat and high pressure, they gasify their 
coal to get a syngas that they can use to burn to turn their 
turbines. So they’re actually capturing their carbon capture, 
their carbon dioxide prior to the turbines being turned. That’s 
why it’s called a pre-combustion. 
 
I think a couple of other things that are worthy of note between 
that plant and our plant here, of course theirs is, it’s a huge 
plant. It’s going to produce, you know, substantially more 
power than our Boundary dam 3 will because of their 
population. It’s going to provide power for a good portion of 
Mississippi. 
 
They are putting their CO2 that they’re capturing into the 60 
kilometre . . . 60 mile, I guess in the state, pipeline that’s going 
to the Denbury line to go to those two fields that I talked about 
a moment ago. From this plant, they’re also capturing the 
ammonia and the SO2 as well as we do here at Boundary dam. 
 
As I mentioned this is a huge plant, about 500 permanent 
employees are going to be there. There was 6,200 employees 
building this plant. So without being negative, you really can’t 
imagine the magnitude of this plant. And they’re using 
new-tech gasification, which has totally never been used before 
in the States or anywhere, to gasify the lignite to turn their 
turbines. 
 
The problem that they have is that there’s quite a quality 
variation in their lignite. So they have a problem with that. And 
because of their gasification process and some of the things 
they have to do, they have a lot more parasitic load than what 
we have at our Boundary dam plant. 
 
This plant that we toured in Kemper County had the potential to 
produce 860 megawatts of power, but in fact their net 
production peak power is 580 megawatts. So you can see that 
their percentage of parasitic loss is a lot greater than what ours 
is here in Boundary dam 3, and I think that’s a great testament 
to our technology, our engineers, and our people that have built 
Boundary dam 3. 
 
And of course their plant is similar in another way, that’s it’s a 
mine-mouth-type plant. The coal mine is right there at the plant, 
and that’s why they built the plant where it is. They can just 
take the coal, as we do down there, load it in the big trucks, take 
and put it on site where it can be burnt. And they carry about a 
million tonnes of coal on stock on site at all times. 
 
And just to give you an idea of the scope of that plant, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re burning approximately 14 400 tonnes of coal a 
day, and their CO2 is put into the Denbury line. And right now 
they’re producing approximately 420 tonnes of CO2 gas that 
they’re not capturing per gigawatt out of that plant, which again 
is very substantially higher than what ours was at 150. But it’s 
still below what the Obama administration is recommending at 
455 to 500 tonnes per gigawatt. 
 
[12:45] 
 
The next stop on our tour down there was, I think, very 
appropriate to what we’re talking about here today. We attended 
a conference put on by the Southern States Energy Board and 



6892 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2015 

was a SECARB [Southeast regional carbon sequestration 
partnership] briefing they called it, the southeast carbon capture 
board. And we listened to several engineers, very 
technologically . . . presentations, kind of. Some of it was a 
little bit maybe over our heads, but by the end of our two days 
there we caught on to what they were talking about. And I think 
it was very informative, and I know our two engineers from 
SaskPower got a lot out of that. 
 
And also they were able to exchange some information about 
Boundary dam 3 to our American counterparts down there. And 
that was one of the purposes of our tour, was (1) to learn; but 
(2) to sell our knowledge, what’s being done in Saskatchewan, 
to other jurisdictions, that they will come back here, join our 
consortium, and learn about what we’re doing in Saskatchewan. 
 
Because this was a carbon capture symposium conference, a lot 
of the speakers talked about the carbon capture that has been 
going on and the storage that’s been going on in the States for 
quite some time. The first speaker spoke about they’re running 
two demo projects right now. They’ve been doing it since 2009, 
and to date they’ve injected about 6 million tonnes of CO2. And 
they have several other projects under way right now, a project 
at the Cranfield field which is about 5 million metric tonnes are 
being injected, and in the Citronelle field, which is a huge field. 
They anticipate when they’re done they will have injected 112 
million tonnes of CO2 into that field. 
 
And most of the focus about this conference related to, how are 
we going to be sure that when we inject CO2 into the earth, are 
we going to be sure that it’s not migrating, that it’s not moving, 
that it’s not going to cause other ripple effects down the line. 
And I think most of the presenters that were there were either 
university professors, engineers from various universities all 
across the southern States. And they had of course reams of 
data that indicated the monitoring they’re doing, whether it’s 
through seismic, through pressure testing, through the 
monitoring wells that are there, and the general consensus was 
that there’s very little migration of any of the CO2 that’s being 
injected into . . . stored in the earth. 
 
Some of the things that they thought about was that if you have 
the monitor wells that are close to the injection well, that’s 
probably your best indication, and they could see the results on 
the seismic graphs at that time that it was. But when they 
moved away, a distance further down the line or moved into 
another formation, they found that there was no variance in the 
seismic readings from what it would have been before. And 
they tried to determine a baseline. They thought that was very 
important, and I think it was too. 
 
And it kind of goes to what we’ve been doing in the 
Weyburn-Midale field. They’ve been monitoring and assessing 
and investigating for several years there before they started 
injecting the CO2, and that’s very important, as well as has our 
Aquistore project down there. 
 
So they found that there’s very little migration from the CO2 
injected from any other formation. In the formation that it’s put 
into, it sometimes does migrate a distance, but it doesn’t go into 
the layer above it and it doesn’t go into the layer below it. So 
that was very, I think, very . . . And there’s several speakers that 
talked about the same thing, so it just wasn’t one person’s 

opinion. It was the opinion of many of the geologists, 
geoscientists, hydrologists, chemical engineers — all of the 
people that were speaking there. 
 
After that two-day conference that we attended there, we 
continued our journey, back on the bus again, and did some 
travelling to some other plants that I think are something that’s 
going to be very important to everyone in the world and 
certainly to us here in Saskatchewan. And there were some 
people from the Advanced Resources International there that 
talked about what they’re doing, the amount of CO2 that’s been 
injected. 
 
Some of the things that come out of this, they’ve actually now 
found that they’re capturing some of the CO2 that’s being 
burned. I know Mississippi has a large biomass power 
production industry in Mississippi, so they are capturing some 
of the CO2 from the biomass plants and injecting that in as well. 
So they’re not only taking the CO2 out of the atmosphere that’s 
coal-burned, but it’s burning from biomass as well. 
 
One of the places they’ve now experimented with injecting the 
CO2 — and maybe this is something we can look at here in 
Saskatchewan in the future, whenever — is they’re injecting it 
actually into coal fields, Mr. Speaker. And the reason for doing 
that is they are also extracting methane gas down there and 
burning methane gas as well. By injecting the CO2 into the coal 
bed, into the coal seam, it is producing . . . It is freeing up the 
methane gas, making it easier to access and thereby burn. So 
again, it’s a ripple effect of what we’re doing with our carbon 
capture storage. 
 
Some of the comments said that we need to have more 
long-term testing, and I think everyone agreed with that. And as 
I mentioned, we’ve been doing that here in Saskatchewan. I 
think that’s very important. It’s important to find the baseline 
levels so that we can determine if there is any effects from the 
CO2 being down in the earth. 
 
We moved from there to the Bowen Water Research Center. 
And I think this is important because we all know that there’s 
certain steam comes off of these power plants, and we’ve talked 
a lot about limiting the air emissions from our plants, but there 
is proposed new regulations certainly coming in the United 
States that probably will take effect sometime this September 
with regard to water effluent restrictions in the States. 
 
So the Southern Company has developed this Bowen Water 
Research Center, and they’re doing some great work there with 
limiting the type of water that’s going back into the streams, 
going back into the lakes in that area. They’re actually recycling 
a huge percentage of the water. They had some monstrous big 
towers there that the steam goes in. When it cools, some of it 
evaporates because it’s going into the water and then it falls 
back down the side. Just simply by the way these structures 
were built lends itself to the evaporation process. Then they use 
the water back again to cool their turbines in that plant — very 
efficient use of the water products that they’re using and no 
longer putting back into the streams. 
 
Our final stop on that tour, Mr. Speaker, was at the National 
Carbon Capture Center in Mississippi as well, and again it’s 
being run by the Southern Company. This is a very advanced, 



April 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6893 

technologically advanced, world-class, and it’s a neutral test 
site. It’s a site that we had a little bit of trouble getting our 
heads around initially, that one company would run a site and 
several other companies could come there and test their 
technologies. And we wondered about corporate secrecies, 
corporate not wanting to share information, but the way the 
plant’s set up, they have different areas. There’s been many, 
many countries come and test technology there, some of them 
like Norway again, from Germany, actually Boundary dam 3 is 
a member of this, belongs to this group, and they’re testing 
technology there. 
 
One of the things there that they’re starting to do — and again 
this is why they were very interested in talking to our two 
engineers from SaskPower — was that they’re doing both the 
pre-combustion carbon capture and storage from the 
gasification process, and as well they’re now starting to do the 
post-combustion capture. Now that plant wasn’t up and running 
yet when we were there. It was just being commissioned 
probably in the near future. So they had a lot of questions for 
our SaskPower officials because they realize that what we are 
doing here obviously is working because we have the data to 
prove that it’s working, and they did say that. Finally on the last 
day they said, you know what? We know we’re going to come 
up to Boundary dam and we’re going to look at what you’re 
doing up there, and hopefully we can incorporate some of those 
technologies into our post-combustion capture in our plant 
down there. 
 
There’s been at that plant alone, Mr. Speaker, over 30 different 
technology developers that have used the facility. Again they’re 
state jurisdictions, state plants, other corporations, other power 
companies, and it’s an opportunity where they can share ideas 
and more ideas than just simply technologies, but ideas that 
maybe will end up being technologies in the future. And they’re 
truly international uses. And I mentioned Norway, Germany, 
China have been there. Boundary dam 3 is a member of this 
consortium as well. 
 
Since they’ve been opened, just at this test facility alone, Mr. 
Speaker, they have screened over 300 CO2 technologies. And 
it’s hard to imagine there’s that many technologies available for 
CO2 storage, but there is. I think in a process like this, this is the 
way to narrow them down to the ones that are going to be 
effective, that are going to work, that are going to be 
economically feasible to use. And of the 300 they screened, 
they’ve actually begun testing on 40 of these technologies, and 
the reason they’re doing that is to share that technology, not 
only with the companies that are there testing it but with other 
jurisdictions such as ours. 
 
The pre-combustion testing, here they’ve spent over 10,000 
hours in testing of pre-combustion technology. And in the 
post-combustion technology, not only here but elsewhere 
there’s been over 27,000 hours of post-combustion testing. This 
plant employed about 300 to 350 employees. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, because of some of the things that I’ve talked 
about here and the importance of this Boundary dam 3 project 
and the fact that here in Saskatchewan we get about 40 per cent 
of our power from coal-fired power plants and probably will 
continue in the future because at current rates we do have 
enough coal in this province to last for the next 300 years, 

because of those facts and the fact also that in the United States 
they produce about the same amount of power from coal-fired 
power plants, that I think magnifies the importance of what 
we’re doing in Boundary dam 3. 
 
With great interest, I had that opportunity that I had to travel to 
the States and learn as much probably in four days about carbon 
capture storage and power production and gasification than 
probably I’d learned in my life before that, and it was a great 
opportunity and I appreciated that opportunity to go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only is it important that we capture our carbon 
dioxide, store it, or use it in our enhanced oil production. That’s 
one side of it. But the other side of it is the ripple effect that 
happens, as I mentioned before, not only in our 
Weyburn-Midale field but up closer to my area. And there’s 
also three more plants being built up in that area as well that are 
going to use some of this similar technology, although it’s 
SAGD technology, but it’s technology that’s being evolved 
over time. And it’s through projects like Boundary dam 3 that 
this technology becomes available and will continue to become 
available. 
 
The economic benefits, not only the benefits to saving our 
environment and saving the environment for our future 
generations, for our kids and for our grandkids but the 
economic benefits and the ripple effect because we can use that 
CO2 in our oil fields . . . And with the price of oil being what it 
is today, as I mentioned earlier, the oil companies I’m sure are 
more than anxious to get whatever CO2 they can produced at 
our plants so that they can not only increase their production 
from current wells by a substantial percentage, but they can 
extend the life of those wells thereby to meet their needs for oil 
production, for the world’s needs for oil production. 
 
We don’t need to be running down the road, drilling new oil 
wells and finding new sources of oil. We know that’s there oil 
in some of those existing wells, but it just wasn’t economically 
feasible to get it out. The volume wasn’t there to make it 
economically feasible, but by flooding these oil fields with CO2 
it gives an opportunity to make these wells productive at an 
economically feasible level. 
 
As well our other two products that we’re saving from 
Boundary dam 3, just to wrap up here, Mr. Speaker: the SO2 
that’s being converted into sulphuric acid and being sold at the 
rate of about one and a half tankers per day, saving some . . . 
One hundred per cent of the SO2 that was going into the air is 
now being captured and sold. Our fly ash that we’re saving, Mr. 
Speaker, at a rate of 22 to $50 per tonne of the fly ash, saving 
again . . . to concrete producers, from running plants to make 
concrete because they now use the fly ash in those plants. And 
we know for a fact that that saves an additional 170 000 tonnes 
of CO2 from that production going into the atmosphere. 
 
So having said all of that, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say 
that I am very pleased to be able to support the motion . . . 
 
[13:00] 
 
The Speaker: — It is my duty to interrupt debate on private 
members’ motion no. 1 under rule 27 which reads: 
 



6894 Saskatchewan Hansard April 2, 2015 

27(1) Items of business on the Order Paper under each 
category of Private Members’ Public Bills and Orders may 
not be adjourned more than three times, at which time 
Rule 27(3) applies . . . 
 
27(3) After any order under Private Members’ Public Bills 
and Orders has been adjourned a third time, a notation “To 
be voted” shall be applied to that item on the Order Paper. 
 
27(4) When an order to be voted is called, it shall not be 
further adjourned, and the Speaker shall put every question 
necessary to dispose of the motion at the conclusion of the 
debate or, if not disposed of sooner, immediately prior to 
the ordinary time of daily adjournment. 
 

The motion by the member from Estevan reads: 
 

That this Assembly supports this government commitment 
to the Boundary dam integrated carbon capture and 
sequestration project. This innovative facility is the first of 
its kind and is a tangible step in addressing the production 
of greenhouse gases worldwide. Further, its innovative 
technology supports Saskatchewan’s resource industry 
which is vital to the prosperity of our province. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — All those in favour say aye. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — All those in favour say no. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — The ayes have it. Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 13:02 until 13:06.] 
 
The Speaker: — All those in favour please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 39] 
 
Stewart Duncan Eagles 
McMorris Reiter Toth 
Huyghebaert Doherty Moe 
Docherty Campeau Heppner 
Cheveldayoff Harrison Tell 
Ottenbreit Norris Hart 
Kirsch Bjornerud Brkich 
Makowsky Weekes Cox 
Wilson Marchuk Ross 
Michelson Hutchinson Young 
Jurgens Steinley Merriman 
Lawrence Tochor Elhard 
Parent Phillips Doke 
 
The Speaker: — All opposed please rise. 
 

[Nays — 5] 
 
Broten Wotherspoon Chartier 
McCall Sproule  
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Senior Committee Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of 
the motion, 39; those opposed, 5. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion carries. It now being after the 
hour of adjournment, this House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. 
Monday, April 13th. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 13:09.] 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Apology for Remarks During Statements by Members 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6867 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6867 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6867 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6867 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6867 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6867 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6868 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6868 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6868 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6868 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 World Autism Awareness Day 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6869 
  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6869 
 Asbestos Awareness Week 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6869 
 4-H Members Compete in Public Speaking Competition 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6869 
 Legacy Award for Prince Albert Couple 
  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6870 
 Funding for New Hepatitis Drugs 
  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6870 
 Message of Easter 
  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6870 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Provision of Care and Staffing Levels in Long-Term Care Facilities 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6871 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6871 
 Funding for Education 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6872 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6873 
 Besnard Lake Facility Evacuation 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6874 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6874 
 Provincial Budget and Public Debt 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6874 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6874 
TABLING OF COMMUNICATION 
 The Speaker ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6875 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6875 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Federal Government Bill C-51 and Provincial Budget 
  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6875, 6884 
  Phillips ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6877, 6885 
  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6878, 6884 
  Ross ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6880, 6884 
  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 6881, 6884 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6883 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6884 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6884 
  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6885 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6885 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6885 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 



 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 1 — Boundary Dam Integrated Carbon Capture and Sequestration Project 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6886 
 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 6894 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


	PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS
	ADJOURNED DEBATES
	PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS
	Motion No. 1 — Boundary Dam Integrated Carbon
	Capture and Sequestration Project
	PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS
	ADJOURNED DEBATES
	PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS
	Motion No. 1 — Boundary Dam Integrated Carbon Capture and Sequestration Project

