






















































Hansard: November 24, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 88A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 24, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Hon. Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7771 
 November 24, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m requesting leave 
for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Cypress Hills has requested 
leave for an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great pleasure 
to be able to introduce to you and through you to all members 
of the Legislative Assembly, an honoured guest who is in your 
gallery. With us today is His Excellency Nicolás Lloreda, the 
ambassador of Colombia to Canada. And we just had a very 
delightful lunch together, covered a lot of ground, learned from 
the ambassador the growth in the economy and social status of 
the nation of Colombia, talked about opportunities in trade 
going forward. 
 
There is one item I would like to identify in particular, Mr. 
Speaker. As a result of the free trade agreement between the 
nation of Colombia and Canada, Saskatchewan’s portion of that 
trade has been probably the most dramatic. And we’ve seen 
quite an increase in particularly agricultural products going to 
the nation of Colombia. But we do have some important things 
in common. They’ve got an oil and gas industry; so do we. And 
they’ve got some coal reserves there that we might be able to 
help them with in terms of capturing carbon and sequestering 
carbon in the future. 
 
But he’s got a very busy agenda. He’s going to be visiting a 
number of ministries and agencies in the next day or so, be 
travelling to Saskatoon and talking to university officials and 
students. And we hope that his trip is immensely beneficial, not 
just for his own sake and his own knowledge, but for that 
relationship that we are developing with the great country of 
Colombia. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to have all members welcome His 
Excellency here to our Legislative Assembly today. 
Accompanying him is Melinda Carter, senior protocol officer. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the member opposite in welcoming His Excellency Mr. Nicolás 
Lloreda, welcome him to the Assembly here. As the member 
points out, opposite, there are important ties that Saskatchewan 
has with Colombia, ties of an economic nature and possibilities 
there, and of course with the people, Mr. Speaker. And I think 

of many interactions that I’ve had — I know other members as 
well in this Assembly — in attending community events with 
the Colombian community, whether it’s a fun soccer game or 
whether it’s some other cultural supper or meal that’s going on, 
Mr. Speaker. Of course the contributions of Colombians to 
Saskatchewan are significant. So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all 
members to join me in welcoming Mr. Lloreda to the 
Assembly. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Spanish.] 
 
Gracias, Mr. Speaker. I’d ask all members to join me in 
welcoming Señor Lloreda to the Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, well from Colombia to northern Saskatchewan, we 
have a number of leaders here from northern Saskatchewan that 
I’d like to introduce that are seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’d just maybe have them give us a wave once I introduce your 
names. First of all is Vice-chief Joe Tsannie Jr. from the Prince 
Albert Grand Council, a member of Hatchet Lake; Chief Ricky 
Robillard from Black Lake Dene; Chief Bart Tsannie from 
Hatchet Lake Dene; Chief Rudy Adam from Fond du Lac Dene; 
Chief Lawrence McIntyre from English River First Nation; 
Chief Mike Natomagan from Pinehouse — sorry I missed that a 
little bit; Anne Robillard, the chairperson of the Athabasca 
Basin Development; Geoff Gay, who’s president and CEO 
[chief executive officer] of Athabasca Basin Development; 
Russel Black from English River First Nation; Glenda Mercredi 
from the Hatchet Lake Dene; Sean Willy, who is the director of 
corporate relations, Cameco; and Jeff Hryhoriw who’s the 
director of government relations, Cameco. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these individuals are in the gallery today. They’re 
spending today and tomorrow in the city. They’re meeting with, 
obviously, ministers of the Crown as well as deputy ministers, 
and I believe they’ll probably be meeting with some of the 
opposition as well. 
 
I had the opportunity to have lunch with them today with a 
number of ministers and certainly hear their concerns and the 
positiveness that they feel for northern Saskatchewan. It is a 
land of great opportunity and great potential, Mr. Speaker. 
They’ve done a great job partnering with industry, and Cameco 
has been a great partner for northern Saskatchewan and done 
great work. They’re looking for further partnerships with 
government, Mr. Speaker, as we move forward. 
 
I want to thank them for their professionalism and the meeting 
that we had at lunchtime. We all learned a lot and certainly I got 
to know them better in times that aren’t quite as heated as for 
example this summer through the forest fire season. So I want 
to thank them all for being here in their Assembly and ask all 
members to join with me welcoming them here. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 



7772 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2015 

the member in welcoming this important delegation from the 
Far North, Mr. Speaker, to the Assembly today. And of course 
we have representatives from PAGC [Prince Albert Grand 
Council] and representatives from individual First Nations 
within the PAGC, municipal leaders, and of course leaders on 
the economic front as well. So thank them all for their 
participation and their presence here. 
 
And it’s true, Mr. Speaker, that there’s incredible potential in 
northern Saskatchewan. There’s potential there that needs to be 
realized, that needs to be pursued with a sincere approach, Mr. 
Speaker. And I thank all these members for what they bring to 
the table in working for the best interests of their communities 
and their First Nations. And I think of the gathering that we had 
in Stony not too long ago, Mr. Speaker, where representatives 
from the Athabasca Basin got together to talk about the future, 
and that was an important milestone in many of the plans that 
are under way. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would say we look forward to the 
meeting that we will be having, and I would ask all members to 
join me in welcoming these important individuals to the 
Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to 
request leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce some friends and guests of mine that are 
sitting in your gallery in the House today, Mr. Speaker. We 
have with us Jason Zhao, Chris Triffo, and his wife, River 
Triffo. 
 
Jason is an accomplished entrepreneur who specializes in 
making strategic investments in Saskatchewan and Western 
Canada. Growing up in Regina, Jason lived in Alberta for eight 
years before seeing the light and coming home. He brings 
significant investment to the province from abroad in a variety 
of sectors ranging from natural resources to real estate 
development, retail, and manufacturing. Jason is passionate 
about the arts, especially music, and is very active in the 
community through a number of organizations. He currently 
serves as the Chair of the Regina Symphony Orchestra board. 
 
Chris Triffo has worked in the film business for over 35 years. 
His projects can be enjoyed in over 150 countries, 30 languages 
around the world. Chris has received many awards including an 
American Emmy Award and two Geminis. He enjoys assisting 
young producers, spends much of his time training 
up-and-coming directors and cinematographers. His latest 
project, Nordic Lodge, puts the spotlight on northern 
Saskatchewan and highlights the fishing tourism possibilities of 

that great part of the province. Chris met his sweetheart, River 
Triffo, while working in Talladega, Alabama over 30 years ago 
and convinced her to marry him to come and see the beautiful 
Saskatchewan mountains. Despite not finding mountains when 
she arrived, she stuck around, working with Chris on many film 
projects, doing everything from casting to wardrobe to assistant 
director. 
 
Aside from their film work, Chris and River also have two sons, 
two daughters, and a new daughter-in-law, all of whom call 
Saskatchewan home. It’s my pleasure to welcome not only my 
friends but these guests to their Legislative Assembly. I’d like 
all members here to join me in welcoming them. Thank you so 
much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to join 
with the minister opposite to welcome these important guests to 
their Legislative Assembly. Certainly, Jason, with your 
representation with the symphony orchestra, I know it’s a very 
vibrant, vital force here in Regina. So great for you and great 
for us that you’re doing that work. 
 
And Scott . . . Chris — I want to call you Scott — Chris and 
River, welcome again to your Legislative Assembly. Your mom 
would be so proud. Chris’s mom is a good friend of mine and 
she talks about him often, very, very proud of all his 
accomplishments in the film industry. And certainly 
Saskatchewan is proud. Nordic Lodge is a great project. So 
thanks for everything you do. And on behalf of the official 
opposition, we would really like to welcome you to your 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 
Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 
highlight three guests seated in your gallery. And to start with, 
I’d like to highlight the presence of Vaidehee Lanke. She’s 
accompanied today by her parents Uday and Kirti, and 
watching from home is Darshana, her younger sister who’s at 
the École College Park. 
 
The significance of this young woman sitting in your gallery 
really relates to the significance of her focus on medical 
research. She’s in grade 10 at Aden Bowman in Saskatoon. She 
has already done an internship with Dr. Troy Harkness at the 
University of Saskatchewan with a focus on anatomy and cell 
biology, and she is contributing already to our global human 
fight against cancer. She is the winner of the Biogenius 
Challenge that’s sponsored by Sanofi, and I know by others in 
the pharmaceutical community. 
 
And I would like to offer my sincere thanks to that community 
for their work, but most especially to congratulate Vaidehee for 
your remarkable work, and I can only hope that you continue 
this fight through high school and into the post-secondary 
realm. You have tremendous, tremendous opportunities to help 
all of humanity as we continue to wage our fight against cancer. 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming 



November 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7773 

Vaidehee and her family to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
want to rise and welcome the northern leaders. It’s always 
important to note that the travel schedule to get all the way to 
the capital city is an amazing challenge, and I want to make 
sure that we make every effort to recognize them at every 
opportunity. 
 
Of course, as I have mentioned, the North is a great place to 
live, work, and to raise a family. And some of these leaders, the 
Dene leaders, the Cree leaders, have made an incredible 
difference. So I too want to join my leader and members 
opposite in welcoming all these northern leaders to their 
Assembly. 
 
It’s important to note, Mr. Speaker, I know many of them very 
well, and in particular I know the two gentlemen way in the 
back, the newly elected chief of the English River First Nation, 
Lawrence McIntyre, and of course Councillor Russell Black. 
Many people may not know this but they’re from the famous 
community of Patuanak, the home of legendary players like 
Abe Apesis and August George Jr. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve 
played against Russell Black and Lawrence McIntyre in 
hockey, and Lawrence and Russell were actually my shadows 
in the 1970s and the ’80s. Their job was to shut me down in 
hockey. 
 
The great news is that Lawrence has since quit. He’s pursuing 
his chief full time, and Russell continues to chase, Mr. Speaker. 
But I just want to point out that it’s always a great pleasure to 
see leaders from the North and I congratulate them for making 
the journey, and tell them, welcome to your Assembly. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Dene.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
seated in the west gallery this afternoon it’s my pleasure to 
introduce a number of guests that are here for not only an MLA 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] reception that’s going to 
take place later this evening, but some meetings that we had not 
only with myself and the Minister of Rural and Remote Health, 
but as well as a number of members. And they are 
representatives of the Rx&D industry that are very important in 
the health care field. And so I’m very pleased to introduce 
Geoff Squires, as well as Bill Gowen, Beth Kidd, and Anne 
Babineau — sorry, I didn’t want to get those mixed up — as 
well as Ed Gudaitis, who is the new regional Chair of the 
Prairies committee for Rx&D. We look forward to tonight’s 
reception and I would ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, as well seated in the 
west gallery, and I apologize I don’t have all of the names of 
the individuals, but they’re members that play an important role 
in terms of seeing a reduction in the use of tobacco in our 
province, in our society. 
 
And so again I don’t have all the names but I know Donna 

Ziegler and Donna Pasiechnik from the Canadian Cancer 
Society, the Saskatchewan office; as well, Mr. Speaker, Jennifer 
Miller from the Lung Association. And I would ask all 
members to join with me in welcoming them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join the 
leader and the colleagues who have welcomed the northern 
leaders. I just want to take an opportunity to welcome Chief 
Bart Tsannie, also vice-chief, PAGC . . . [inaudible] . . . 
Tsannie. 
 
I know the important work you do for your people. And I know 
sometimes there’s challenges, but I just want to wish you well 
as you’re here doing the work that you’re asked to do on behalf 
of your communities. And northern Saskatchewan has its 
challenges, but we have to remember the successes. And it’s the 
good work that’s being done by leaders like yourself that 
directly impact the community and always lobbying, so I want 
to wish you well. 
 
I know tomorrow we’ll be meeting with you as well and we’ll 
do all we can to support you. And I hope the government hears 
the concerns and the issues you raise. And I just wanted to also 
just take that opportunity to welcome all the leaders here from 
northern Saskatchewan. Thank you and welcome to your 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, seated 
in your gallery, and from my vantage point I can’t really see 
them, so I’m hoping that there are 40 students up there, 40 
students who are part of the Bishop Filevich Ukrainian 
Bilingual School Choir. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of the people in the Assembly had the 
opportunity to be part of the commemorative service earlier on 
today, and we heard this group of students sing. And I want to 
express my gratitude to the choir, but I also want to express my 
thank you to the choir directors, Ms. Cathy Schabel and Ms. 
Sonia Kodak, for taking the time to make that trip from 
Saskatoon here. It was very much appreciated. 
 
I think also joining that group of students up there, Mr. Speaker, 
were four chaperones I would like to introduce. And I would 
hope that they would give me a wave or give the Assembly the 
wave when I introduce Charlotte Olson, Valerie Kaye, Kerry 
Kropelnichy, and Robert Rudy. 
 
I want to ask all members to help me thank these people and 
welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join in in 
welcoming this large delegation and group that we have in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, today, thank them for coming today to the 
Assembly for the commemoration service that took place earlier 



7774 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2015 

to mark the Holodomor. 
 
And I want to welcome, Mr. Speaker, all of the students, 
especially, from Bishop Filevich for what they added to the 
service. I think a trip to the legislature is always a memorable 
one for children when they’re in elementary school, but to play 
such a meaningful and powerful role in a service like we had 
earlier today I think is a memory that I know you’ll carry 
forward for many years to come. So thank you, boys and girls, 
for your excellent singing and thank you for reminding us all 
about this important event that cannot be forgotten from one 
generation to the next. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a 
privilege today to introduce through you and to all members of 
the Assembly 37 great students from the Humboldt Collegiate 
Institute in Humboldt. And they are accompanied today with 
their teacher, Ms. Jacquie Bergerman, and I’m looking forward 
to meeting with them after the proceedings. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the minister opposite in welcoming a few people here in the 
west gallery, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to start with the folks here 
from the Heart and Stroke Foundation, from the Lung 
Association of Saskatchewan, and from the Canadian Cancer 
Society. We have Lorie Langenfurth, Melody Lynch, Jennifer 
Miller, Donna Pasiechnik, Rob Cunningham, Donna Ziegler, 
and Kelsey Michaluk. 
 
I want to thank you for all that your organizations do when it 
comes to supporting the health and well-being of Saskatchewan 
residents, but particularly around the reduction of use of 
tobacco here in Saskatchewan, especially since it is the leading 
cause of preventable disease and death here in this province. So 
thank you for all the work that you do here in the province. 
 
And I would also like to say welcome to the representatives 
from the pharmaceutical industry here today. So I would ask all 
members to join me in welcoming these guests to their 
legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Post-Secondary 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 
and through you to all members of this Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce in the west gallery, we have Svetlana Lairich. Mr. 
Speaker, Lana is a senior business student at the University of 
Regina where she is studying marketing. She came to 
Saskatchewan five years ago from Germany, Mr. Speaker, and 
she’s remained here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Lana is a student organizer in addition to being a 
student at the Paul J. Hill mentorship program at the University 
of Regina. Mr. Speaker, the mentorship program is available for 
third- and fourth-year students where it allows them to be 
mentored with someone from the business community, Mr. 
Speaker, and where they can interact and network, as well as 

give the students an opportunity to ask questions, questions 
about world business, about provincial business, about business 
etiquette, Mr. Speaker, things like resumé preparation as well as 
a number of other opportunities for interaction with their 
mentors, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I would ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 
welcoming Lana Lairich to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just like 
to quickly join with the minister opposite in welcoming 
Svetlana Lairich, Lana Lairich, to her Legislative Assembly, 
you know, certainly adding to the good work over at the 
Edwards School of Business here in the University of Regina. 
Keep up the good work and welcome to your Legislative 
Assembly . . . [inaudible]. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join the 
member from Canora-Pelly in welcoming Bishop Filevich 
School. It happens to reside in the constituency which I have 
the honour of representing. 
 
But I wanted to specifically mention one individual. Boston 
Maxwell was a fine hockey player — played with my son last 
year on the Saskatoon Kodiaks and is currently playing with the 
Saskatoon Generals. He’s a great young leader on the ice and 
off the ice, and I want to welcome him and the rest of the school 
to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to recognize and introduce a couple of folks in your 
gallery. I want to pay particular attention to Robert Rudy and 
the school principal. Both are good friends, and I want to 
recognize them because of the good work that they do within 
their own professional organization, the Saskatoon Teachers’ 
Association and the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation]. 
These folks worked hard. Great to see them here with their kids. 
But they also take the profession very seriously. So I ask all 
members to give them a special welcome. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to recognize a 
fellow in the east gallery, Gunnar Passmore. And he’s no 
stranger to this House. He makes regular trips here. But I do 
want to recognize Gunnar because, you know, we all fight our 
own personal challenges, and he’s going through some tough 
times right now. And we just want to wish him the very, very 
best. I think the whole House does, as we celebrate and 
recognize Movember, and November is a very special month 
for him. But he does such good work for the people in the 
building trades, and we hope to see him many more times in 
this House. So welcome, Gunnar, to your Legislative Assembly. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the member opposite in welcoming Mr. Passmore to the 



November 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7775 

House today. Mr. Passmore has been a tireless advocate for the 
building trades, and we recognize, we appreciate that. We know 
he is going through health challenges, so we want to wish him 
all the best as he goes through that. 
 
I know that he doesn’t necessarily wear the same political 
jersey as some of our members, but on behalf of the member 
from Indian Head-Milestone, he is waiting for the sign to be put 
up on the front lawn so he can look at it when he goes by. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I also want to 
recognize and thank the teachers and members of the teachers’ 
association and STF that are here today. These are people that 
work hard, are incredibly committed to the students of the 
province, and in fact are building our province’s future, and we 
thank them for what they do. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 
Mr. Norris: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a rare privilege to invite all 
members, to you and through you, to join me in a second 
introduction. But I think this one is especially important for a 
number of reasons today. Mr. Speaker, I’m delighted to 
recognize the presence of our Treaty Commissioner, George 
Lafond, in the west gallery. We know how significant his work 
is in serving as a liaison, not simply here within the province of 
Saskatchewan but also with that interface and dialogue and 
collaboration with Ottawa. And so I would invite all members 
to join me in helping to welcome Mr. George Lafond to his 
Legislative Assembly, with special thanks for all his efforts on a 
very, very important file. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to 
welcome Treaty Commissioner Lafond to the Assembly today 
and thank him for his important work, and work that really is 
central to the discussion about the future success of our 
province, Mr. Speaker, as we — as all of us are treaty people, 
Mr. Speaker — seek to better understand and better live out the 
treaties. So I thank the commissioner for being here today, and 
also ask all members to join me in welcoming here to the 
Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
some more petitions calling for greater protection for 
Saskatchewan citizens from developers who default on 
fixed-price contracts. And we know that in September 2014, 
this government walked away from a new 48-unit affordable 
housing project in Regina, allowing a private developer to 
instead take control of and rent the units at full price. And this 
government allowed the private developer to back out of a 
fixed-price contract without any penalties, setting a dangerous 
precedent for this type of default. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to 
recognize that there are indeed desperate homeless people 
in our province and to immediately reverse its policy of 
now allowing private developers with whom the 
government has close relationships to default on 
fixed-price contracts for affordable housing projects. 

 
I do so present, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
asking for this government to support a homeless shelter in the 
Lac la Ronge area. With skyrocketing cost of living in 
Saskatchewan, home ownership is a real struggle across the 
province and, Mr. Speaker, the same is true for my community. 
A shelter for our community would provide a safe haven for 
individuals and families who deal with the realities of 
homelessness. And the prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to build a homeless shelter in the Lac la 
Ronge area to meet the needs of addressing homelessness 
in the Lac la Ronge area. 

 
It is signed by hundreds and hundreds of citizens of northern 
Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again I rise to present a petition as it relates to cellphone 
coverage for northern Saskatchewan. And this particular 
petition, Mr. Speaker, deals with a number of smaller 
communities. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

To cause the provincial government to improve cell 
service coverage for northern communities like St. 
George’s Hill, Dillon, Michel Village, Dore Lake, Michel 
Point, and Sled Lake to provide similar quality of cell 
coverage as southern communities currently enjoy [Mr. 
Speaker]. This would provide support to our northern 
industries as well as mitigate safety concerns associated 
with living in the remote North. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we have presented petitions here day after day, 
and these particular pages are signed from people from Laird, 
Hague, Saskatoon, Smeaton, Prince Albert, Michel Point, Dore 
Lake, and from many communities and people from across the 
province of Saskatchewan. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition in support of better seniors’ 
care. This petition grows out of the seniors’ care crisis that we 
have here in this province, Mr. Speaker, around chronic 
short-staffing across facilities from the top of the province to 
the bottom of the province, Mr. Speaker, that has led to the 
neglect of our loved ones, Mr. Speaker. 



7776 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2015 

I would like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the provincial 
government to immediately undertake meaningful steps to 
improve the quality of seniors’ care in our province, 
including creating more spaces and more choices for 
seniors, ensuring higher standards of care in public 
facilities, private facilities, and for home care; ensuring 
appropriate staffing levels in seniors’ care facilities; and 
providing more support to help seniors remain 
independent in their own homes for as long as they desire. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Canora, 
Stornoway, Yorkton, Sedley, and Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition from residents in the province of 
Saskatchewan who are concerned about the high costs of 
post-secondary education in the province. In the prayer that 
reads as follows: 
 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 
cause the provincial government to immediately increase 
the funding for post-secondary education in this province, 
with a legislated provision that this increase in funding be 
used to lower tuition fees. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition, in an ongoing series of 
petitions from all around the province, is signed by individuals 
from Regina and Watrous. I so present. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to present a petition in 
support of better schools. This petition is signed by residents 
who are concerned that far too many of our classrooms are 
overcrowded and under resourced and that the Sask Party 
government has eliminated hundreds of educational assistant 
positions so that students don’t get the one-on-one attention 
they need. And so they state: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
call on this government to immediately stop ignoring 
schools and start prioritizing students by capping 
classroom sizes, increasing support for students, and 
developing a transparent plan to build and repair our 
schools. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these are signed by residents of Regina. I so 
submit. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition 

opposed to correctional service job privatization. And the 
people who have signed these petitions wish to bring to our 
attention the following: corrections facilities, including those 
that deal with young offenders, are operated publicly in the 
justice system, and the government has privatized food services 
in the corrections and young offender facilities. 
 
Whereas the government is failing to properly listen to 
front-line food service workers who have many concerns about 
what impact the loss of these jobs will have for the corrections 
system and for the community; and whereas costs will escalate, 
the safety of staff, inmates, and the public will be put at risk, 
local business will lose contracts, inmate training and 
rehabilitation will be undermined, and the door to full-scale 
privatization in the corrections system will be opened if the 
government goes ahead with this plan: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
may be pleased to cause the government to cancel its 
privatization in the corrections and young offender 
facilities in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from a 
number of communities including Unity, Southey, Stoughton, 
Melfort, Nipawin, Sedley, Macdowall, Meota, Prince Albert, 
Regina, Moose Jaw, Saskatoon, North Battleford and 
Battleford, Hudson Bay, Melville, Wynyard, Hepburn, 
Kelvington, Conquest, Windthorst, Bruno, Assiniboia, 
Bredenbury, Yorkton, Esterhazy, Indian Head, and Outlook. I 
so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Holodomor 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, today we commemorated the 
victims of Holodomor, the man-made famine and genocide that 
murdered up to 10 million Ukrainians in 1932 and 1933. One of 
the most brutal events in modern history, Holodomor saw 
Joseph Stalin’s Soviets confiscate the grain grown by 
Ukrainians for their own use. Even though Ukrainian farmers 
were reaping bountiful harvests at the time, Soviets took nearly 
all of the grain, leaving the Ukrainian farmers and their families 
to starve. One-third of those murdered were children, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Unfortunately we do not yet live in a world free from war, 
genocide, and famine. Despite the tragedies of the past, 
agitators and aggressors continue to sow hatred and fear, and it 
is the innocent and the defenceless that continue to pay the price 
when they are caught in the crossfire. 
 
Last year we all took note of the situation in Ukraine and 
unfortunately the Ukrainian people are still gripped in the throes 
of conflict, division, and Russian interference. I’m sure that all 
members share my concern for the present situation and stand 
in solidarity with the Ukrainian people in this time of turmoil. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with all the members of this Assembly joining to 
recognize Holodomor Remembrance Day and Holodomor 



November 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7777 

Remembrance Week, we will keep our Ukrainian brothers and 
sisters in our thoughts and prayers. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
in this Assembly to acknowledge a sombre anniversary. I ask 
my colleagues to join me in remembering Holodomor, a tragic 
man-made famine that devastated Ukraine during the early 
1930s. Earlier today I had the opportunity to share some 
remarks in the rotunda about the Holodomor. 
 
The great famine of 1932-33 in Ukraine, which took from 7 
million to 10 million innocent lives, became a national tragedy 
for the Ukrainian people. The objective of the engineered 
famine was to destroy the Ukrainian national idea. A 
Holodomor eyewitness, Mykhailo Prokopenko, stated, and I 
quote, “It was Stalin who gave the order to pillage Ukraine, to 
take away the grain, and export it while our children died by the 
thousands.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2008 this Assembly passed a bill to ensure 
Holodomor is remembered every year, and officially 
acknowledged this as an act of genocide. There is a statue on 
the shores of Wascana Lake, just southeast of this building, of a 
little girl holding five stalks of wheat, a telling symbol of the 
harsh force that the Soviets used to crush political dissent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask everyone to join me today in remembering 
these tragic events. I also encourage everyone to take time this 
week and attend a Holodomor service near you. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Ukrainian.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Positively Red Gala in Saskatoon 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last night in 
Saskatoon I had the pleasure to attend the AIDS Saskatoon’s 
first ever Positively Red Gala. It was a successful event for an 
organization and a cause that is so important in our province. 
 
Speaking to The StarPhoenix last week, Dr. Tyler Maltman 
described the gala as “. . . a celebration of the community. A lot 
of the stuff around HIV can get pretty heavy because it is a 
serious issue, but the gala we’re looking at it like a celebration 
of life.” And it was a great celebration, Mr. Speaker. With a 
fashion show featuring local designers Klassique Designs, 
SheNative, and Opinion Atelier, music by Eekwol and Main & 
10th, a drag performance featuring Kiki Roquette, and stand-up 
comedy from Dawn Dumont, it was a fun night, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know that Saskatchewan is facing an HIV [human 
immunodeficiency virus] and AIDS [acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome] epidemic, and we need to do more to 
address this public health crisis. And we know that with better 
prevention, expanded harm reduction practices, early 
intervention, and a real plan to address poverty and 
intergenerational colonial trauma, we turn the tide on HIV and 

AIDS in our Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking Dr. Tyler 
Maltman and everyone else at AIDS Saskatoon whose hard 
work made the Positively Red Gala such a success. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

Moose Jaw Festival of Trees 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The festive season 
is nearly upon us and that was evident at the 24th annual 
Festival of Trees fundraiser in Moose Jaw this past weekend 
that was attended by myself and the MLA from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 
This year’s theme was Oh Santa, and the Heritage Inn in Moose 
Jaw was decorated just like Santa’s workshop. The sellout 
crowd of 300 enjoyed a night of dining and dancing while 
partaking in the auction for the uniquely decorated trees, live 
and silent auction items, and a cash auction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Festival of Trees is the largest fundraising 
event for the Moose Jaw Health Foundation. Funds from this 
year’s gala will go towards the construction of a hyperbaric 
space, refurbishment of the chamber, and the additional state of 
the art equipment for the new Dr. F.H. Wigmore Regional 
Hospital. The popularity and yearly sellout of this event is a 
perfect example of the generosity of the people of Moose Jaw. 
This event is a huge undertaking but demonstrates the 
community commitment to the new regional hospital. 
 
I’d like to extend my congratulations to Laurie Axten Kosior, 
Kelly McElree, their organizing committee, the dedicated 
volunteers, and the staff at the Heritage Inn for raising over 
$188,000 at this wonderful and successful event and for their 
dedication to this great cause. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

Enchanted Forest Season Opens in Saskatoon 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last 
Thursday I had the pleasure of participating in the official 
kickoff for the 17th sparkling season of the BHP Billiton 
Enchanted Forest in Saskatoon. 
 
It’s incredible to have this fantastic attraction in the 
constituency of Saskatoon Silver Springs. I can tell you that 
each and every year, it is exciting to drive through the Forestry 
Farm and experience the magic of Saskatoon’s premier winter 
holiday light tour. This place indeed becomes the enchanted 
forest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this must-see event has become a family tradition 
in our home and many homes throughout our city and province. 
I sincerely thank BHP Billiton, Saskatoon Silver Spring’s 
resident Hugh Vassos, and all the sponsors for making this 
animated light show a highlight of our holiday season and a 
great attraction to our city. 
 
The lit trees, hockey and curling displays, Noah’s Ark, Candy 



7778 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2015 

Cane Lane, and many other displays make it an absolute 
must-see tour for people of all ages. The show attracts over 
60,000 visitors every year from throughout the province and 
beyond, making it Saskatchewan’s top wintertime visitor 
attraction. 
 
Last year the show generated $240,000 for the partner charities 
— Saskatoon City Hospital Foundation and the Saskatoon Zoo 
Foundation. Board Chairs Greg Porter and Ivan Bergerman 
were on hand as well as Saskatoon City Hospital Foundation 
CEO, Steve Shannon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all members of this Assembly to 
experience the lights this winter. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 

University Hosts Truth and Reconciliation Conference 
 
Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
week I had the honour of representing the Minister of Advanced 
Education in a truth and reconciliation conference led by 
President Peter Stoicheff and the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
The formal name of this session was Building Reconciliation — 
Universities answering TRC’s calls to Action. The truth and 
reconciliation report lists 94 calls to action. Many focus on 
education. 
 
The forum, held at both the U of S [University of 
Saskatchewan] and Wanuskewin Heritage Park, provided a vital 
platform to start this Canadian conversation. Joined by senior 
leadership teams from post-secondary institutions across the 
country, the U of S took the important work of facilitating this 
dialogue to ensure that Canada’s post-secondary community 
will play a leading role in Canada’s response regarding the truth 
and reconciliation report. 
 
In the room there was a clear consensus that there is a need to 
do more as far as integrating more indigenous knowledge into 
classrooms and curriculum. That consensus included having 
more opportunities to share this knowledge, including in our 
Aboriginal languages. It also led to a constructive discussion 
about ways to address education and employment gaps that 
continue across the country. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan, we’re pleased to say that since 2007 
we’ve seen a 30 per cent increase in our post-secondary 
enrolment for our First Nations and Métis students. Mr. 
Speaker, we know there’s more to do, but we see that the 
University of Saskatchewan is playing a key role, a leading role 
in this Canadian conversation. And I would like all members to 
join me in congratulating the U of S in this vital time, as far as 
making sure that there are voices heard by this incredibly 
important sector. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 

Remembering Manmeet Singh Bhullar 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 

Assembly today with a heavy heart but fond memories to join 
with colleagues and people from across our country to offer 
condolences on the tragic passing of a big man with a huge 
heart. 
 
Alberta MLA Manmeet Singh Bhullar lost his life yesterday as 
he had selflessly stopped to help another driver who was in 
need during a blizzard on a busy Alberta highway, a reflection 
of how he lived his life. His nature was to always put others 
first. 
 
Manmeet, affectionately known as Manny, cared about 
everyone he came into contact with. He never lost focus on the 
people he served, and represented not only the people of 
Alberta and his constituency but, as I experienced, well 
represented Canada when the opportunity arose. 
 
Outside of politics, he was a dedicated family man with a strong 
faith, and was always community minded. I first met Manny on 
a trip to Germany many years ago. We were both part of a 
Canadian delegation. On that trip and thereafter, we developed 
a great professional and a very friendly personal relationship. I 
remember fondly his infectious laugh, his intelligence, wit, his 
great sense of humour, and how, no matter the circumstance, he 
always stood up for what was right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all the members of this Assembly 
and the people of Saskatchewan join in offering our most 
sincere condolences to the Bhullar family, Manny’s many 
friends, the Sikh community, and many colleagues. You are in 
our thoughts and prayers as you grapple with Manny’s tragic 
death. 
 
Our Premier often reminds us to strive to leave the world better 
than we found it. Mr. Speaker, Manny Singh Bhullar, Manny, 
he did. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Lean Initiative and Provision of Health Care 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Right now the Sask 
Party government has more than 120 people working in health 
care whose sole job it is to promote lean. To the Premier: why? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, in the absence of the Premier, I’ll take that question on 
behalf of the government. Certainly, Mr. Speaker, these are 
individuals that had been working on ensuring that we have a 
high-performing health care system even prior, for many of 
these people, even prior to formally adopting the Saskatchewan 
health care management system, or the lean system, in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are individuals that have worked in our 
health region, in our Health Quality Council, within the 
ministry to ensure that we are running an efficient health care 
system, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that we are making progress as 
it relates to a number of important priority areas for the 



November 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7779 

province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen not only, I believe, better care for 
the people of the province, a more efficient system for the 
province, but as well a financial savings of well over $125 
million since lean has been adopted. Mr. Speaker, this is 
something that not only high-performing systems in North 
America are using, Mr. Speaker, including the SickKids 
Hospital in Toronto are now using lean. Mr. Speaker, I think 
we’re certainly on the right track in this regard. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this government’s blind pursuit of 
John Black lean is anything but efficient, and we have seen that 
time and time again. These 100, 120 positions do not even 
include lean leaders or members of kaizen operations teams. 
These are just the lean promoters who work within the kaizen 
promotion offices, and the Sask Party has more than 120 of 
them working in our health care system. 
 
Meanwhile, Mr. Speaker, meanwhile, they’re eliminating 150 
front-line positions, including nurses and care aids here in 
Regina, and making cuts to health care throughout our province. 
How can the Premier possibly justify such misplaced priorities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
again in the absence of the Premier, I’ll take that question on 
behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s keep this in context. We have nearly 44,000 
people working in the health care system each and every day. 
Mr. Speaker, we felt that it was important to ensure that we 
have an efficient system in the health care system, knowing that 
the days of health budget increases of well in excess of what the 
economy is growing at, Mr. Speaker, that’s not sustainable. 
Other jurisdictions have indicated, have acknowledged that 
that’s not sustainable. So we need to ensure that we do have 
tools in place to ensure that we have a sustainable health care 
system well into the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, I can only point to a number of projects all across 
the province, both in terms of improving processes, but as well 
as the facilities that we’re building. And, Mr. Speaker, I would 
share just most recently the Moose Jaw Hospital. The regional 
hospital just opened, and this is what Dr. Fred Wigmore had to 
say, the chief medical health officer: “In my years of touring 
1,000 hospitals, this is the most intelligent hospital I’ve ever 
seen built in Canada.” That was using lean principles. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this government is cutting 150 
positions, meanwhile they have 120 people devoted just to lean 
promotion, Mr. Speaker, plus many more on top of that as well. 
 
The government spends $11 million per year for lean 
promoters. You know what? That’s 71 per cent higher than just 
two years ago, and that’s just within the health regions. That 

doesn’t include lean promoters who work in the provincial 
kaizen promotion office, or eHealth, or 3sHealth [Health Shared 
Services Saskatchewan], or the Ministry of Health. 
 
More than 120 people working in health care whose job it is to 
promote lean, yet we’ve seen cuts to areas that matter most for 
patients and matter most to residents in care facilities. How can 
the Premier, Mr. Speaker, how can the Premier not recognize 
that this is a blatant example of misplaced priorities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Again in the absence of the Premier, I’ll take the question on 
behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I can 
indicate to the House in terms of some of the successes that 
we’ve seen using lean methodology, or the Saskatchewan health 
care management system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For example, Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region achieved a 95 
per cent reduction in the time it takes for patients arriving via 
STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] or EMS 
[emergency medical services] to receive a first diagnostic in the 
cardiac care unit. Imagine that, Mr. Speaker — a 95 per cent 
reduction in the time when somebody arrives, either by STARS 
or EMS, to when they have a first diagnostic for cardiac care in 
a tertiary centre, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s looking at the way that we have normally operated in the 
past, looking at seeing where we can make improvements, and 
deploying that improvement, Mr. Speaker. That’s ensuring that 
people are receiving more timely care, Mr. Speaker, reducing 
errors, reducing waste, and ensuring that we have an efficient 
and sustainable health care system well into the future, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s the direction of this government and, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ll continue in that direction. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, when we hear about 120 people 
whose job it is to promote John Black lean, while basic needs in 
hospitals are not being met, Mr. Speaker, when residents in care 
facilities aren’t getting the care that they need, when front-line 
positions are being eliminated, when this government refuses to 
cover important treatment for little Kayden Kot who needs 
$14,000 in treatment, but they refuse to even give an answer to 
his parents, Mr. Speaker, that is outrageous that they would 
have money for 120 full-time people to promote lean but then 
not be able to focus on the things that matter most to families. 
 
Last year nurses filed about 870 work situation reports when 
they couldn’t meet their professional standards, when there was 
safety concerns, and when patient care was compromised. Eight 
hundred and seventy, and 81 per cent of those were about 
short-staffing. My question to the Premier: what does he have to 
say about that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I can say to the Leader of the Opposition it’s a good 
thing that this government set targets to increase the number of 
RNs [registered nurse] in this province, Mr. Speaker, compared 



7780 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2015 

to what the members opposite left us with. I can’t imagine how 
many of those care concerns there would have been if we didn’t 
have the over-1,000 additional RN positions that we do now 
under this government because we set some bold targets. 
 
We looked at the way that we were operating under the NDP 
[New Democratic Party], and we decided that’s not good 
enough for the people that are paying the bills in this province. 
We need to make changes, Mr. Speaker. A part of those 
changes is some of the work that we’re doing. For example, the 
Ministry of Health, using lean, designed a process improvement 
that means that fragile infants will have to travel 65 per cent 
less to receive important follow-up injections. Mr. Speaker, that 
is going to save us in the system $900,000, but more 
importantly it’s better for those fragile infants. It’s better for 
those kids that are receiving care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Would the members opposite want us to go back to a time 
where those kids were not getting the care that they needed, Mr. 
Speaker? We’re going to keep working on improvements in this 
system under this government. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, you don’t need a Japanese sensei 
to take care of children properly in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
You need the right resources put in the front line to help people, 
Mr. Speaker. You don’t need 120 full-time lean promoters plus 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know they brag about, Mr. Speaker, their overall roster, 
but we also know this government regularly has less nurses 
actually on each shift, and hundreds and hundreds of times last 
year, nurses filed situation reports about short-staffing. This 
government has at least 120 full-time lean promoters. They’re 
spending tens of millions of dollars on this lean money pit, Mr. 
Speaker, every year. They’re making cuts to the front lines and 
to seniors’ care. Nurses are raising hundreds of alarm bells. 
 
Now I don’t know whose idea it was, Mr. Speaker, to cut the 
resources when it comes to front-line care for Saskatchewan 
patients and at the same time ramp up spending on more lean 
professionals, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps it was John Black. Maybe 
this is his $40 million contract wisdom that the government just 
took hook, line, and sinker. I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, but will 
the Premier, will he at least admit that it was a mistake to 
follow his awful advice? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, again in the absence of the 
Premier, I’ll take that question on behalf of the Government of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, how the Leader of the Opposition 
can stand in the House and say that in terms of our health care 
providers and the number of providers that we have in this 
province, that the situation is now worse off than it was under 
the NDP, Mr. Speaker? It’s laughable. If it wasn’t so serious, 
Mr. Speaker, of an issue, it would be funny coming from the 
NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can go over the numbers. Under the NDP, we 
had 173 fewer physicians practising in the province. We had 
almost 500 fewer nurses practising from when they started as 

government to when they ended, Mr. Speaker. We had 155 
fewer pharmacists in the province. We had nearly 100 fewer 
physiotherapists in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On all of those counts, the numbers are up. Over 500 additional 
physicians, nearly 600 physicians practising compared to when 
this government started, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, more than 
3,000 nurses of all designations under this government. Mr. 
Speaker, when you look at the track record, the track record is 
clear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had a lot of work to clean up from the NDP 
mess. That work still continues, but we’ll certainly stand on our 
record on this side of the House compared to the members 
opposite. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, they have unprecedented 
revenues and they’ve been spending money, wasting money on 
this lean project. At the same time, Mr. Speaker, not making 
sure that the dollars are going to the front lines where they’re 
needed and not giving little children like Kayden Kot the 
medical care that he needs to do well, Mr. Speaker. They have 
money for 120 full-time lean promoters, do workshops . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . And the member from Wood River 
is talking about potatoes, Mr. Speaker. At a time when we’re 
talking about health care that should be going to families, 
they’re heckling about potatoes, Mr. Speaker. That sums up the 
approach of this government when it comes to health care needs 
here in the province, Mr. Speaker, and it’s unacceptable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nurses in the province have sounded the alarm bell 
about short-staffing. They’ve issued, Mr. Speaker, 870 work 
situation reports when they’ve seen problems, when they have 
seen patient care compromised, when they have seen concerns 
as professionals, Mr. Speaker.  
 
My question to the Premier: what does he have to say to those 
nurses who filed 870 work situation reports? It better not be 
about potatoes, and it better not be about John Black saying that 
lean is the most amazing thing in the world. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, again in the absence of the 
Premier, I’ll take the question on behalf of the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I guess I would say, I would say this: when we 
had overcrowding in the emergency department in 2001 at the 
General Hospital here in Regina, this is what the then Health 
minister had to say, the member from Lakeview, and I quote. 
This is in Hansard, and I quote: 
 

But what I would say is that we know that all across 
Canada there’s a shortage of nurses and that . . . and other 
staff. We also know in emergency wards right across this 
country there are peaks and valleys in the requirements. 

 
Mr. Speaker, you know what this side of the House did, what 
members on this side of the House did, Mr. Speaker? We 
thought, you know what, we do have a shortage. So let’s 



November 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7781 

actually address the problem; let’s set a goal. We set a goal on 
this side of the House of 800 additional RN positions in this 
province. And, Mr. Speaker, you know what we’ve done? 
We’ve exceeded that promise, Mr. Speaker, by a couple of 
hundred. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of all designations for nurses, over 3,000 
practising in this province, Mr. Speaker. There is more work to 
be done. But I think the record would show that if you need that 
work to be done, don’t rely on the members opposite. Rely on 
this side of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Lowering Tobacco Use 
 
Ms. Chartier: — The Cancer Society, the Lung Association, 
and the Heart and Stroke Foundation say this government is 
doing a poor job of protecting the public from the harms of 
tobacco, the leading preventable cause of disease and death in 
our province. 
 
This government collects about $275 million in tax revenue 
from tobacco every year, but it devotes just 450,000 in tobacco 
control programs. That’s the lowest per capita amount in all of 
Canada at just 40 cents per person. When will this government 
finally get serious about tackling tobacco use? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the government, we have made some moves over the 
last number of years to reduce people’s use of tobacco in the 
province, Mr. Speaker. We have passed legislation to make it 
illegal to smoke on school grounds, to smoke in a vehicle with a 
child under the age of 16 present, to smoke near the entrance of 
buildings. We also did make a move that I know that groups 
had been calling for for many years, which was not acted on by 
the previous government, and that was to limit the amount of 
tax-exempt tobacco that could be sold in the province, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s, I think, an important initiative that this 
government has done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at a time where we have seen the national average 
for youth smoking be reduced from, I believe, about 12 per cent 
down to 8 per cent over the term of this government, our rate in 
Saskatchewan has been reduced from 18 per cent down to 10 
per cent. Mr. Speaker, we are continuing to work with our 
counterparts, not only in the province, and accept their 
recommendations. We’ll be looking at their recommendations, 
but as well as our PT [provincial-territorial] partners and the 
new federal government to see which initiatives that they may 
be moving on. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Most Saskatchewan people agree that this 
government should ban smoking in public outdoor spaces such 
as restaurants and bar patios. They should ban candy-flavoured 
tobacco products that are targeted at young people, and they 
should commit to an aggressive, well-funded tobacco reduction 

strategy. Why won’t the Health minister get on board with the 
majority of Saskatchewan citizens and just commit to that 
today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
again we will continue to work with organizations that are 
working not only in the province but outside of the province as 
it relates to providing for recommendations to further improve 
on tobacco use . . . the reduction of tobacco use in our province, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that there is some difference in terms of 
opinions. All you have to do is look even across Western 
Canada where Alberta has, the government in Alberta has 
moved on a ban that essentially is much more restricted, as 
opposed to NDP Manitoba next door to us on the other side that 
has put in place some exemptions as it relates to menthol, 
chewing tobacco, and snuff, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that the new federal minister has a 
mandate that does include for bringing in some national 
legislation as it relates to plain packaging of tobacco. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s something that I wrote to the former Health 
minister last October of last year. And I look forward to 
meeting with the new Health minister in January to have further 
discussions with her on what she may be doing on the national 
level. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Reduction of Carbon Emissions 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday, while he was speaking 
to reporters in Ottawa, the Premier said that Saskatchewan has a 
carbon levy for large emitters. To the Environment minister: is 
that really true, or did the Premier misspeak? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would just like to 
say that Saskatchewan certainly recognizes the importance of 
addressing climate change, and that’s why we’ve taken such 
concrete actions in this province by deploying . . . We heard it 
here in the last several days, in this Assembly, talking about our 
carbon capture sequestration down at Boundary dam 3. It’s a 
very important project. 
 
And I’m very happy to hear on Monday SaskPower’s 
announcement that by 2030, we’ll be going to 50 per cent 
renewals. I think that’s very important. But I think it’s also 
important to remember that climate change is a global problem, 
Mr. Speaker. And I think that by focusing on our technological 
changes that we’re developing here in Saskatchewan, that’s 
going to have global ramifications all across this world. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 



7782 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2015 

Ms. Sproule: — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker. I didn’t hear the 
answer to the question. I’m going to try this again. When 
speaking to reporters in Ottawa yesterday, the Premier said that 
Saskatchewan has a carbon levy for large emitters. And we 
want to know from the Environment minister, is that really true 
or did the Premier misspeak? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve been 
working on several things in the Department of Environment, 
working on a phased approach to what we’re going to do here 
in Saskatchewan. One of the things that we are working on is 
the initial phase. Phase 1 is going to be cutting down our 
emissions from our power plant, and that’s why we’re working 
on Boundary dam 3 as well. 
 
We’ve done a lot of good work here in the province with 
regards to our low-carbon emissions technology. Over the last 
. . . since 2007, there’s been $5 billion invested in this province, 
Mr. Speaker, with regards to low-carbon emissions. And we 
thank the industry, provincial government, federal government 
for doing that. Presently, 25 per cent of our power comes from 
renewables, and certainly by 2030 we’re going to increase that 
to 50 per cent. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier was very clear 
yesterday. He said that Saskatchewan has a carbon levy for 
large emitters. Now we know that the Premier and the 
SaskPower minister have really struggled with using the proper 
tenses here. They said that the carbon capture project was 
working when they apparently meant to say that it hopefully 
will work someday. But it doesn’t make sense for the Premier 
to say that Saskatchewan has a carbon levy for large emitters 
because we don’t. The Sask Party promised to implement one 
back in 2009, but they have failed to do so. 
 
So again to the Environment minister: why did the Premier say 
the government has a carbon levy for large emitters when that’s 
not accurate? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard so many times in 
this House over the past weeks. I would just like to hear the full 
context of what the Premier said down there before I took the 
word of what this member opposite is saying because I would 
need to see what the full context of that was. 
 
One of the things that he did say down in Ottawa last week is 
that we will not be levying a carbon tax in this province. The 
present economy in this province and across Western Canada, I 
don’t think we can stand another tax on consumers, another tax 
on businesses. I would just like to know what that opposition 
would do. Are they in favour of a carbon tax that would further 
cripple the economy of this province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, this is coming from a minister 
who didn’t know whether climate change was real, and now he 
apparently can’t read the newspapers to find out what his own 
Premier is saying in Ottawa. We want this government, we 
want this government to implement the carbon levy for large 
emitters. We want the Saskatchewan technology fund 
implemented which would reinvest that money into green 
innovation here in Saskatchewan. 
 
What we don’t want is for the Premier to fly around making 
statements that don’t match reality about this government’s 
shameful record on climate change. So to the Environment 
minister: since the Premier has already told the world that we 
have a carbon levy in place for large emitters, why not do the 
right thing and finally implement it. It’s been six years since 
they proposed it. Why not finally get the job done? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Mr. Speaker, I really welcome this 
opportunity to finally set the record straight. And again, we’re 
hearing part of what was said before. I’d just like to clear up 
what I said on my first interview after I became Environment 
minister, and had the member opposite heard that transcript or 
read that transcript since, she would know that my answer to 
that question was, yes I believe that it was an issue we all 
should be concerned about as individuals and certainly as 
government. So the short answer to that question, Mr. Speaker, 
is yes, we believe in climate change and we believe in helping 
to mitigate the effects that man is having on that climate 
change. 
 
And I would repeat my question to them: are they in favour of a 
carbon tax who would further cripple this economy of this 
province or are they not? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, we’re going to try this one more 
time. We’ve had five Environment ministers who have 
promised this carbon levy for large emitters. This is the fifth 
minister to come along, and we want to know whether or not he 
is going to agree with what the Premier’s saying. The Premier 
says you have a carbon levy. Is that true or did the Premier 
misspeak? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Mr. Speaker, there’s only one way to answer 
that again: without hearing the full transcript of what the 
Premier said in Ottawa, I’m not prepared to comment on it. I’m 
not going to take the word of that member opposite on what 
was said by the Premier. I would like to see it before I do. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Costs and Benefits of Public-Private Partnerships 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Unbelievable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Setting aside the highly questionable location chosen by this 



November 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7783 

government for the bypass, my question to the SaskBuilds 
minister is, will he admit that the capital costs, operation costs, 
maintenance costs, and rehabilitation costs of the Sask Party’s 
P3 [public-private partnership] rent-a-road bypass scheme is 
going to cost Saskatchewan taxpayers more than $100 million 
than a traditional, straightforward approach? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’ll answer that question as Minister Responsible for 
SaskBuilds. Mr. Speaker, this morning we were proud to 
release the value-for-money report with respect to the Regina 
bypass, which demonstrates that we will be saving $380 million 
to the taxpayers of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’ll remind the member, who was at a technical briefing 
this morning, that our auditor has said we have effective 
practices for evaluating P3s. I’ll also remind him, Mr. Speaker, 
that the auditor said that risks are real when it comes to transfer 
of risk with respect to these projects. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s amazing to me that this member can 
continue to play politics with a very, very important 
infrastructure project, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to deliver this 
bypass on time. We’re going to deliver it on budget six years 
sooner than would otherwise have been done using a traditional 
approach, Mr. Speaker, and at the same time saving $380 
million for the taxpayers of this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — It was a really straightforward question 
to that minister. All he had to say was yes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In that technical briefing this morning, there were question after 
question that wasn’t answered by that minister here today, Mr. 
Speaker. The fact of the matter is that if you just go to the 
government’s own document, you can see within their numbers 
there that there is a significant savings for the traditional, 
straightforward approach, cheaper than the P3 approach. That’s 
what the numbers show, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the Sask Party is so ideologically bound to the P3 approach 
that they had to add a $480 million of what they call risk 
transfer that they won’t define or won’t provide the details on, 
so they could tip the scales in favour of their preferred P3 
approach. That doesn’t sound like evidence-based decision 
maker . That sounds like decision-based evidence making, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
To the SaskBuilds minister: will he at least admit that the risk 
calculation is based on a whole lot of assumptions and let us 
know why he won’t publicly release those numbers publicly 
and why wouldn’t he support an independent audit of those 
numbers? What’s he hiding? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll repeat my answer. We 
do a detailed risk analysis with respect to these P3 projects, Mr. 

Speaker. A significant part of a P3 project is the transfer of risk 
from the government to the proponent team, Mr. Speaker. 
Those risks are real, Mr. Speaker. The auditor has said that. The 
member opposite would be prepared to sit and rely on an audit 
report out of Ontario without listening — and I know he has 
respect for the Saskatchewan auditor — without listening to 
what the Saskatchewan auditor has to say, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, this is an important project for the 
people of Saskatchewan. And in terms of releasing 
commercially sensitive information, and we explained to him 
this morning, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, this government will not 
release commercially sensitive information. When they were in 
government, Mr. Speaker, they wouldn’t release commercially 
sensitive information with respect to traditional projects. We’re 
not going to do it with respect to traditional projects or with 
respect to our P3 projects. 
 
If it’s their position, Mr. Speaker, that commercially sensitive 
information needs to be released by the government, then he 
needs to stand up and tell the people of Saskatchewan, tell 
contractors that contract with the government that he is 
prepared to release that information if they were the 
government, Mr. Speaker. I very much suspect that they would 
be very disappointed with that answer. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 1,058 through 1,087. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 1,058 through 1,087. 
 
I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to order the answers to 
question 1,088. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered a 
response to question 1,088. 
 
I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 1,089 through 1,094. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 1,089 through 1,094. 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Immigration. 



7784 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2015 

Trans-Pacific Partnership 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise today on a motion before the 
House and a question before the House that’s of significant 
importance for the province of Saskatchewan, and I speak 
specifically of the Trans-Pacific Partnership. 
 
This was an agreement that was reached by 12 countries who 
had been members of the TPP [Trans-Pacific Partnership] 
process. That agreement was assigned, announced on October 
the 5th, 2015, a deal that’s going to be the largest free trade 
zone in the world, the most comprehensive free trade agreement 
on the planet, and going to be something that’s very important 
for this province going forward. 
 
The agreement . . . Of course maybe I’ll talk a bit about 
Saskatchewan’s reliance on exports. This province, of course, is 
a very large exporter of goods right around the world, whether 
that be agricultural products, whether that be potash, whether 
that be energy products, whether that be other 
mining-associated commodities. We are very, very dependent 
on trade. $35 billion a year of GDP [gross domestic product] is 
generated by exports each and every year in this province and 
has been increasing steadily over the last eight years, I might 
add as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In terms of the free trade zone that’s being created, there’s an 
area of 800 million people, a GDP of $28.5 trillion of whom 
and with whom we will be able to trade freely in terms of our 
export products. We are the most export-reliant province in the 
country, Mr. Speaker. Last year we exported more than $25 
billion worth of goods to our TPP partners, which was 71 per 
cent of our province’s entire exports. 
 
And the reason this is so important, Mr. Speaker, that Canada 
be a part of the TPP, is that by not being a part of the TPP . . . 
There’s going to be very significant tariff reductions. Tariff 
lines are being reduced right across, right across the board for 
other countries. If we are not a part of the TPP and are not able 
to trade on that preferential basis, we’re going to be left behind 
and we’re going to be at a very, very significant competitive 
disadvantage with our partners and with our competitors around 
the world. So it’s pivotally important that we actually sign on to 
this agreement and ratify this agreement as expeditiously as we 
possibly can. 
 
And that’s why we put this motion into the House here today, 
Mr. Speaker. We want to hopefully speak with one voice as a 
province. We’ll see. It remains to be seen, I guess, but we hope 
to speak with one voice from this legislature and sending that 
message to the national government and encouraging them to 
put the ratification to a vote in parliament as rapidly as they can. 
So we believe this is very important. 
 
[14:45] 
 
I just want to touch on some of the benefits that we’re going to 
see specifically for Saskatchewan in this agreement. And we’re 
going to see benefits right across the country, in all sectors of 
the economy, but I’m going to look at kind of 
Saskatchewan-specific sectors where we’re going to see 
benefits. 

Agricultural equipment is a big one. We know that we’ve had 
some very, very successful agricultural manufacturers, 
agricultural equipment manufacturers here in Saskatchewan 
who have done great work in building their companies, 
expanding their markets. This is going to give them even more 
opportunity to do that. 
 
On the harvesters, mowers, and other ag equipment category, 
tariffs of up to 5 per cent will be eliminated within three years 
in Vietnam. In Australia and New Zealand, tariffs of up to 5 per 
cent will be eliminated upon the agreement taking effect. In 
Malaysia, tariffs of up to 30 per cent will be eliminated within 
three years. Agricultural equipment manufacturers also believe 
that thanks to TPP and the benefits the agreement will bring to 
our agriculture and agri-food producers, they’ll sell more 
equipment here as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in terms of the tariff lines that I had referenced earlier, in 
terms of the reductions, we’re going to see very significant 
reductions across the board. But we’re going to be seeing some 
very significant reductions in Japan, which is a market that we 
currently sell into, but a market where we think that we have 
tremendous opportunity to sell more into. In terms of tariffs on 
canola oil, these will be eliminated within five years in Japan 
and in Vietnam as well. 
 
Dried peas will have their tariffs eliminated within two years in 
Vietnam, and over-quota tariffs eliminated within 10 years in 
Japan. In Vietnam we’ll see tariff elimination of 10 per cent on 
our honey immediately upon the TPP taking force, which will 
obviously open up a significant new market for some of our 
honey producers here in the province. And Japan will eliminate 
their tariff of 25.5 per cent within seven years on honey as well. 
 
TPP will provide new access for wheat and barley, and of 
course anybody listening and in this Chamber knows what an 
important pair of crops those are for Saskatchewan. In Japan, 
feed barley will be duty free upon the agreement taking effect, 
while food barley markups will be reduced by 45 per cent 
within eight years. Wheat producers will see Vietnam’s tariffs 
of up to 5 per cent eliminated once the TPP takes effect as well 
as Japan’s tariff on feed wheat. Japan’s markups on food wheat 
will be reduced by 45 per cent in eight years. 
 
In terms of our beef industry, this will also be substantially 
benefited by Canada being a member of the TPP. We’ll see 
tariff reductions of 38.5 per cent down to 9 per cent on fresh 
and frozen beef in the next 15 years in terms of Japan. In terms 
of Vietnam, they’ll be reducing tariffs of up to 31 per cent on 
fresh and frozen beef within two years. 
 
And also, something that didn’t get a whole lot of play I don’t 
think when the agreement was first announced, but the forestry 
sector is going to be greatly benefited by this. Japan will be 
eliminating its tariffs of up to 6 per cent, within 15 years, on 
lumber. Australia will be eliminating its lumber tariffs of up to 
5 per cent upon the agreement’s entry into force. Brunei’s 
tariffs of up to 20 per cent on lumber will be eliminated upon 
entry into force. 
 
OSB, oriented strand board, tariffs will be eliminated upon the 
TPP taking effect in Malaysia, Brunei, Australia, and New 
Zealand, which is going to be very helpful for our OSB 



November 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7785 

producers here in Saskatchewan. Japan will be eliminating its 
OSB tariff within 15 years, opening up a significant new market 
and giving us a significant advantage in trading into that market 
from where we sit right now. 
 
And TPP will further ensure that we have our potash industry 
continuing to be able to export into these countries where we 
know we sell a lot of potash. 
 
Today in Saskatchewan, even before we benefit from the TPP, 
one in five jobs depend on international exports, so we need to 
have this agreement ratified. 
 
And there’s other very, very significant and important parts of 
the agreement in terms of the technical barriers to trade. There’s 
an entire chapter on eliminating technical barriers to trade based 
on some WTO [World Trade Organization] guidelines in terms 
of that. But what these are, technical barriers to trade, are 
essentially . . . They’re standards. They are certain things that 
national governments can put in place to make sure that the 
health and safety of citizens are protected, and that’s important. 
But they’re also on occasion used as a barrier, as a trade 
impediment to protect domestic industry. 
 
So we’re going to see an entire . . . There is an entire chapter. 
And these TBT [technical barriers to trade] chapters are 
included in CETA [Canada-European Union Comprehensive 
Economic and Trade Agreement] and Canada-Korea and other 
free trade agreements as well. So this isn’t entirely new, but it is 
new in terms of our relationship with these 11 countries. 
 
We’re going to be seeing a brand new chapter on small- and 
medium-sized enterprises. We’ve never actually had an entire 
chapter in a free trade agreement that’s been dedicated to SMEs 
[small- and medium-sized enterprise] before. We know how 
important SMEs are. There’s about seven and a half million 
SMEs that are active in Canada, or thereabouts, I believe. This 
is going to allow those companies who are small- or 
medium-sized enterprises to have the ability to export and work 
in the partner countries that we have, and hopefully we’re going 
to be able to use this concept going forward as a part of future 
free trade agreements. So it’s an important and innovative new 
way of making sure that we can engage all parts of our 
economy in these trade deals. 
 
The other part of the agreement, there had been criticism in the 
lead up to the actual announcement of the agreement with 
regard to supply managed industries. When the agreement came 
out, I think we actually saw some pretty positive reaction from 
supply managed industries when they recognized that there was 
protection for the pillars of supply management and for 
programs that the Government of Canada had put in place to 
ensure that supply managed farmers, producers are able to stay 
whole financially. 
 
So there was a provision that . . . about three and a quarter per 
cent, I believe, increase in terms of milk, exported milk quota 
over and above what we produce right now would be allowed 
into the country. So there’d be some additional opportunity for 
export into Canada, but for the most part we saw positive 
reaction from even supply managed industries. 
 
A chapter on sanitary and phytosanitary standards, which are 

basically health and safety for agricultural products, what we 
again, kind of in the lines of the technical barrier to trade 
chapter, these are often used as . . . or on occasion used as 
non-tariff barriers to import. By actually having these addressed 
in the agreement, and they were addressed in CETA and in 
Canada-Korea and other free trade agreements as well, but 
having the sanitary and phytosanitary protection will allow for 
us to have some certainty in terms of the export of our ag 
products and that we’re not going to be facing unfair action, 
trade action, from partner countries. 
 
Protection on intellectual property, which also we would find I 
think in other trade agreements and it’s often based on . . . It is 
based on WTO work that had been done, World Trade 
Organization work that had been done. 
 
A chapter on e-commerce, which is a new thing as well as far as 
free trade agreements go, that provide protections for those 
doing commerce on the Internet, protecting of privacy of those 
that are both engaged in that business and those that participate 
as consumers. So these are positive things as well. 
 
We saw chapters as well . . . There was about 20 chapters in the 
agreement. I’m just touching on a few of them. But in terms of 
labour and environmental standards, ensuring that the countries 
that are partner to the agreement have appropriate labour and 
environmental standards. 
 
And this agreement was widely supported. We have . . . I have a 
list. I’m not going to read all of them, but just right here, 37 
letters of support for TPP, many in Saskatchewan: North 
Saskatoon Business Association, Saskatoon Chamber of 
Commerce, Sask Pork, Canola Council of Canada, Canadian 
Cattlemen, Saskatchewan Manufacturing Council, Sask Pulse, 
Sask Cattlemen’s Association, Sask Stockgrowers Association, 
Barley Council of Canada, SaskCanola — I’m just trying to hit 
on the Saskatchewan-specific ones — but many, many. Wide 
support right across the spectrum in terms of industry groups 
and in terms of business organizations. 
 
So this is a deal that’s going to be very, very good for 
Saskatchewan, I think almost unequivocally, unarguably a 
positive thing for Saskatchewan. Not being a part of this deal 
would be very bad for Saskatchewan. It would be a very 
negative thing. We need to . . . Obviously it’s not up to us to 
ratify the agreement, but I think by having this Assembly speak 
with one voice and encouraging the Government of Canada to 
ratify this agreement as rapidly as they can will be sending a 
very important message. And we’ll be moving a motion of 
transmittal in addition to the main motion which I’ll be moving 
shortly. 
 
But I think it would be really positive if we could have that one 
voice. And we know the NDP had indicated initially that the 
deal sounded good for Saskatchewan. They indicated shortly 
after that they needed time to take a look at the agreement, 
which is fair. The agreement’s been, in its entirety, has been 
publicly available now for nearly a month. The New Zealand 
government, which is the repository of the agreement, has had it 
online. It’s on the Internet, and the members of the opposition 
have had a full month to review the agreement in the legal form. 
The full agreement was basically released on October the 5th as 
well. It wasn’t in its legal framework, but it has been now for 



7786 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2015 

about a month. We’re hoping that the NDP will be supporting 
this, that we can speak with one voice in this legislature and 
send that one voice to, that message to Ottawa that we need this 
agreement ratified expeditiously, that Canada needs to be a part 
of this agreement, that we need to be at that table. 
 
Actually I had a very good discussion with the consul general 
from the United States this morning as well with regard to this 
issue amongst others, and the United States is moving full 
steam ahead. The president had been granted trade promotion 
authority. I think we’ll be seeing a presidential signature on the 
agreement. There’s still a bit of a time frame in terms of 
congressional approval, but the president said TPA [trade 
promotion authority] will be lasting until I think the beginning 
of February. 
 
So this agreement is a very good one for Saskatchewan. It’s a 
very good one for Canada. It’s the result of many, many years 
of, at times, challenging negotiation and trade-offs. But in terms 
of Saskatchewan, this is unequivocally positive. This is a very 
good thing for us. And I think it’s incumbent on us to speak 
with that one voice, to send that message to Ottawa, and to have 
this agreement ratified as quickly as possible. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will move the motion: 
 

That this Assembly supports the Trans-Pacific Partnership 
trade agreement, the largest and most ambitious free trade 
initiative in history, and calls on the Government of 
Canada to ratify the finalized agreement at the earliest 
possible opportunity. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Immigration: 
 

That this agreement supports the Trans-Pacific Partnership 
trade agreement, the largest and most ambitious free trade 
initiative in history, and calls on the Government of 
Canada to ratify the finalized agreement at the earliest 
possible opportunity. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
enter into this debate on this motion around the Trans-Pacific 
Partnership agreement. And I think I want to start from a 
perspective where the New Democratic Party and the New 
Democratic Party governments over many decades in 
Saskatchewan have always been pro-trade. We’ve always been 
a party that’s promoting what’s happening in Saskatchewan. 
 
We’re concerned about getting an open market for 
Saskatchewan products, and we’ve always held that 
perspective. But we’ve also held the perspective that 
Saskatchewan citizens deserve the best, they deserve protection, 
and they deserve careful review of any document. It was very 
distressing, you know, a few weeks ago when the Minister of 
Trade for Saskatchewan made the comment about our party 
saying, “I’m hopeful that they don’t say that they need to see 
the details.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s changed slightly today, but I think what we 

know, what we know is we have a version of this agreement 
which every single page says at the top of it, “Subject to legal 
review in English, Spanish, and French for accuracy, clarity, 
and consistency subject to authentication of English, Spanish, 
and French versions.” Mr. Speaker, what we’re dealing with 
here is a question around what will the finalized agreement be. 
 
We know from our new federal government that they’re very 
much concerned about what this actually means for Canadians, 
and they are going take some time to take a very careful look at 
this document. Because we know that it was rushed at the end 
to deal with the fact that . . . a number of factors, but one of the 
key factors was that we were having an election in Canada. 
 
[15:00] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I know that we on this side of the House are 
going to be very careful in how we look at the documents that 
are here. And so, Mr. Speaker, I think we need to spend some 
time taking a look at what’s here. We need to understand what 
it is that is . . . the document that’s taking place here. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, in the very first part of the agreement it 
sets out who are the parties to this agreement. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, for the record — because the minister hasn’t done this 
— for the record, the parties to this agreement are: Australia, 
the Commonwealth government; Brunei Darussalam, the 
national level of government; Canada, the Government of 
Canada; Chile, the national level of government; Japan, the 
Government of Japan; Malaysia, the federal level of 
government; Mexico, the federal level of government; New 
Zealand, the national level of government; Peru, the national 
level of government; Singapore, the national level of 
government; United States, the federal level of government; and 
Vietnam, the national level of government. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have an agreement involving 12 parties, 
and all of these parties have been involved obviously in other 
agreements and other information. And in the very opening 
clauses of this agreement it states very succinctly this. It says 
that this agreement . . . Just give me a second here. This is the 
very opening page. It says this agreement is going to establish a 
comprehensive regional agreement, and it’s going to cover 
probably the largest area in the world. It’s going to deal with 
issues of: 
 

. . . economic integration to liberalise trade and 
investment, bring economic growth and social benefits, 
create new opportunities for workers and businesses, 
contribute to raising living standards, benefit consumers, 
reduce poverty and promote sustainable growth. 

 
That’s the very first paragraph of this document. And if you can 
see there, this is very much a forward-looking document about 
improving the life for all citizens of all of these countries. And 
that includes all of us here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So what does it mean that it’s going to do that? It also is here to 
strengthen the bonds of friendship and co-operation between 
these 12 countries. And it’s going to build on the respective 
rights and obligations under the Marrakesh Agreement 
Establishing the World Trade Organization. 
 



November 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7787 

So, Mr. Speaker, on the 15th day of April in 1994, a whole 
number of countries in the world established an organization 
called the World Trade Organization. And this organization has 
dealt with many issues that affect international business, but 
that it also affects the rights and the benefits for citizens around 
the country. And so what this Trans-Pacific Partnership does is 
it builds on the World Trade Organization. And, as we’ll see as 
we go through this document, it builds on the various GATT 
[General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade] agreements that deal 
with very specific issues. 
 
But what also this agreement is to do — and I think it’s 
important we understand the intent of these 12 countries — is 
that it’s also going to recognize the differences in their levels of 
development and diversity of economies. It’s going to 
strengthen the competitiveness of their businesses in global 
markets, and it’s going to enhance the competitiveness of their 
economies by promoting opportunities of businesses, including 
the promoting and the development and strengthening of 
regional supply chains. 
 
And you know, it’s also interesting to look at how carefully 
things are worded at the front end of a document. And so what 
this gets to is why these 12 countries are interested in working 
together. They understand, and they understand that the trade, 
the regional supply chains throughout this area are crucial for 
the further economic development of their countries and the 
further economic development and the further social 
development of their citizens. 
 
It also states very clearly that this agreement is going to support 
the growth and development of micro-, small-, and 
medium-sized enterprises by enhancing their ability to 
participate in and benefit from the opportunities created by this 
agreement. Mr. Speaker, I think that’s a significant goal, 
because many of the largest companies in the world that control 
much of the international trade are in these 12 countries and so 
they also have a very specific goal of making sure the smaller 
businesses are going to be able to compete in a worldwide 
fashion as opposed to just in their local areas. 
 
It’s also the goal here to “Establish a predictable legal and 
commercial framework for trade and investment through 
mutually advantageous rules.” And so we have these 12 
countries and they’re going to create some rules that are to their 
advantage. Obviously this is also taking place within the World 
Trade Organization and so there’ll be discussions about whether 
they’re benefits for trade or restrictions on trade. But the goal is 
that it should be mutually advantageous at least for the 12 
parties to this agreement. 
 
Its also going to “Facilitate regional trade by promoting 
efficient and transparent customs procedures that reduce cost 
and ensure predictability for their importers and exporters.” Mr. 
Speaker, this speaks to the kinds of discussions that arose in 
many of the bilateral agreements between Canada and US 
[United States] over 150 years. It also speaks to the NAFTA 
[North American Free Trade Agreement] and what’s happened 
between Canada, US, and Mexico. And hopefully there’s some 
recognition that there’s still lots of work to do between our 
southern Saskatchewan border and our Montana and North 
Dakota, because we still have quite a few procedures that are 
very, very costly. But maybe this has got some advantages 

there. We’ll have to find out. 
 
It also emphasizes that it’s going to: 
 

Recognise the inherent right to regulate and resolve to 
preserve the flexibility of the Parties to set legislative and 
regulatory priorities [so in other words, regulate business 
also], safeguard public welfare, and protect legitimate 
public welfare objectives, such as public health, safety, the 
environment, the conservation of living or non-living 
exhaustible natural resources, the integrity and stability of 
the financial system, and public morals. 

 
So we have in here in a very short paragraph an encapsulation 
of the goals, I think, for all citizens of the earth, that we want to 
make sure that we’re able to preserve this place as a place to 
live for ourselves, for our children and our grandchildren, and 
for many, many generations. 
 
And so practically it also has a clause or a recognition that 
there’s an “inherent right to adopt, maintain, or modify health 
care systems.” In other words there’s going to be a recognition 
that different places may have different kinds of health care 
systems, but clearly there’s a goal to have public health be a 
benefit right across the board. 
 
Another goal of this agreement is to: 
 

Affirm [in other words, recognize and affirm] that 
state-owned enterprises can play a legitimate role in the 
diverse economies of the Parties, while recognizing that 
the provision of unfair advantages to state-owned 
enterprises undermines fair and open trade and investment, 
and resolve to . . . [set up] rules for state-owned 
enterprises that promote a level playing field with 
privately owned businesses, [and also with] transparency 
and [with] sound business practices. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s a topic that we’ll get at a little later 
when we get into some of the chapters and it’s one that’s, I 
think, crucial for Saskatchewan and for Canada because we 
have a number of state-owned enterprises. Probably not as 
many as some of the other partners in this agreement but we do 
have some very important state-owned enterprises that play a 
very legitimate role in our Saskatchewan economy and our 
Canadian economy. 
 
Another goal of this agreement is to: 
 

Promote high levels of environmental protection, 
including through effective enforcement of environmental 
laws, and [also to] further the aims of sustainable 
development, including through mutually supportive trade 
and environmental policies and practices. 

 
And this is obviously a question that was being dealt with in 
question period today around our provincial laws. We maybe 
have some hope in Canada again that we will work in this area 
to do some things that are important for not just Saskatchewan 
and Canada but for the whole country. 
 
We also have a goal in this agreement to: 
 



7788 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2015 

Protect and enforce labour rights, improve working 
conditions and living standards, strengthen cooperation 
and . . . [all of the different countries’] capacity on labour 
issues. 

 
And there’s a specific reference in that clause in that chapter 
when we get there about the International Labour Organization. 
And we know the role that that organization played in dealing 
with some provincial legislation which was held to be 
unconstitutional, and so this agreement has some direct impact 
on the ability of provincial legislatures to create labour law. 
And so I think we need to look pretty carefully at what that 
means and how it’s, once again, part of the protection of 
workers when they are often in a position where they don’t have 
as much power as the people that they are bargaining with about 
their jobs. 
 
There’s also a whole section in this agreement which goes to 
promote transparency. In other words, have governments tell us 
what they’re doing, share the information about how they’re 
making decisions, making sure they’re using good evidence. It 
also promotes good governance and the rule of law, and that’s 
clearly what our job is here in this legislature. Also, promoting 
the elimination of bribery and corruption in trade and 
investment. 
 
Another section deals with the important work that all of the 
various authorities and countries are doing to strengthen 
macroeconomic co-operation, including on exchange rate issues 
in the appropriate places. And this is a very interesting and 
good goal, but we obviously feel that in Saskatchewan now, 
because most often our international trade deals are set out in 
American funds, or if they’re in Canadian funds, there’s some 
kind of a hedging that goes on to make sure there’s some 
protection for our businesses here. It may be that through 
co-operative work through these 12 countries, we would 
develop some co-operative ways in dealing with some of the 
exchange rate issues. 
 
Another section of this agreement recognizes the importance of 
cultural identity and diversity among and within countries, and 
that trade and investment can expand opportunities to enrich 
cultural identity and diversity at home and abroad. And I think 
that’s an important clause for Saskatchewan that we haven’t 
heard much about. But it’s about what some people call tribal 
economies. That’s a term that’s been used in the last 20 or 30 
years, but it’s about how people like to do businesses with 
others that they know. 
 
And so we know that there’s international connections among 
our Canadian or Saskatchewan people. If they know a 
Saskatchewan person is running a business in Texas, well, you 
make some connection. But there’s also connections in the 
South Asian community. There’s connections within the 
Chinese diaspora around the world. There’s connections within 
the Jewish community, within the Lebanese community, within 
the Norwegian community. I can say that myself. 
 
[15:15] 
 
And also this is a recognition that that type of trade is 
something that needs to be enhanced and promoted. And one of 
the advantages that we have here in Saskatchewan is that we 

have many different cultural backgrounds and many 
connections around the world and, as we’ve seen in the last 
couple of decades, an expanded array of new citizens in 
Saskatchewan who bring their connections to trade around the 
world. And clearly one of the poster childs of that kind of 
expansion is the expansion in the production of lentils here in 
Saskatchewan through Mr. Al-Katib and his company. That 
builds on an international business situation with also the 
cultural identity in trade as an important factor. 
 
Another part of this agreement talks about contributing to the 
harmonious development and expansion of world trade, and 
provide a catalyst to broader regional and international 
co-operation. Mr. Speaker, I think that goal relates to this whole 
agreement, including the 12 nations that are around the Pacific 
area. It doesn’t include all the Pacific nations but it includes 
many of them, and I think we would identify that the biggest 
one not included is China. But what this agreement is saying is 
that there may be ways that there can be broader regional and 
international co-operation. And one of the goals in this 
agreement is to be a base from which to work to build that 
broader co-operation. 
 
And then there’s a clause that basically sets out an agreement to 
address future trade and investment challenges and 
opportunities and contribute to the advancing of their respective 
priorities over time. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s a very kind, I 
think, and generous way of describing dispute resolution. In 
other words, if we’re going to have some disputes — trade 
disputes — that relate to this agreement, we’ve got a system 
whereby those challenges can be dealt with in an orderly 
fashion. The procedures are set out in advance and they will 
hopefully resolve those differences as quickly as possible. 
 
Now we as Canadians have quite a bit of experience in dealing 
with these kinds of issues. Whether it’s in the lumber industry 
where we in Saskatchewan get caught in the international battle 
between Canada and US around the lumber trade, or obviously 
the whole issue of automobile manufacture and how that’s 
worked out, the country origin of . . . labelling issue, which is 
still one that’s not totally resolved at this stage. There’s a whole 
number of issues like this that . . . There’s an intention here that 
this particular part of this partnership agreement will address 
some of those challenges or those conflicts. 
 
And then I think the final area or the final section of the 
agreement relates to the inclusion of other states that aren’t 
there yet. And so it says the partnership’s going to encourage 
the other states or separate customs territories to join this 
agreement to enhance the regional economic integration and 
create the foundations for . . . the foundation of a free trade area 
of the Asia Pacific. So I think that’s an invitation to our 
neighbours to be included in this particular agreement. 
 
And so as you can see, there’s quite a few goals and issues in 
this document which, as I said before, is still in the process of 
being finalized. And I think that there’s a lot of work to be done 
on the provincial level, on the national level in Canada, to 
understand what this means for all of the citizens of 
Saskatchewan and the citizens of Canada. 
 
And so as a result, the details do matter. The details are 
important, because how else are we going to understand what it 



November 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7789 

means for our province? And as I said before, we are always . . . 
We’re the number one trading province in Canada, and that’s 
been the advantage that we’ve had for many years. 
 
I know that we’re all proud of the work that the Romanow 
government did in establishing STEP [Saskatchewan Trade and 
Export Partnership]. And STEP was an organization for trade 
enhancement, and it’s still doing a very good job today in 
building those connections with our, I guess, buyers or 
purchasers of our assets around the world. And when that whole 
organization was brought into place, it was as a result of 
substantial consultation with the Saskatchewan business 
community, led by people within the government and very 
capable civil servants. And ultimately we ended up with an 
organization that has much government involvement but very 
substantial private involvement as well. 
 
And that type of perspective is what informs our trade policy 
here in Saskatchewan. It’s that constant discussion going back 
and forth to make sure that the rules work for our Saskatchewan 
people, for our Saskatchewan businesses. And we’ve clearly . . . 
That came in a time when we had the North American Free 
Trade Agreement as a given, and what was the rules that we had 
in North America. 
 
I know that there were, at times, issues that arose in that context 
that directly affected our Saskatchewan institutions, and we 
wanted to make sure that there were protections for some of the 
ways that we organized our utilities, which are still there. We 
wanted to understand what it meant for our delivery of health 
care, and we continue to raise those questions as, you know, 
this whole process moves forward. 
 
And so I think just on those two questions alone, there’s much 
to be said for taking a careful look at this agreement. Because as 
I said before in the preamble, that clearly the goal right up on 
. . . The very number one goal is to basically bring economic 
growth and social benefits, liberalize trade and investment, 
create new opportunities for workers and businesses, and 
contribute to raising living standards, benefit consumers, reduce 
poverty, and promote sustainable growth. And so, Mr. Speaker, 
those are the fundamental goals, I think, of any good 
government. 
 
And so practically we need to know what this agreement does 
to enhance those issues. And it’s not just about, how does this 
benefit our businesses? It’s important about that, but it’s not just 
that. 
 
And so let’s take a little look at what this agreement is and try 
to see where some of the positives are and where some of the 
negatives are. We know that there are 12 countries that are 
involved in this deal, and I gave you the names earlier. And this 
agreement, when it’s ratified at some point after it’s finalized — 
and clearly that’s going to take some time — will create the 
largest trade zone in the world. It covers North America, South 
America, Asia, and Australia. Or Australasia, I guess they call 
that. And it’s 800 million people. And clearly that number 
would jump substantially if China joined in with the group, but 
still it’s 800 million people. And we’re quite a small chunk of 
that coming from Canada, and even a smaller piece coming 
from Saskatchewan. 
 

The combined gross domestic product of these 12 companies is 
about $28.5 trillion, and this is about 40 per cent of the world’s 
economic output. And thus the hyperbole in describing this I 
think is accurate, because it does affect a very large part of the 
globe. 
 
One of the key issues for Canada, which wasn’t always obvious 
in the negotiations, related to the automobile industry. The 
North American Free Trade Agreement, which took some 
getting used to when it was brought in, had established the fact 
that sixty-two and a half per cent of a motor vehicle’s content 
had to be local. So if it was made in the States, it would be 62.5; 
if it was made in Canada it was 62.5. And effectively they 
worked out ways so cars were built all over North America and 
South America and Mexico. 
 
This agreement, at whatever time it comes in effect, would 
reduce that sixty-two and a half per cent to 45 per cent. Now 
it’s been I think about 85 years, or maybe a little less, 80 years 
since we were producing cars, General Motors cars, in Regina, 
so it doesn’t directly affect us. But I think there may be some 
businesses in Saskatchewan that provide parts to cars and so 
this affects our Saskatchewan business as well. I know one 
business in Saskatchewan that was making some of the sound 
baffling systems out of our flax straw and that would be 
affected by this type of an agreement. 
 
Now another factor involved in this particular agreement, and 
this is a decision made by the previous federal government and 
we’ll have to see how that works out over the longer term, but 
effectively the Government of Canada, under the previous 
administration, promised to protect current dairy, chicken, and 
egg farmer revenues at a cost of $4.3 billion over 15 years. And 
also this agreement allows for access to 3.25 per cent of 
Canada’s dairy market and 2.1 per cent of the poultry market. 
And the numbers sound somewhat small but we know that there 
are some issues in this area and, when we get to that chapter a 
little later dealing with some of the agricultural stuff, we will 
have a chance to see what kinds of things are affected. 
 
Another number here that’s important for Canadians is the 
value, the annual value of Canada’s exports of metals and 
minerals to these 11 countries. And the annual average of 
money over the years 2012 to 2014, according to numbers 
provided by the federal government, said that the annual sales 
or trade amount to these 11 countries was 158.6 billion. And we 
know, as one of the leading mining jurisdictions in Canada, 
Saskatchewan, it’s a very important part of our business. And 
the items that are included in that metals and minerals section 
would be petroleum products, which we have; potash, which we 
have; precious metal, which we have; iron, which we have; and 
steel, which we have; aluminum; and I guess we have some 
nickel. But the aluminum isn’t one that we have here in 
Saskatchewan. So right away one of the key parts of this 
agreement does affect Saskatchewan. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Now one of the other factors to look at, there’s a number of free 
trade agreements that Canada has with countries on top of this 
and we know that there are 40 other countries where we have 
free trade agreements on top of the 11 that are included in this 
proposed agreement. So it is important. It is a major factor in 



7790 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2015 

what’s going on. 
 
Now as we know, this agreement, you know, is in the process of 
being finalized. It’s not there yet. And what always needs to 
take place is that many different voices take a look at what is 
going on and register their praise or their concern so that we can 
understand exactly what the effects are. Unfortunately much of 
that kind of information wasn’t available during the discussions 
that took place, and so we’re at a point where we’re having to 
play catch-up. And I don’t think it’s appropriate to just sort of 
jump on and say, oh, we’ve got to approve everything that’s 
here. We need to ask the important questions because it does 
affect our Saskatchewan businesses. It does affect our 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Does it affect our labour rules? We don’t know that for sure yet. 
We’re looking at that. Does it affect our health care? That’s an 
area that we’ll get into a little later, but I think there are some 
major voices being raised in Australia and in New Zealand and 
the United States and in Canada around some of the patent 
protection for pharmaceuticals that may or may not have some 
difficulties for us. What we’ve known for decades is that the 
highest price for pharmaceuticals in the world is the United 
States. And I think they would, many of the people in their 
health care system would like to get Australian prices or 
Canadian prices or some other, but this appears maybe to have 
the other effect, that we’ll have similar prices but we’ll all be 
jacking them up rather than dealing with these on a broader 
basis. 
 
And so we need to understand what that means. We’re having a 
hard enough time in our province with the money that’s being 
allocated to health care to provide for our citizens. And if the 
trade side of the world is off increasing prices to something 
that’s as important as health care is to our Saskatchewan 
citizens, then we need to know about that before we jump 
wholeheartedly into endorsing this. And unfortunately we don’t 
yet have that information. We have much more than we did two 
or three weeks ago, but we don’t have that information yet. 
 
And so what kinds of other issues are here relates to the kinds 
of longer term issues that are included. And if you think about 
Saskatchewan industry, I think the minister did list some of the 
areas where what we produce here will be affected. I’m not sure 
he mentioned alcohol, but clearly that’s one factor. We don’t 
produce autos, but we do produce auto parts. 
 
And clearly agriculture is a big part of this agreement. Beef and 
pork, that’s clearly an area where there can be some advantages 
for us, especially in opening up or reopening the trade with 
meat products to Japan. And so we also know that many of the 
countries on the other side of the Pacific are increasing the 
amount of beef and pork and chicken that they’re eating, and so 
we can provide a role there as well. But we also know that, as 
part of this agreement, we have New Zealand and Australia, and 
they have many strongly held and I think well-held opinions on 
the production of agricultural products and how they should be 
traded or sold into these markets. And so it provides some 
opportunities, but it also provides some interesting questions. 
 
Clearly there’s a number of fisheries issues, and we’ll get to 
those when we look at some of the chapters. But we have a 
substantial amount of fishery products that come from the other 

side of the Pacific to North America. And in the same way, we 
have fish products from Canada that go over the other direction. 
And how all that works I think is important for some of our 
freshwater fish marketing that takes place here in the province. 
 
Forestry will once again be an issue, and I think we’ll all be 
looking carefully at the dispute resolution clauses as it relates to 
the forestry issue. 
 
And then look at heavy industry. Well we’re producing a lot of 
equipment here that’s used right around the world. That’s part 
of . . . Dealing with some of the tariffs on that will be a factor. 
 
And then pharmaceuticals. And I guess once again there will be 
things that are hidden in the details that we need to take a look 
at. 
 
Now in the discussion and development of this agreement, there 
were many I guess myths and theories flying around about what 
actually was happening. And so that is another factor that has to 
be dealt with as we take a careful look at the wording. What we 
know is that New Zealand is the holder of the pen in the sense 
that they have all the documents in their system. And we start 
with English but we obviously have Spanish and French 
versions of this as well, and part of the finalization process 
involves making sure that all of these different pieces come 
together in a way that works for Canada and for Saskatchewan. 
 
And so it’s a bit interesting to review what kinds of things are 
going to be included in the agreement itself. And what happens 
is that we know that we’re part of Canadian agreements. Our 
constitution says that the federal government is the level of 
government that does the negotiating. But clearly many of the 
areas that are negotiated in the agreement, like this around 
trade, are subject to provinces coming on board or being part of 
the discussion or working on various aspects of this. We don’t 
know, from what information we have here, how much our 
Saskatchewan officials were involved early on in the 
international discussions. I mean clearly they’re more involved 
now as the documents are more open, and we’re all trying to 
respond to individual businesses and individual questions that 
arise. 
 
But just to get a breadth, a sense of the breadth of this 
agreement and how many other places it affects, you just have 
to go to some of the definitions of the clauses that are going to 
be used in the agreement itself. And so, you know, you start 
right off the top and what you recognize is that the first . . . We 
talked about it earlier but the WTO agreement from Marrakesh 
in 1994 is where all this starts. But then you go into, well what 
other parts are affected as well where you have the Asia-Pacific 
Economic Cooperation? So that’s APEC. You have the central 
levels of government of all 12 parties. And then you have to go 
into this agreement and talk about the regional levels of 
government in quite . . . not all of them but probably about 8 out 
of the 12 where there are regional governments. 
 
So in Canada, we have provinces and territories. In the States, 
they have states and territories. In Australia, they have states 
and sort of national territories. So there’s a whole number of 
other parties that are brought into this and a lot of that gloss, if 
you could put it that way, or that further explanation is in other 
places besides the actual agreement. And sometimes some of 



November 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7791 

the issues that affect us in Saskatchewan are part of that extra 
layer of how this all works. 
 
Also there’s . . . important to note that this agreement 
establishes the Trans-Pacific Partnership Commission, and 
we’ll get to that a little later. But there’s another body being 
created that’s going to add to the international discussion. 
 
A further area that they specifically reference is the whole area 
of customs administration in every jurisdiction, and that’s the 
administration of actually entry and exit from different 
jurisdictions. And then on top of that is a whole customs duty 
clause which relates to what kinds of expenses might be there 
for travel between countries or trading between countries. And 
so there are many areas there where there’s concern. 
 
There’s also an issue related to agreeing on the evaluation of 
products that are transferred over international boundaries, and 
that relates to the customs valuation agreement. And that then 
ties back into the taxation issues because we’ve got some 
litigation going on, not in Saskatchewan but relating to some of 
our major Saskatchewan companies right now that specifically 
relates to the valuation of goods that are transported across 
international boundaries. 
 
So then we also deal within this agreement something called 
GATS, G-A-T-S, and that’s the General Agreement on Trade in 
Services. So that’s not trade of goods, but it’s trade of services 
or provision of services, so that has to be dealt with. 
 
Then we have the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, 
1994. That’s part of the original Marrakesh WTO agreement. 
 
We also then end up having a number of other issues that are 
dealt with in the definition. And there’s an attempt to define 
terms like preferential tariff treatment, in other words are there 
special tariffs for certain types of goods or recovered material, 
so what happens when you put some used parts into a new 
product, and how that’s dealt with and whether it meets some 
safety standards but also health standards. And there’s all kinds 
of use of recycled material and how those things are dealt with. 
There’s a whole area of sanitary and phytosanitary measures. 
 
And this looks like it’s a bit interesting, but one story I would 
share, which is kind of a sad story. But it relates to this whole 
issue of moving goods back and forth across the Pacific. A few 
years ago, probably about four or five years ago, people around 
Seattle starting noticing that there were way more mosquitoes in 
Seattle than there ever had been. And I know from visiting that 
area regularly that people are now putting screens on their 
windows where they hadn’t for, you know, 50, 60, or 70 years. 
 
And when they started tracking and getting the entomologists to 
see what kinds of mosquitoes there were there, they discovered 
that they all happened to come from one of the river basins in 
China. And so they wondered, well how did this many 
mosquitoes get here from China? 
 
Well what happened was, when they traced it all back, the 
whole situation arose I think in Nebraska or Kansas, or in those 
two states, where a company had collected used tires. They had 
a huge number of these used tires, and they ended up seeking 
purchase of these used tires and got a buyer in China. So they 

were all loaded on ships and went to China and sat on the docks 
in one of the port cities, I think near Shanghai, and they were 
being held in customs or in a brokerage place until the seller 
was paid. Well unfortunately the seller wasn’t paid. So all these 
tires were sitting there, and they couldn’t find another seller and 
eventually decided to bring them all back. And they brought 
them all back, unloaded them at the port of Seattle onto an area 
near, I think it was near Renton. And all of a sudden you had 
these tires there. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Well it wasn’t too long after that that these mosquitoes showed 
up. And what they figured out was they had come back with the 
product, with the tires which were to be recycled from China. 
And so, Mr. Speaker, there is a whole section of this agreement 
that relates to some of those kinds of issues and how we provide 
the protections because it does affect many different aspects of 
how we live. What happens in a modern world is that 
practically we need to protect our citizens. We need to 
understand how these citizens are being protected, and we need 
to do the things that are right. 
 
Also this agreement includes references to the Agreement on 
Subsidies and Countervailing Measures, which is defined as the 
SCM agreement. That’s also an annex to the world trade 
agreement, and that agreement then gives remedies where 
somebody has breached the trade deal that’s there. 
 
So practically I think there’s a few other ones. There’s the 
whole TRIPS [Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of 
Intellectual Property Rights] agreement, which will be referred 
to a little later, and that relates to the Agreement on 
Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights. And 
that’s the one that affects some of the patent medicines. It 
affects music. It affects writing. It affects all kinds of research 
that’s being done, and that agreement and some of the terms of 
that whole area are brought into this particular agreement as 
well. 
 
And so what we have is, as was stated in the preamble, an 
agreement by these 12 countries within the World Trade 
Organization agreements, and so how that plays out for our 
Saskatchewan people becomes an important factor. And so 
what we do is, we look at how are we going to be affected in 
Saskatchewan, and once again I think this is where the details 
matter. And so then you look at what kinds of protections are 
there. They call it national treatment and market access for 
goods, in other words, what kinds of things can you have a 
special condition for that relates to your own country?  
 
And I think this is quite enlightening. We end up once again 
taking a look at what kinds of things are defined. Well it starts 
right off the top with advertising films and recordings. And I 
thought this is kind of interesting because various places in this 
document, there’s a very clear protection for promotional 
material so that you can go and tell them how good 
Saskatchewan is or how good Canada is. And I think everybody 
agrees about that, but sometimes lines can get blurred if it’s a 
way to bypass certain other kinds of restrictions that are there. 
So they’re very careful in how they define this. And so I think 
that, you know, you look at it, it’s a detailed description: 
 



7792 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2015 

Advertising films and recordings means recorded visual 
media or audio materials, consisting essentially of images 
and/or sound, showing the nature or operation of goods or 
services offered for sale or lease by a person established or 
resident in the territory of a Party, provided that such 
materials are of a kind suitable for exhibition to 
prospective customers but not for broadcast to the general 
public. 

 
So there’s a concern, and I think it’s a good concern, about 
people promoting products but not stepping in and setting up 
sort of a way to bypass some of the restrictions on the 
entertainment or the work of artists and singers and others in a 
country. And I’m not sure if this comes from our Canadian 
negotiators or from the Australian or New Zealand ones. But 
this is an area where we as Canadians have been very careful 
over the last five decades because we are concerned that our 
Canadian artists — whether they be musicians or visual artists 
or dance or other — that the work that they do is protected. And 
we all know examples of blurring between promotional kind of 
material and artistic material and how that’s dealt with, and this 
is an attempt to try to deal with that. 
 
Then it goes on. Another area where there’s maybe some 
special rules that relate to commercial samples of negligible 
value. And so this means: 
 

Commercial or trade samples having a value, individually 
or in an aggregate as shipped, of not more than one U.S. 
dollar, or the equivalent amount in the currency of another 
Party or so marked, torn, perforated, or otherwise treated 
that they are unsuitable for sale or for use except as 
commercial samples.  

 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s kind of interesting that if you 
have a sample that’s worth more than $1, then you better 
mutilate it in some way to make sure nobody can use it when 
you are showing people your product in another place. Once 
again it’s a recognition of how carefully people are observing 
the clauses of this agreement to protect their own businesses but 
also make it possible for businesses to, you know, sell products 
in other places. 
 
Then there’s another sort of exemption or a specific description 
which relates to consular transactions. And I used to be the 
Norwegian consul for a number of years before I was in 
politics, and so I took a look at this one because it’s interesting 
how, once again, how very specific they get in defining what 
this is. And so consular transactions means: 
 

Requirements that goods of a Party intended for export to 
the territory of the other Party must first be submitted to 
the supervision of the consul of the importing Party in the 
territory of the exporting Party for the purpose of 
obtaining consular invoices or consular visas for 
commercial invoices, certificates of origin, manifests, 
shippers’ export declarations, or any other customs 
documentation required on or in connection with 
importation. 

 
So that’s a long clause, I think, that means if you want to take 
your Canadian-style maple furniture to your consular office in 
Denver, you better take it to the US embassy and get one of 

these certificates that allows it to go across the border, or else it 
won’t get across there because there’s lots of good maple 
furniture you can buy in the States for your office. And why 
wouldn’t you do that? 
 
But once again it’s a way to make sure that people are 
discouraged from fooling around at all with using consular bags 
or consular stamps or consular moving vans to move products 
between one country and another. And I’m not sure that it’s that 
big an issue between Canada and the US, but it must be in some 
of the other parts of the 12 nations. But here it is. It’s very 
clearly spelled out what that is. 
 
In this same section, they also have to define what the word 
consumed means. And consumed means it’s “actually 
consumed.” In other words you ate it or you used it, or it’s 
“further processed or manufactured so as to result in a 
substantial change in the value, form, or use of the good or in 
the production of another good.” 
 
So this is another interesting clause. How does that relate to us 
when we will send certain food products or certain other kinds 
of products that are then incorporated and used in other places? 
I mean presumably there’s people looking at what this means, 
but it’s interesting how carefully this is worded to deal with 
some of the kinds of products that we will have. 
 
Then there’s a couple of other: duty free and goods. Well those 
are pretty simple definitions. But then there’s a clause that 
specifically defines “goods admitted for sports purposes.” So 
this is an interesting one, but obviously if you’re Australia and 
New Zealand, you want to make sure that you can take your 
Australian equipment to play rugby in New Zealand and vice 
versa. So this one says, “sports requisites for use in sports 
contests, demonstrations or training in the territory of the Party 
into whose territory such goods are admitted.” So in other 
words, you can take those kind of goods with you to play the 
game. The idea is clearly that you take them home again so that 
you’re not selling them in the other jurisdiction. 
 
And then there’s a whole definition of the term “goods intended 
for display or demonstration.” And that one’s I think fairly 
straightforward. It’s things that are part of displays. Now if 
somebody wants to bring in some of these things, then you end 
up having to get import licences, and those import licences are 
pursuant to an import licensing agreement which is effectively 
the World Trade Organization Agreement on Import Licensing 
Procedures. And so practically, that’s another factor. 
 
I mean these are terms around defining how trade works. But 
it’s important to actually take a look at them because it 
identifies how I guess careful the people are that are describing 
what this trade is. Now I think an example of this will be when 
we look at this term, “performance requirement.” So the word 
performance requirement is a defined term, and it means a 
requirement. And then there are, looks like about 11 different 
paragraphs. It says a requirement that: 
 

a given level or percentage of goods or services be 
exported; 
 
[A requirement that] domestic goods or services of the 
Party granting a waiver of customs duties or an import 



November 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7793 

license be substituted for imported goods . . . 
 
[A requirement that] a person benefiting from a waiver of 
customs duties or [a requirement for] an import license 
purchase other goods or services in the territory of the 
Party granting the waiver of customs duties or the import 
license, or accord a preference to domestically . . . 

 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. There are a number of 
members that appear that they’d like to enter into the debate. 
Once the member from Regina Lakeview has concluded his 
remarks, there will be opportunity for other members to enter 
the debate. At this time, the member from Regina Lakeview has 
the floor. I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — So thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I was 
talking about the performance requirement definition which 
deals with this whole area of national treatment or treatment of 
protection for national goods and market access for goods and 
how carefully this is being worded because there is a concern 
about certain products that are to be traded in this way. 
 
And so then the (d) requirement is that: 
 

a person benefiting from a waiver of customs duties or [a 
requirement for] an import license produce goods or 
supply . . . [goods], in the territory of the Party granting 
the waiver of customs duties or the import license, with a 
given level or percentage of domestic content. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I think that one relates to the fact that 
sometimes there are economic development contracts that are 
put in place that involve construction of boats or airplanes or 
very complicated products that require a certain percentage of 
the product to be from the domestic place, the place where it’s 
actually being assembled. And so this goes back then, a 
performance requirement could be that in Saskatchewan if we 
were going to assemble a certain type of vehicle for use up in 
the Far North or in the desert, that 22 per cent of it had to be 
produced here locally. And so that could be a performance 
requirement which would then be part of an import licensing 
agreement, which would then fit under the World Trade 
Organization agreement on import licensing and fit into this 
agreement. But to actually get to that point describing some of 
these things, it takes a fair bit of description and some very 
careful wording. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Another performance requirement could be a requirement that 
“relates in any way [to] the volume or value of imports to the 
volume or value of exports or to the amount of foreign 
exchange inflows.” So that’s another example where a certain 
amount of Saskatchewan wheat maybe could go to a country 
provided that we bought an equivalent amount, either value or 
volume, of oranges from Mexico. So it’s a way of doing trade 
in different items that therefore sets a specific performance 
requirement. 
 
But then it goes on and talks about performance requirement 
means requirement . . . but it doesn’t “include a requirement 

that the imported good be: subsequently exported.” In other 
words it can be used where it is, or it doesn’t require that that 
imported good be “used as a material in the production of 
another good that is subsequently exported.” Or that it can be 
that imported good be: 
 

substituted by an identical or similar good used as a 
material in the production of another good which is 
subsequently exported; or 

 
[is] substituted by an identical or similar good that is 
subsequently exported. 

 
So in other words, they’re once again trying to protect the 
national or the local situation. 
 
So basically it’s protection of our Canadian situation, our 
Canadian producers. And so how some of these kinds of 
agreements are entered into will be absolutely crucial in the 
further use of this agreement. And that’s why I think the 
discussion is subject to legal review, and it’s subject to 
authentication in English, Spanish, and French of the actual 
wording of the agreement. 
 
Now another definition, and I think luckily it might be the last 
one, is “printed advertising materials.” And this: 
 

. . . means those goods classified in Chapter 49 [we 
haven’t got to 49; we won’t get there for a while] of the 
Harmonized System, including brochures, pamphlets, 
leaflets, trade catalogues, yearbooks published by trade 
associations, tourist promotional materials and posters, 
that are used to promote, publicise or advertise a good or 
service, are essentially intended to advertise a good or 
service, and are supplied free of charge. 

 
In other words, you can do all that kind of promotional material 
as long as you’re not charging money for it and therefore 
competing or selling some published book, whether it’s a 
brochure or a magazine or something like that. 
 
Now then, this whole section gets into the national treatment. 
And so in other words all these definitions that we’ve been 
looking at are now used in a clause that says that nations have 
certain rights to protect some of their businesses. It also then is 
used to talk about the elimination of customs duties and also 
certain places where you waive customs duties. 
 
Now there’s a clause that I think is maybe standard in some of 
the international trade clauses, but it relates to an area where 
you don’t necessarily always think that trade agreements apply, 
and that’s about goods that are re-entered after repair or 
alteration. And basically it says you can’t apply a customs duty 
on a good that’s sent back to its original place to get fixed and 
then brought back. 
 
So I think that’s probably a fairly practical one, but its 
interesting that, you know, you spend half a page going through 
very clearly how this is an important factor in trade. So in other 
words, people are ingenious when it comes to figuring out ways 
to get around trade rules, and what this document, and why it’s 
so many pages and why there’s so much kind of discussion 
around it, relates to all of these clauses that deal with some 



7794 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2015 

very, very specific things. 
 
And then, you know, further on it goes on then to describe the 
commercial samples issue we talked about, and then also the 
temporary admission of goods, which includes sports 
equipment and other things like that. 
 
Now another sort of factor that seems obvious but is spelled out 
in great detail in this agreement relates to the fact that if you are 
transporting your goods or samples or equipment or whatever 
that’s brought in duty free or with an exempt tariff exemption 
and they’re located on a pallet or in some kind of a box, the 
company or the country where those items are going can’t 
charge duty on the pallet or on the box. 
 
And I mean clearly these are clauses that relate to situations that 
have arisen, and people are going to make sure that nobody 
messes around with the intent, the general intent, which is to 
encourage trade, in other words encourage promotion, 
encourage the use of products in other jurisdictions. 
 
But when you’re actually going to sell those products in those 
jurisdictions, and so the product remains in another country, 
then you need to make sure that you’re applying for all the 
appropriate or paying all of the appropriate fees and tariffs that 
each country might have or might not have. 
 
Just a little bit of a, just an early warning: later in the book there 
are pages and pages of the percentages of tariffs that apply to 
specific goods. And that’s once again the detail that could very 
directly affect some of our Saskatchewan businesses. And we 
need to, you know, to understand and I think businesses need to 
understand where or when they might get caught. 
 
We’ve all, after you’ve been in this kind of a job for a while, 
have had businesses come to you and say, well I tried to sell a 
product here or there, and all of a sudden there were some of 
these rules I didn’t know anything about. And those rules are in 
things like this and that’s why taking a careful look at this is 
extremely important for us as legislators. 
 
Now in this section as well, and we’re talking about sort of the 
national protection or the, you know, specific rights to have 
national treatment of certain products, there are clearly many 
points of discussion when products are moved from one place 
to another. And one of the things that this agreement does is it 
sets out a process which attempts to get at that, what’s 
sometimes called a poor communication line, so that each 
country will have people who deal with particular issues. And 
so here there’s a whole page that sets out how you get ad hoc 
discussions to sort out a particular problem that has arisen. 
 
And then this part further goes on to talk about import and 
export restrictions. And I think this gets to the heart of what this 
deal is all about, which is these 12 countries agree to be very 
open and direct about any time they’re going to add import or 
export restrictions. And in fact they have agreed that they won’t 
do that or that they’ll hold or even reduce slightly some of those 
tariffs that they put if the good’s not totally restricted from 
being imported or exported. And so then again there’s some 
fairly detailed rules around how this information is used. 
 
And it’s interesting that one of the very specific clauses that’s 

mentioned here relates to what they call commercial 
cryptographic goods. And so they’ve defined the term 
“commercial cryptographic goods.” And this means: 
 

Any good [so any product] implementing or incorporating 
cryptography, where the good is not designed or modified 
specifically for government use and is sold or is otherwise 
made available to the public. 

 
And so effectively what this is dealing with is the fact that some 
countries have quite open sale or transfer or trade of 
cryptographic material, in other words, coding information for 
whether it’s a BlackBerry or it’s your computer or your car or 
whatever. And there’s a concern that some of the countries 
might be allowing for the importation of some of this kind of 
material without taking into account restrictions that national 
governments have in preventing the export of that kind of 
material. 
 
And so I would think this probably comes from Japan and from 
the United States as a clause where, because they have so many 
. . . so much of their electronic or their exports do have 
protections for the intellectual property that involve 
cryptographic means of protecting it. And so this clause is one 
there that then says you’re not supposed to, or you’re not, you 
know . . . There’s a penalty if you start giving out these 
decoding devices to countries where there may be a possibility 
of knock-off products being made because they’ve gotten 
access to the specific codes in your equipment. And so 
practically it’s once again in this whole national protection area 
that there’s lots of concern around protecting the intellectual 
property as well as protection of the physical goods. 
 
And I think when you look in a broader way at some of the 
commentary about this agreement, it’s in that whole area where 
there’s substantial concern that basically US law overrides 
everything else, although we’ve gotten some, I think, 
concessions for Canada, but we don’t totally know how all that 
fits. But that’s once again for a later chapter. We’ll get there 
yet. 
 
Then we get into the transparency issue which has been referred 
to a number of times. And basically it’s making sure that all the 
processes around getting importing licences are very open for 
all of the 12 countries involved. And I’m not sure if that has 
been an issue up until this time. I assume it has and that there 
has been secrecy involved in the ways that affect the trade and 
affect the ability of some of the other competing countries to get 
involved. 
 
[16:15] 
 
One of the . . . well, the word product isn’t right, but one of the 
institutions that is created out of this whole Trans-Pacific 
Partnership is a committee on trade in goods. And so there is 
going to be another interesting international committee for 
somebody to be part of that will deal with a lot of the problems 
that are set out in this chapter of protecting the national market 
or national perspective of various countries. And so then you 
start looking at where, you know, what kinds of things have we 
dealt with. 
 
So clearly there’s a whole area that relates to goods. And we’ve 



November 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7795 

talked a bit about that, and actually a lot of the definitions deal 
with that. But then we get into a whole area around making sure 
that each of the parties — so in other words, each of the 
countries — will make sure that it’s open and accessible as it 
relates to publishing information about a number of different 
things. 
 
And this is another one which is really quite fascinating, and I’ll 
talk about the first one and then give you an example of why 
this is absolutely crucial. The first one, and this is Article 2.19, 
it’s called Publication. It says: 
 

Each Party shall promptly publish the following 
information in a non-discriminatory and easily accessible 
manner, in order to enable interested parties to become 
acquainted with them. 

 
And then (a), the first one is, “importation, exportation and 
transit procedures (including port, airport, and other entry-point 
procedures) and required forms and documents.” 
 
So in other words, what they don’t want is a country that sets up 
all its documents and procedures so only their citizens know 
how to do it, and if anybody else tries to compete, they can’t do 
it. And my story about this one is . . . and it kind of relates to 
people travelling in and out of countries. Sometimes you don’t 
really know what the forms are. There’s not really transparency. 
 
But I had a friend who was travelling in Africa, or actually there 
were two of them. And they were in an airport, and I think it 
was in Tanzania, and they were trying to get on the airplane to 
fly back up to London. And there was a bit of a free-for-all 
every time a plane came in and by the time they actually figured 
out what was going on, all the seats were taken. And what was 
happening is that they were giving all the information in the 
local language, then five minutes later giving it in English and 
French and a few other languages. And so the people that were 
from afar couldn’t get there. 
 
Well finally, somebody figured out that maybe the guy that was 
the announcer might say it in English first if he had a little help. 
So they gave him some money and the next plane, they 
announced in English first. They all got on the plane, and then 
all the others got the announcement and they got there. Well 
this clause in this agreement relates to a similar issue around 
ease of import and export and how it affects the ability of 
businesses to trade or people to be there. 
 
So that was the first one. Then they need to be published in a 
non-discriminatory, easily accessible manner, all the applied 
rates of duty and taxes. So in other words, you’re not surprised 
by those kinds of taxes. Also the rules for classification or 
valuation of products are these ones that are subject to certain 
rates of customs or duty or not. And also then the laws and 
regulations and rulings around rules of origin. And I suspect 
that might be there because of our pool issue with the United 
States, or it may relate to some other issues in other parts of the 
other side of the Pacific, but it is a specific one. 
 
And then there’s the clause about import, export, or transit 
restrictions or prohibitions. Well if you don’t have a clear and 
non-discriminatory way to understand what those are, well then 
you can have a whole load of things going somewhere that then 

is totally blocked and therefore is not able to be, you know, 
traded at all. 
 
And then it goes on to talk then about transparency around fees 
or around penalties for other things. And then something as 
simple too as appeal procedures, in other words how do you 
appeal something when you think you’ve been treated unfairly. 
 
So I think in that whole world around goods, they’ve set up a 
committee that’s going to deal with these issues, and then 
they’ve set out some rules around some transparency. So then 
we get in this chapter, the same chapter we’re dealing with 
around national treatment and market access, there’s a whole 
section on agriculture. And clearly this is an area that’s 
important for us here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And so what it starts off by saying that they’re going to use the 
same definition for agricultural goods as in the World Trade 
Organization agreement on agriculture and that also the term 
“export subsidy,” is going to use that same term as well. But 
then it goes on, it talks about modern biotechnology. And this 
has got a very specific definition of this and also the term 
“products of modern biotechnology.” And I think this is one 
that we need to watch carefully in Saskatchewan. We’ve got 
Agribition going on; we know that a big part of the value in the 
cattle industry and other related industries does relate to the 
genetics, the different parts that are able to be sold. 
 
So here the definition of modern biotechnology means the 
application of: 
 

(a) in vitro nucleic acid techniques, including recombinant 
deoxyribonucleic acid (rDNA) and direct injection of 
nucleic acid into cells or organelles, or 
 
(b) fusion of cells beyond the taxonomic family, 
 
that overcome natural physiological reproductive or 
recombinant barriers and that are not techniques used in 
traditional breeding and selection. 

 
So that’s a definition of modern biotechnology, which then is a 
definition to be used in this section on agriculture under 
national treatment. 
 
Then there’s a definition of the products of modern 
biotechnology, and that means agricultural goods, as well as 
fish and fish products. And then they say go and look at the 
term for fish and fish products as defined in chapter 3 of the 
“Harmonized System,” so that’s another section of this one. So 
it’s “. . . agricultural goods, as well as fish and fish products, 
developed using modern biotechnology, but does not include 
medicines or medical products.” So we’re going to obviously 
deal with those in another chapter. 
 
But in agriculture those are the extra terms that are added to this 
specific agreement on top of what’s traditionally been the 
World Trade Organization definitions. I think it gives us a bit of 
a hint of what they’re trying to deal with in this agreement. And 
so it is interesting, but it’s also I think important that these very 
specific clauses are dealt with. 
 
And as we all know, sometimes there may be free trade, but 



7796 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2015 

then there are import restrictions or export restrictions. And 
how those fit in with the actual sale of what the farmer says is 
what I’ve produced on my farm can have dramatic effects on 
our economy here in Saskatchewan or in Canada. 
 
And so then in this section, once again under national treatment, 
as it relates to agriculture, there’s a whole paragraph that says 
this . . . And let’s reflect for Saskatchewan what this means. It 
says: 
 

Recognizing the ongoing work in the WTO in the area of 
export competition and that export competition remains a 
key priority in multilateral negotiations, Parties shall work 
together in the WTO to develop multilateral disciplines to 
govern the provision of export credits, export credit 
guarantees and insurance programs, including disciplines 
on matters such as transparency, self-financing, and 
repayment terms. 

 
Now this specifically relates to the export development bank, 
other kinds of facilities that we’ve had in Canada in various 
ways over many years. And what we know is that just south of 
the border, in the States, that a number of their export 
development bank provisions expired last year, and all of a 
sudden people who were quite able to sell much of their product 
around the world were finding that their customers couldn’t buy 
it because they didn’t have that bridging finance. 
 
And so what this clause says is, well we’re dealing with that 
over in the World Trade Organization side; we’re not going to 
try to deal with that specifically in this Trans-Pacific 
Partnership. But it also is a signal, I think, that they couldn’t 
agree on what to do with this and that’s something we need to 
know more about as Canadians, as Saskatchewan people, 
because it is very much a part of how we end up selling our 
products around the world. 
 
So there’s a clause that kind of dodges a tough issue by a simple 
paragraph. They haven’t, you know, eliminated the issue or 
they haven’t said they’re not going to deal with it, but they’re 
saying to get this agreement to at least to a stage for discussion, 
we’re going to set that issue off to the side. 
 
The next issue under this national treatment is another one that 
directly relates to us in Saskatchewan, and it’s called the 
Agricultural Export State Trading Enterprises. And it says: 
 

1. The Parties shall work together toward an agreement in 
the WTO on export state trading enterprises that requires: 
 

(a) the elimination of trade distorting restrictions on the 
authorization to export agricultural goods; 
 
(b) the elimination of any special financing that a WTO 
Member grants directly or indirectly to state trading 
enterprises that export for sale a significant share of the 
Member’s total exports of an agricultural good; and 
 
(c) greater transparency regarding the operation and 
maintenance of export state trading enterprises. 

 
Now this particular clause was probably one that is targeted at 
institutions like we used to have, like the Wheat Board, but 

there are some other institutions that we have that are like this. I 
think there are some in some of the other countries, especially 
countries that are concerned about having their own local 
supply of food. Often there are state trading companies to make 
sure that, in a situation of dire need, they actually have the food 
products in their own country. So once again there’s a clause 
that we need to understand how it relates to what we do in 
Saskatchewan, what we do in Canada. It has a different 
meaning in 2015 that it might have had in 2005, but I think it’s 
still important that we understand what this means for options 
that we might want to set up in our country. 
 
Then the next section under this national treatment relates to 
export restrictions as it relates to food security, and basically it 
says that a country can stop the export of food even to their 
traditional customers. So it would be, I suppose, like us in 
Saskatchewan in the wintertime, if the United States said, well 
we have a concern around having enough food in Texas, and 
we’re not going to send any of the citrus fruits north during the 
winter months. And this, I think, allows that to happen on a 
temporary basis. 
 
But it’s also clear that there’s quite a number of rules to 
specifically look at that question of how you define a crisis in 
having enough food in your own country and how you then 
respond. And so this is important as we once again look at how 
it affects us in Saskatchewan and how it affects us in Canada. 
 
And the rules as it relates to this specific clause go on at quite a 
length, but they want to make sure that the rule is not being 
used as a trade-distorting rule. In other words, if it’s a 
humanitarian purpose because you’ve got people in your own 
country that are without food, then you can make some 
restrictions or terminate even some agreements that you might 
have had. But if you’re doing it because you want to force the 
prices up, or you want to do something other than provide food 
for people, then there’s some dispute. It can go into some of the 
dispute resolution kinds of clauses. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Now one of the things then that comes out of this section as it 
relates to agriculture is that these 12 countries are setting up a 
committee on agricultural trade with representatives for each 
party. So there’s going to be this agricultural trade, and it’s kind 
of a forum where trade’s promoted, but it’s also monitoring all 
of these other topics that I’ve just been talking about to make 
sure that everybody is treated fairly. And I think that it’s a 
recognition that there’s no way, even in a 6,000-page document, 
that you can anticipate all of the kinds of issues that may arise 
when you’re involved in trade of any kind, but even more 
specifically when you’re involved in trade in agriculture, or as it 
relates to food. 
 
Now the next section that we’ll look at here is around trades of 
products of modern biotechnology. And we saw the definitions 
of the terms, and here once again . . . and I think this is maybe 
new territory, because it hasn’t been in other agreements. And 
so what happens is that they are setting out, I don’t know if it 
would be first draft, but an early draft of how this all would 
work. 
 
And so practically what it’s doing is setting up a forum where 



November 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7797 

they can identify what they call LLPs [low-level presence]. And 
that’s a whole new term that we’re going to probably end up 
seeing at some point, and basically LLP means low-level 
presence. And low-level presence is, some examples arise and 
this is a way for this committee to identify possible issues that 
are coming up that relate to the specific modern biotechnology 
issues. 
 
And so what we’re really looking at here then is, as I said 
before, a new area, a new process to deal with some of these 
products that come from modern biotechnology, and to remind 
people what that relates to. It’s the recombinant DNA. It’s some 
of the gene sort of changes that are made in certain products, 
and how you end up identifying and dealing with them in a 
trade area becomes a very big issue. 
 
We know that some of the challenges to our products in 
Saskatchewan — some of our really important products — does 
relate to concerns that there have been some sort of use of 
modern technology to change the nature of some of the 
products. And the question always becomes, is it manipulation 
in some way, or is it a natural development that has been 
identified and developed using good biological evidence? 
 
Clearly our research that we do in Saskatoon with the 
synchrotron is something that actually does relate to how you 
can develop new products. And so practically this whole area 
and this new procedure that’s being set up is a procedure that’s 
going to try to deal with some of the genetic issues for food 
products. Now whether this is fully set out, it’s not clear here. 
 
What they say on page 2-25 is that these 12 nations are going to 
set up a “. . . working group on products of modern 
biotechnology under the Committee on Agricultural Trade 
(Working Group) for information exchange and cooperation on 
trade-related matters associated with products of modern . . . 
[technology].” 
 
And so this working group’s going to be comprised of 
representatives of all of the parties, so all of the different 
countries. And they’ll be working to try to exchange regulations 
and policies, information on these issues, including on existing 
and proposed domestic laws and regulations and policies related 
to the trade of products of modern technology and to further 
enhance the co-operation among two or more parties where 
there is a mutual interest related to the trade of products of 
modern technology. 
 
And so in some ways this is a bold statement. It’s a statement 
saying we have to understand these LLPs, these low-level — 
what was the definition again? — low-level presence 
occurrences. In other words, where is that line? And they’ve 
defined on page 2-23 here, 2-23 of this agreement, that for the 
purpose of section 2: 
 

. . . LLP occurrence [low-level presence occurrence] 
means the inadvertent low level presence in a shipment of 
plants or plant products, except for a plant or plant product 
that is a medicine or medical product of [recombinant] 
DNA plant material that is authorized for use in at least 
one country, but not in the importing country, and if 
authorized for food use, a food safety assessment has been 
based on the Codex Guideline for the Conduct of a Food 

Safety Assessment of Food Derived from [recombinant] 
DNA plants. 

 
So in other words, this goes right to the heart of one of the 
toughest issues that we end up having to deal with in 
Saskatchewan as it relates to world trade of food products. And 
I would hope that our Agriculture minister and Trade minister 
have been in discussion with the federal government to make 
sure that somebody from Saskatchewan — or at least has a 
strong knowledge of our agricultural industry in Saskatchewan 
— will be part of this working group. Because related to 40 per 
cent of the market in the world, but in a big part of our market 
to the west, we want to make sure that we have people that 
understand Saskatchewan and our agricultural practices 
involved with this very specific clause. 
 
And once again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is an example where 
you’ve got, you know, thousands and thousands of words and 
you end up honing in on a new concept, a new way of doing 
things which, if it’s done in a correct way or a positive way, can 
have huge benefit for our province. If it’s interpreted some 
other way, it can cause much damage to our economy. And so 
it’s these kinds of things where we’re looking for information 
from our ministers, from our civil service as to where and how 
people get on to the working group, where and how we have a 
way to make sure the kinds of science that we have in 
Saskatchewan can be used as evidence in dealing with this very 
specific issue. 
 
We’re still in this national treatment section, and as you can 
guess, this is where probably the hottest discussions have taken 
place over time. 
 
And so I think once again we need to make sure we look at the 
next area, and the next area is called TRQs [tariff-rate quota]. 
Lots of acronyms in this business. And so a TRQ is pursuant to 
Article XIII of GATT 1994. Everybody know what a TRQ is? 
It’s a tariff-rate quota. And practically, once again it’s 
something that affects trade and it affects trade in some fairly 
direct ways. And so it’s important that we actually take a look 
at and try to understand what they are doing here. 
 
Under the GATT 1994 agreement, there are I guess tariff-rate 
quotas, TRQs, that are implemented and administered by each 
state or each country, or each party to this agreement. And those 
TRQs are set up in a way that are plain, obvious to all of the 
other parties, all the other countries that are involved in the 
deal. 
 
And so the point is that there needs to be once again an open 
and transparent administration of these kinds of things so that 
people who are producing something, whether it’s a farmer or 
whether it’s a miner or whether it’s a manufacturer, that they 
know exactly what kind of hurdles they’re going to have to 
cross as far as the tariffs are, when they export a product into 
another country. 
 
And so what do we do there? Well we need to make sure in this 
national area, the whole area of the national treatment, that it’s 
being done in a way that takes into account that we’re a pretty 
small actor as a producer in Saskatchewan compared to some of 
the big interests in other places. 
 



7798 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2015 

And so once again our job is to be vigilant. It’s to be part of the 
discussion. It’s to be asking questions, making sure that there 
isn’t something that’ll happen in this whole area of the TRQs 
that causes difficulty for us. 
 
So then once again, and I think the key point on the TRQs is 
just the fact that it has to be very transparent and open as to 
what happens. 
 
So then the next area that we get into is the national treatment 
and import and export restrictions. And this is one where we get 
into the big tables, but I don’t think we’ll spend a lot of time on 
the big tables, but you never know. There’s some pretty 
interesting stuff. And what happens is when you’re in this 
section of national treatment, then you have an annex. Okay. So 
you have the main agreement, and then you have an annex. And 
so I’m now in annex 2-A for anybody who’s online and 
watching this and trying to follow where we’re going. But what 
it does then do is say okay, each nation, each country, each 
party to this deal should tell us what kinds of things are going to 
be affected. And some of them it’s sort of obvious; some it’s 
not so obvious. And I’ll give you an example. 
 
Basically it gives two general statements. It says “. . . nothing in 
this Annex shall affect the rights or obligations of any Party 
under the WTO Agreement with respect to any measure listed 
in the Annex.” In other words, they’re not trying to renegotiate 
the WTO. It also says that this national treatment and import 
and export restrictions: 
 

. . . shall not apply to the continuation, renewal, or 
amendment made to any law, statute, decree or 
administrative regulations giving rise to a measure set out 
in this Annex to the extent that the continuation, renewal, 
or amendment does not decrease the conformity of the 
measure listed with . . . [national treatment and with 
import and export restrictions]. 

 
So we have those general rules in the annex, and then you go to 
each of the 12 countries. The first one is Brunei Darusalaam, 
and basically they have a Customs Order 2006, section 31, and 
you have to go and look at the Brunei Darusalaam laws to 
actually find what it is that they’re saying that these rules don’t 
apply to. 
 
[16:45] 
 
But the next one is the measures or the things that are important 
for Canada. And so Canada says that these rules that we’ve just 
been talking about for the last half hour, national treatment and 
import and export restrictions, “shall not apply to (a) the export 
of logs of all species.” 

 
And guess what that’s all about? Well we know that Japan for 
years has wanted to just take the logs to Japan, take the logs 
from British Columbia and Alberta and Saskatchewan forests to 
Japan so they can cut them up and use them in the ways that 
they like to do it over there, taking many jobs out of Western 
Canada. I think it’s also true . . . So there’s export of logs. I 
think it also applies from logs from Eastern Canada as well. 
 
Second item, “(b) the export of unprocessed fish pursuant to 
applicable provincial legislation.” Well that relates directly to 
Saskatchewan. We have freshwater fish produced here. I think 

people didn’t realize, but often some of our whitefish in 
Saskatchewan that went to the Freshwater Fish Marketing 
Board in Winnipeg ended up going to China for deboning. And 
then they’d bring it back and make gefilte fish and then sell it in 
New York. 
 
You know, it’s a very strange kind of transport of a product, but 
it’s a recognition that some of our unprocessed products created 
can be . . . Value can be created in them in other places. And as 
Canadians, we want to develop as much of that processing here 
in Saskatchewan. So this is what Canada has said: we don’t 
want lots of unprocessed fish leaving the country without being 
processed. 
 
And then the next one, it’s not entirely clear just from this 
document, but it says, doesn’t apply to “the importation of 
goods of the prohibited provisions of tariff items 9897.00.00,” 
and then 9898 and 9899 of the schedule of the customs tariff. 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t have the customs tariff with 
me right now. If anybody has a question, maybe I can find it for 
later. 
 
Then the fourth area is one that once again I think affects us in 
Saskatchewan. It says the national treatment and import and 
export restrictions shall not apply to “Canadian excise duties on 
absolute alcohol, as listed under tariff item 2207.10.90 in 
Canada’s Schedule of Concessions annexed to the Marrakesh 
Protocol (Schedule V),” Marrakesh Protocol World Trade 
Agreement from 1994. And for those, that absolute alcohol used 
in manufacturing under the existing provisions of the Excise Act 
as amended. Now I’m not directly certain exactly what that is, 
but I know we produce absolute alcohol or we produce alcohol 
that’s used in other situations here in manufacturing, and this 
relates to that. 
 
Then the next area where these special rules don’t apply relates 
to “the use of ships in the coasting trade of Canada.” In other 
words, we have a special protection for our Canadian sailors as 
long as those ships are going between Canadian ports. 
 
Anybody who’s gone on a cruise out of Vancouver knows that 
they’re very careful to make sure that they go to a US port on 
that cruise. Or if you take it out of Seattle, well then they’re 
very careful to make sure they go to a Canadian port on that 
cruise. And the reason is that both in the United States and in 
Canada, if you’re on a ship that goes between two US ports, it 
needs to be US crew on there. If you’re on a Canadian ship that 
goes between Canadian ports, there has to be Canadian crew. 
And this rule is a bit unusual . . . or it protects Canadian jobs. 
And the Government of Canada is saying, we’re going to 
protect our Canadian sailors’ jobs. And so I mean, I think that’s 
important, but it’s another one of those special provisions. 
 
And then the next one, (f) or number six under this category, 
where these special rules shall not apply, in other words Canada 
is protecting it, is “the internal sale and distribution of wine and 
distilled spirits.” In other words, Canadians buying Canadian 
wine and Canadian distilled spirits, there’s a protection for 
those businesses that’s spelled out right in this agreement. And 
given all the discussion from the minister in charge of alcohol, 
this is another place and another rule that fits or applies to some 
of the rules that we have here in Saskatchewan under 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority. 



November 24, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7799 

So practically, those are Canada’s exemptions. That’s the ones 
that are in this document. Then you go on . . . Well no, there’s 
one more I forgot. There’s national treatment “shall not apply to 
a measure affecting the production, publication, exhibition, or 
sale of goods that supports the creation, development or 
accessibility of Canadian artistic expression or content.” 
 
So this is a specific protection for our Canadian artists, our 
singers, our writers, our painters, musicians. And once again, 
it’s something that I think we support and other countries say, 
oh well we can supply all that kind of thing for you. And other 
countries — I’m talking about United States — they’ve got lots 
to share. 
 
But what we know is that in the Canadian content rules in 
Canada over the last 45 years have actually changed the number 
of our citizens who can actually find a career or make money in 
that area. And so this agreement is protecting that or at least 
trying to protect that. 
 
And then you go to the next section and it talks about other 
countries. Interestingly, Chile, the only thing they’re concerned 
about in Chile is that they want to make sure that the Chilean 
rules relating to imports of used vehicles are not affected. So 
they must have some strong protections for their local car 
manufacturer and they want to protect that, or maybe they don’t 
want a bunch of used Hondas coming in from Japan or Canada 
or whatever. 
 
But then Mexico has some very specific ones, and they go on 
into descriptions of, I think, pricing of hydrocarbons. I guess I 
haven’t ever travelled to Mexico, but I think their prices for 
gasoline and other things are substantially less than in either the 
US or Canada. And it appears what they want to do is protect 
their pricing structures in Mexico as it relates to gasoline and 
also to diesel fuel and other petroleum products. Their other 
protection relates to, they restrict import of used tires and 
clothes and vehicles. So once again they’re not wanting to be a 
dumping ground I guess for stuff from other places. 
 
Then when you go to Peru, the concerns they have, once again, 
used clothing and footwear. Peru’s got a big shoe industry, and 
they don’t want to have footwear coming from other places. 
And then also again, used vehicles and used tires and used 
goods and machinery. So it’s interesting to compare. 
 
The United States, they list, and it kind of complements, so the 
United States says they don’t want national treatment or import 
and export restrictions to apply to, number one — can anybody 
guess? — export of logs of all species. In other words, they’re 
going to make sure they continue to be in a strong discussion 
with Canada about logs and lumber going back and forth. And 
once again the protections that they have under their Merchant 
Marine Act of 1920 and the passenger vessel Act, to the extent 
those measures were mandatory legislation at the time of the 
accession of the United States to the General Agreement on 
Tariffs and Trades in 1947, have not been amended so as to 
decrease their conformity. So in other words, once again the 
point I was making about taking a boat from Seattle where you 
go to Alaska will end up . . . 
 
So now, then we go and look at Vietnam. And Vietnam is an 
interesting case as well because they’re looking at things that 

they want to protect. And one of the things they want to protect 
is a prohibition on the import of right-hand drive motor 
vehicles. So obviously they’re a left-hand drive country. They 
don’t want any right-hand drive vehicles in their country. And 
you know it would end up there coming from Australia or New 
Zealand or China, I guess, is right-hand drive as well. So 
anyways it’s interesting just to look . . . and once again used 
items. They don’t want a lot of used items in Vietnam; maybe 
they’ve had enough of things being sent there. And then they 
also have specific protections around timber from their forests, 
and they have a big forest industry as well and wooden 
products. 
 
So then practically, those are the areas I think where there’s 
very specific restrictions of a national nature. And I suspect in 
the negotiations, it’s in those areas that we’ve just been talking 
about where there was some of the horse-trading that went on. 
But those items were politically difficult to deal with, whether it 
was logs in the United States, or logs in Canada, or obviously 
cultural protections for Canadians. And they’re here, so that’s 
good news. 
 
Then the next area, and it’s pages and pages, but it goes into the 
kinds of changes that are happening around some of the export 
duties. And you know, there’s lots of very specific export duties 
that are important. And so practically, you end up having to dig 
out your dictionary to find out what some of these things are, 
but clearly what they are is local food products and industries 
that need to be protected or not protected, depending on how 
they go, and basically also some of the changes that are made. 
 
So now Vietnam and Malaysia, you can go and look at quite a 
few different items, but the specific kinds of things relate, you 
know, to a lot of the products I think they must make in their 
countries. And they’re very careful about how they set up their 
tariff to protect some of that information. But it’s interesting 
because once again it’s informative of what local issues, what 
political issues have arisen in the negotiation of this agreement. 
 
And so if you’re in a business in Malaysia, in the palm oil 
business which becomes, in some ways it’s kind of like corn oil 
is in North America. Palm oil on an international market is one 
of the cheapest oils, and it’s often used in conjunction with 
other oils. And if you look carefully at some of our products 
even in Canada, they’ve got palm oil here and there in ways that 
you don’t even think about. But practically they have various 
kinds of duties, and obviously it’s a way where, because so 
much of that product is exported, the government can make 
some money for their government expenses and . . . [inaudible] 
. . . they do. 
 
So also in Malaysia it’s, you know, clearly Malaysia is a 
country that produces rubber. So a lot of the products they’re 
concerned about are various products made with rubber, 
whether it’s conveyor belts or tires or transmission belts or 
other kinds of things, and they set up some fairly specific rules 
around how this should go. And so practically what has 
happened and what’s going on is that we have a very, very, very 
detailed description of products that we use here in 
Saskatchewan and then . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. It now being past 5 o’clock, 
this House stands recessed till 7 p.m. this evening. 



7800 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2015 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7771 
  Broten .................................................................................................................................................................. 7771, 7773, 7775 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7771 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7772 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7772 
  Norris ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7772, 7775 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7773 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7773 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7773 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7773 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7774 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7774 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7774 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7774 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7774 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7774 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7774 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7775 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7775 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7775 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7775 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7776 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7776 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7776 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Holodomor 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7776 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7777 
 Positively Red Gala in Saskatoon 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7777 
 Moose Jaw Festival of Trees 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7777 
 Enchanted Forest Season Opens in Saskatoon 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7777 
 University Hosts Truth and Reconciliation Conference 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7778 
 Remembering Manmeet Singh Bhullar 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7778 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Lean Initiative and Provision of Health Care 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7778 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7778 
 Lowering Tobacco Use 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7781 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7781 
 Reduction of Carbon Emissions 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7781 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7781 
 Costs and Benefits of Public-Private Partnerships 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7782 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7783 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7783 
GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 Trans-Pacific Partnership 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7784 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7786 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


