
























































Hansard: October 15, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 68A  THURSDAY, OCTOBER 15, 2015, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Hon. Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7327 
 October 15, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF PAGES 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to introduce another Page. I wish 
to inform the Assembly that Kennedy McBain will be returning 
as a Page for this fall session. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you in your gallery, I’m pleased to introduce a 
number of individuals who have joined us today in support of 
the sexual assault awareness campaign which I spoke about in 
the legislature earlier in the week. And we had our public 
viewing of the video this morning downstairs in the gallery. 
 
So I’m very proud to have them here today to spread awareness 
of the very important problem which we’re trying to address. 
With us today, Mr. Speaker, Betty Ann Pottruff from the 
Ministry of Justice; Pat Faulconbridge from Social Services; 
Dianna Graves, who I don’t think has quite made it up from the 
announcement yet — she’s from the Sexual Assault Services of 
Saskatchewan; Megan Boiteau, Status of Women, from the 
Johnson-Shoyama Graduate School, intern; Debbie House from 
the Regina Sexual Assault Centre; and Norm Jakubowski from 
the Red Cross. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask everyone in the 
legislature to welcome these individuals to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
join with the minister in welcoming our special guests here 
today, the partners in helping to change the culture around 
sexual assault here in Saskatchewan. It’s a great campaign and 
government couldn’t do things like this without their 
community partners, so thank you very much for all that you do 
in your community and for all those of us here in 
Saskatchewan. And particularly as a woman and a mother of 
two daughters, thank you for all that you do. So with that I’d 
like to ask my colleagues to join in welcoming these folks to 
their legislature as well. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
proud to rise today to present a petition on cellphone coverage, 
and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

To cause the provincial government to improve cell service 

coverage for northern communities like St. George’s Hill, 
Dillon, Michel Village, Dore Lake, Canoe Lake First 
Nation, Michel Point, and Sled Lake to provide similar 
quality of cell coverage as southern communities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this would provide support to our northern 
industries as well as mitigate safety concerns associated with 
living in the remote North. And the people that have signed this 
petition, Mr. Speaker, are from all throughout Saskatchewan, 
and on this particular page they are from Saskatoon. And I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition in support of GSAs [gender and 
sexuality alliance] in Saskatchewan schools. And we know that 
this government is not doing enough to create safe spaces in our 
schools for sexually diverse students or students bullied because 
of their sexual identity or orientation, and that GSAs can play a 
pivotal role in providing inclusive anti-oppressive learning 
environments and offer reprieve from bullying and insult. And 
this government must act so that under no circumstance are 
gender- and sexually diverse students denied the right to form 
gender and sexual alliances in their schools. I’d like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on this 
government to take immediate and meaningful action to 
pass The Respect for Diversity — Student Bill of Rights Act 
and enshrine in legislation the right of Saskatchewan 
students to form GSAs within their schools in order to 
foster caring, accepting, inclusive environments and 
deliver equal opportunities for all students to reach their 
full potential. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from Moose 
Jaw, Melville, and Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased once 
again to present a petition in support of a residents-in-care bill 
of rights. The petitioners point out that it is in fact the 
responsibility of the provincial government to ensure consistent 
standards of care in facilities throughout Saskatchewan. The 
petitioners are asking that the government pass the 
residents-in-care bill of rights to ensure that residents have 
individualized care plans and minimum quality of care 
standards. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan adopt Bill 609, 
The Residents-in-care Bill of Rights Act, which would 
provide Saskatchewan seniors with the right to quality, 
high-level standards in seniors’ care homes. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals in Prince 



7328 Saskatchewan Hansard October 15, 2015 

Albert. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition from individuals concerned about the cost of 
post-secondary education in the province of Saskatchewan, 
particularly as it relates to university tuition. The petitioners 
point out that the average Canadian student debt in 2014 was 
over $27,000, not including credit card and other private debt. 
And in the prayer that reads as follows: 
 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 
cause the provincial government to immediately increase 
the funding for post-secondary education in this province 
with a legislated provision that this increase in funding be 
used to lower tuition fees. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by students and 
citizens from Regina and Shaunavon. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

International Day for the Eradication of Poverty 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to bring 
attention to the International Day for the Eradication of Poverty, 
which is observed on October 17th. The International Day for 
the Eradication of Poverty has been observed every year since 
1993. The UN [United Nations] Secretary-General, Ban 
Ki-Moon, states that “On this day we recommit to think, decide 
and act together against extreme poverty — and plan for a 
world where no-one is left behind. Our aim must be prosperity 
for all, not just [for] a few.” 
 
A Saskatoon report released last week outlined that the gap 
between the rich and the poor continues to widen throughout 
the city, and October 17th community members are joining 
together for the Hands Across the Bridge event. Participants 
will form a human chain across the Broadway Bridge to 
demonstrate that Saskatoon is a city united against poverty and 
homelessness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I encourage others to partake in community events 
in the neighbourhoods and support local efforts to mitigate the 
impacts of poverty. I want to thank those groups such as the 
Saskatoon Anti-Poverty Coalition, the Regina Anti-Poverty 
Ministry, Upstream, Poverty Free Sask, and the Saskatoon 
Poverty Reduction Partnership for their tireless work on this 
front. As a community, we need to continue to work towards 
the elimination of poverty. 
 
I ask all members to join me on October 17th in marking the 
International Day for the Eradication of Poverty, and urging the 
government to take real steps now to address income inequality 
and poverty in our province. Thank you Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Advanced 
Education. 
 

Spiritwood Collaborative Emergency Centre 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With our 
population growing, it has become even more important for our 
government to plan for growth rather than decline. Last month 
Spiritwood’s collaborative emergency centre started their new 
daytime model on September 15th. This new model guarantees 
that the collaborative emergency centre will have a physician or 
nurse practitioner available six days a week. There will be a 
registered nurse available on Sundays and all statutory holidays 
to respond to urgent care needs. This ensures that the residents 
of Spiritwood, for the first time since October 30th of 2006, will 
have improved access to urgent care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the collaborative emergency centre is a great 
example of patient-centred care that also provides stable and 
timely access to health services in our communities. With this 
new model we can shorten wait times, we can reduce 
emergency room visits, and we can provide a better work-life 
balance for our incredible health care providers across the 
province. Yet more importantly, this model has the potential to 
improve the access to health care services for all of the residents 
of Spiritwood and the surrounding communities. 
 
I’d like to thank the town of Spiritwood and the surrounding 
communities, the health care providers, and the health region 
for their efforts in improving access to health care services. It’s 
efforts like opening of this collaborative emergency centre that 
will ensure that communities such as Spiritwood will continue 
to make Saskatchewan the very best place to live, the very best 
place to work, and to raise a family. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Regina Business Celebrates 50 Years 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, in the mid-1960s a young man 
who had recently arrived from Greece began operation of a 
40-seat lunch counter on the 1900 block of Scarth Street in 
downtown Regina. 
 
Over the course of the next five decades, with the help of his 
wife, Ann, and later his children, he expanded that modest 
enterprise into a Greek-themed restaurant, complete with lounge 
and an Irish pub next door. Today these two establishments, 
with their heated outdoor patios, can accommodate 800 patrons. 
That’s a long step up from the 40-seat lunch counter where it all 
began. I’m speaking, of course, of Robert Gardikiotis and his 
family, the owners and operators of the Copper Kettle 
restaurant and O’Hanlon’s Irish Pub, both of which are 
institutions in Regina’s downtown. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Robert has been a downtown business icon for 
Regina as long as I can remember. Not only has he nurtured his 
own enterprises through the good times and bad, but he has also 
worked tirelessly to enliven Regina’s downtown and played a 
key role in transforming it to the vibrant cultural centre it has 
become. 
 
It has been my privilege to get to know Robert and the family 
over the years, and I was very pleased to receive an invitation to 
the Copper Kettle’s 50th anniversary celebration. As one would 
expect, it was an excellent evening, replete with fine food, fare, 



October 15, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7329 

and refreshments. I was pleased to be among those who had the 
opportunity to celebrate the Copper Kettle’s 50th anniversary 
and to say thank you very much to Robert and Ann Gardikiotis 
and family and the staff for all the good meals and the great 
times. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 

New Athletic Field for Kipling School 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On September 29th, a 
ceremony was held to celebrate the opening of the Kipling 
School athletic field. Mr. Speaker, for a time the Kipling School 
had a shortage of space for outdoor sports and play. When the 
old school was demolished, school and community members 
took advantage of the opportunity to develop the newly 
available space into an outdoor sports and recreational area. The 
new athletic field is now complete and ready for use, with 
potential that the area could be improved in the future as room 
was left for additions which could include a score clock, 
bleachers, and a change facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a bronze plaque commemorating the opening of 
the field was unveiled at the ceremony. This plaque also serves 
to recognize the many generous sponsors who helped make the 
new athletic field possible. These sponsors include Gee Bee 
Construction, the town of Kipling, Richardson Pioneer, 
Hometown Co-op, Seed Hawk, Louis Dreyfus Commodities, 
and G. Hahn Contracting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thanks to the hard work and generosity of the 
school board, community members, and these sponsors, Kipling 
now has a beautiful new athletic field that will be enjoyed by 
the community now and for years to come. I ask all members to 
join me in celebrating the opening of the new athletic field. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Three Artists Inducted into Arts Hall of Fame 
 
Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, on September 26th 
the Prince Albert Arts Board held a fabulous event which I was 
privileged to attend. The 2015 Hall of Fame Induction Gala at 
the E.A. Rawlinson Centre inducted three deserving members 
of the local arts community into the hall of fame. Linda Erhardt 
was posthumously inducted in the visual arts category, 
Broadway North Theatre Company was inducted in the artistic 
organization category, and Malcolm Jenkins was inducted as a 
builder. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Linda Erhardt was known for her mastery and 
ability to teach nearly every visual art medium. She was also a 
member of several local art groups including the 1010 Painting 
Group, the Prince Albert Spinners and Weavers Guild, and the 
P.A. [Prince Albert] Pottery Guild. 
 
The Broadway North Theatre Company was started by Darren 
and Gillian McCaffery 20 years ago. The company has gone 
through four phases including a powerhouse summer show 
phase, a Christmas and Easter show phase, a phase of early 
summer shows, and the current phase of children’s 

programming. People of all ages have performed with the 
company. 
 
Malcolm Jenkins was inducted as a builder in recognition of the 
key role he played in the creation of the Rawlinson Centre. He 
has also acted in a number of Broadway North shows. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating all 
of this year’s deserving nominees into the Prince Albert Arts 
Hall of Fame. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 
[10:15] 
 

Home Ownership in the North 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
rise in the House to announce a new initiative that 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation is undertaking in 
consultation with northern housing stakeholders. As part of the 
housing strategy for Saskatchewan, SHC [Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation] works with northern communities to 
identify housing needs and supports the long-term sustainability 
of the housing portfolio. 
 
As identified, priority is to create opportunities for home 
ownership in the North where there is a demand for home 
ownership but few private market options in the region. In 
response, SHC is offering up to 50 existing social housing 
clients in northern communities the opportunity to embrace 
home ownership by providing tenants the opportunity to 
purchase the homes they are currently renting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the sale of these homes will be reinvested in new 
rental housing units for the North on top of our investments of 
27 million for 280 new units in the region. Further, Mr. 
Speaker, there will not be an impact for existing tenants. Units 
available for sale will only include those to be sold to existing 
tenants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is proud that this move is 
supported by many municipal leaders including New North 
SANC [Saskatchewan Association of Northern Communities] 
Services Inc. Our government will continue to work with 
northern leaders to address to address these issues and keep 
Saskatchewan strong. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 

Reflections on the New Democratic Party 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, shortly after the 
2007 election the member for Regina Lakeview was asked 
about the election results. His response was one of the most 
arrogant things I've ever heard. He said his government had 
done a great job and now they were just going to wait to clean 
up another mess. So the take-away from the 2007 election was 
that the NDP [New Democratic Party] didn’t do anything 
wrong. The NDP was right but the voters got it wrong, and 
that’s why the NDP lost. 
 



7330 Saskatchewan Hansard October 15, 2015 

But don’t worry, Mr. Speaker. After eight years out of office, 
the NDP is just as arrogant as ever. They still believe they’re 
always right and the voters are wrong. The headline in today’s 
Leader-Post reads, “P3s have majority support, poll finds.” So 
does the NDP listen to the views of a majority of Saskatchewan 
people? Of course not. The NDP leader says Saskatchewan 
people don’t understand P3s. Once again the NDP are right and 
the voters are wrong. Nothing has changed. Mr. Speaker, they 
may have a different leader, but it’s same old NDP. 
 
Today Saskatchewan people are willing to try new ideas, new 
approaches. But the NDP continues to cling to the past like 
grim death because trying anything new would mean that 
maybe they were wrong, and the NDP are far too arrogant to 
ever admit they were wrong. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Wait Times for Specialists and Provision of Health Care 
 
Mr. Broten: — Almost four years ago the Premier promised 
that no one would wait longer than a week to see a specialist. 
Does the Premier know how long people are waiting now? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to report to the 
House today that throughout the life of the government ours has 
been a focus on human resources within the health sector in 
Saskatchewan. What we inherited in 2007 was a situation where 
there was a dramatic shortage of nurses in the province. SUN 
[Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] at the time said we were short 
about 1,000 nurses. I’m pleased to report today, Mr. Speaker, to 
the House that since taking office in 2007 things have changed. 
There are now 3,000 more nurses of various designations 
practising in the province of Saskatchewan. This week we 
learned that there are 500 more doctors practising in the 
province of Saskatchewan. A number of them are specialists, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We continue to set bold goals in the health sector for 
Saskatchewan people. We continue to put patients first, and 
we’ve backed it up with action in terms of hiring more nurses, 
more doctors, more specialists. There’s going to be more work 
to be done, Mr. Speaker, but as long as we have the honour to 
serve in government in the province of Saskatchewan, we’re 
going to continue to set goals and we’ll move to meet them by 
backing those goals up with more resources, more people 
providing the care, more specialists, more general practitioners, 
more nurses, Mr. Speaker. That will be the priority of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the numbers show a very 
different story from what the Premier is saying. I asked the 
Premier if he knew how long people are waiting to see a 
specialist, Mr. Speaker, how long, and he had no answer. 
 
Four years ago the Premier promised, he committed, that 
everyone who needed to see a specialist would be able to do so 

within seven days, one week. That was his commitment, Mr. 
Speaker. The average wait to see a specialist in the Saskatoon 
Health Region right now is 326 days, Mr. Speaker. That’s 11 
long, painful months from when people are referred by their 
family doctor to see a specialist for the first time. 
 
So my question to the Premier: what has happened over the last 
four years? Why are people waiting 326 days instead of his 
promised seven days? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the time it 
takes to see a specialist in the province of Saskatchewan, I think 
a very important indicator in terms of health care for 
Saskatchewan people is perhaps that length of time but also the 
overall length of time to get care. 
 
Specifically I would point to surgeries, Mr. Speaker. When we 
took over in 2007, the NDP left this province in a situation 
where we were the last in Canada. We had the longest wait 
times for surgery in the Dominion of Canada. Mr. Speaker, as a 
result of more specialists practising, as a result of private clinics 
in the public system, more nurses and more doctors, we’ve 
turned that dismal NDP record right around. We now have the 
shortest wait times in Canada for surgical procedures, Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
And I would encourage all of us to check carefully the facts 
when the Leader of the Opposition wants to pronounce on 
statistics. On Tuesday, on the first day of the House, he stood 
up and said that emergency department wait times have doubled 
since 2010-11, and it wasn’t correct, Mr. Speaker. Melfort was 
the only reporting hospital in 2010-2011, and the CIHI 
[Canadian Institute of Health Information] data he was referring 
to later compared Melfort, just Melfort, to include Regina and 
Saskatoon — much larger ER [emergency room] departments. 
He didn’t mention that on his feet, Mr. Speaker. He’s into 
apples and oranges, Mr. Speaker. He’s into spin to try to make 
his case. He can have the spin. We’ll take more nurses, more 
doctors, shorter wait times. We’ll take our record; he can have 
his spin, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s awfully red for so 
early on a Thursday morning. If he thinks ER wait times are 
reasonable and acceptable in Saskatchewan, he is so out of 
touch with reality in what Saskatchewan patients are 
experiencing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know, he doesn’t want to talk about the wait times for 
specialists because it is so far from his commitment of seven 
days, Mr. Speaker. The wait times in Saskatoon are absolutely 
horrible, but the recent figures for Regina here in our capital 
city are also very bad. The recent figures in Regina show an 
average wait to see a specialist of 294 days. Not seven days, 
Mr. Speaker, like the Premier’s commitment — 294. That’s 10 
months filled with pain, uncertainty, and anxiety. Ten months in 
which a disease or an injury progresses, becoming increasingly 
challenging to treat and to fix, Mr. Speaker. My question to the 
Premier: what is his explanation for these ridiculously long wait 
times to see a specialist? 



October 15, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7331 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we are working on this 
particular issue right across the health care system. The clearest 
evidence of our commitment to this particular issue are the facts 
in terms of the number of specialists that are now working in 
the province of Saskatchewan: 2007-08, there were 807 
specialists working in Saskatchewan. Today 1,043 specialists of 
every designation working in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But if the hon. member wants to compare health care records, 
we’re happy to do that. Because I repeat, Mr. Speaker, when we 
took over from those members opposite in government, we took 
over a situation where Saskatchewan had the longest wait times 
for surgery in all of Canada. Here in the home of Tommy 
Douglas, in the home of the NDP-CCF [New Democratic 
Party-Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] who talk a lot 
about health care, we had the longest wait times for surgery in 
Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have hired more specialists. We have hired 3,000 more 
nurses of every designation. Five hundred more doctors 
practising. Private clinics delivering public surgeries in the 
province. And we’ve turned that around to the shortest wait 
times in Canada, the shortest wait times for surgery. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, we recognize there’s more work to be 
done, and the best indicator of future behaviour is past 
behaviour. Our past behaviour over the last eight years is to hire 
more specialists, more health care workers, and provide more 
timely care. That’s our record. Their record were shortages of 
nurses, shortages of doctors, the longest wait times for surgery, 
and we’re going to be interested in placing those two records in 
a choice to the people of Saskatchewan in April of next year. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, you don’t get your surgery unless 
you can see a specialist. And the Premier needs to explain why 
it is that he promises, he makes a commitment of seven days, 
and we’re looking at waits of 290, 326, Mr. Speaker, 
completely out of whack with the commitment that the Premier 
made. He needs to explain why this huge discrepancy between 
what he committed and what the reality is for Saskatchewan 
patients. 
 
Now there’s no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that the one-week 
commitment was an ambitious one. And I don’t think that 
Saskatchewan people would . . . Well I think they would be 
understanding, Mr. Speaker, if the government fell a bit short 
on that commitment if, if they were actually making progress. 
But that’s not the reality, Mr. Speaker. The reality is that things 
have gotten worse. Progress is not being made. The Premier 
made a promise and then went in the completely opposite 
direction. My question to the Premier: how can he explain this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I think 
everybody knows that not all specialists visits result in a referral 
for a surgery. I think it’s important to note that there is a wait 
for the specialist’s time as well as a wait for, after being 
referred for surgery. 

And here is the progress that we have made. The number of 
people waiting 18 months or more for surgery in this province 
is down 100 per cent. The number of people waiting more than 
a year is down 98 per cent. In fact, Mr. Speaker, in March of 
2010 when this government started its surgical initiative, and 
we can go back even further to when the members opposite 
were the government because the number was even higher, but 
even under this government the number of cases, people 
waiting more than three months for surgery: 15,291. The 
number in July: 2,200, an 85 per cent reduction. So we’ve seen 
significant progress in removing that wait for surgery. And we 
are committed to seeing a reduction in the wait for specialist 
time, and that work does continue in the province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we see the clock starting ticking 
for those surgeries once they see the specialist. And the problem 
here is, Mr. Speaker, is the huge wait for the specialist. And we 
note the Premier hands it off to the Health minister because he 
doesn’t want to answer the question. He doesn’t want to answer 
the question about why he promised seven days, Mr. Speaker, 
and we see a wait of 326 days in Saskatoon to see a specialist. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, that last year, last year the average to 
see a specialist in Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region jumped by 
47 per cent. Last year the average was less than seven months; 
now it’s 10. We can look in Saskatoon Health Region, Mr. 
Speaker. Last year it was a bit over 7 months; now it’s 11. So 
we have the Premier almost four years ago committing to, that 
everyone who needs to see a specialist could do so within one 
week. But we know now they’re waiting 10 months in Regina 
and 11 months in Saskatoon, which is way worse than last year. 
 
So my question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker, he needs to answer 
this: will the Premier at least acknowledge that waits for 
specialists are getting worse and that his commitment 
apparently meant nothing? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
What I can indicate to the House and the people of 
Saskatchewan is this commitment, the government’s 
commitment to ensure that we have the right providers in the 
province to provide the services. And all one has to do is look 
and compare the record of the members opposite to today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, despite the fact that we have a growing province, 
which we never had under the NDP, over 100,000 new 
residents of the province of Saskatchewan, here’s the 
difference. Back when the NDP were the government, 
anesthetists: 93, 125 today. Cardiologists: 24 under the NDP, 28 
today. General surgery: 64 specialists, 87 under the 
Saskatchewan Party. Internal medicine: 146 under the NDP, 
180 today. Neurosurgeons: 10 under the NDP, 14 under the 
Saskatchewan Party. Neurology: 14 under the NDP, 19 under 
the Saskatchewan Party. OB/GYNs [obstetrics and 
gynecology]: 47 under the NDP, 68 under the Saskatchewan 
Party. And I look forward to the next question because the list 
keeps going. 
 



7332 Saskatchewan Hansard October 15, 2015 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we see great agitation on the 
government benches this morning, but we see no answers. We 
see no explanation from the Premier about how he committed to 
a seven-day wait to see specialists, Mr. Speaker. And now, in 
Saskatoon, they’re waiting 326 days, Mr. Speaker. We see a 
huge discrepancy, and we see no response by the Premier. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, that it’s not just in the last year that 
waits for specialists have become much worse. These waits 
have gotten worse since the Premier made that promise that 
anyone who needed to see a specialist could do so within one 
week. In 2013, the year after the Premier made that 
commitment, just 12 per cent of people had to wait longer than 
three months to see a specialist. So in 2013, 12 per cent were 
waiting longer than three months. Now the average, Mr. 
Speaker, the average wait is 10 or 11 months. That’s absolutely 
atrocious. 
 
[10:30] 
 
This Premier, Mr. Speaker, has had years of record revenues. 
But instead of investing in better access to health care when 
people need it, they have plowed millions of dollars into the 
failed John Black lean experiment. Well, Mr. Speaker, John 
Black lean has clearly failed. It has failed despite the hundreds 
of millions that this Premier has dumped into it. My question 
for the Premier: what’s his plan now? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, you want to talk about 
better access to health care. Mr. Speaker, how do you explain 
the fact that over 16,000 people would have been waiting longer 
than three months for surgery under the NDP, probably actually 
was even higher than that at one time, Mr. Speaker? How do 
you explain, Mr. Speaker, the fact that headlines under the NDP 
were this. 1999: “Man decries government decision to refuse 
MRI scan in the province.” 2001 headline: “Woman waits for 
MRI while dog gets scanned.” 1998 headline: “Long wait for 
MRI test forces woman to Alberta.” 2004 headline: 
“Saskatchewan’s 22-month wait for an MRI is ‘almost 
criminal’ says radiologists’ association.” 
 
Here’s the list, and I’ll continue on it. Orthopedics: under the 
NDP, 34; under the Saskatchewan Party, 46. Pediatricians: 
under the NDP, 67; 93 under the government, Saskatchewan 
Party. Psychiatry: 87 psychiatrists in the province under the 
NDP; 100 under this government. And, Mr. Speaker, the list 
goes on. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, here’s a 2015 headline: Little 
boy’s coverage denied because of cutbacks. That’s what we see 
from this government, Mr. Speaker. Simple question to the 
Premier, simple question to the Premier. He’s here today. He 
can stand up and answer. What is his explanation, Mr. Speaker, 
as to why wait times for specialists are getting so much worse? 
What is his explanation? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I want to put on the record 
and correct the record of the Leader of the Opposition, which 
I’m getting quite used to, and we’re only a couple of days into 
the session, Mr. Speaker. The decision that was made with 
respect to yesterday’s case was not done with respect to a 
cutback or a budget decision. That is absolutely not the case, 
100 per cent. 
 
But the list goes on. Radiologists: under the NDP, 78; under the 
Saskatchewan Party government, 134. Urologists: 14 under the 
NDP, 17 under the Saskatchewan Party. 807 specialists in the 
province under the NDP, 1,043 under this government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, let’s go back to the radiology number: 78 
under the NDP, 131 under this government, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s why we saw headlines going back many years, Mr. 
Speaker, about “NDP gets heat over MRI ban,” which in 2005 
the then Health minister’s own riding was going to propose that 
people that went out of province to pay for their own MRI were 
actually not going to be able to use that MRI scan in the 
province. That’s how backwards they were, and that’s why 
they’re sitting on that side of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Standards for Health Care Facilities 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Regina 
Qu’Appelle Health Region says there is “No process or 
oversight for quality of care in long-term care.” Does the Health 
minister agree? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, certainly we do have oversight when it 
comes to all areas of the health care system, Mr. Speaker. We 
have oversight as it relates to the regional health authorities and 
the boards that provide oversight to the management of each 
respective health region. We also have in place policies that we 
put in place at a provincial level that we expect that all of our 
organizations would follow, whether they be affiliates or 
whether they be region-run facilities or operations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So yes, there is oversight when it comes to the health system, 
but we’re always looking for ways to improve that oversight, 
improve the accountability within the system. And we’re 
working very hard with the system to address those issues. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the second largest health region 
in our province says there is no process or oversight for quality 
of care in seniors’ care facilities, no process or oversight. For 
years now, we have heard horrendous stories about a quality of 
care in seniors’ care facilities that is far from adequate. We have 
pushed for regulated minimum care standards and we have 
demanded that the government start to fulfill its oversight role, 
but the Premier and the Health minister have repeatedly 
shrugged this off. 
 



October 15, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7333 

Now we have the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region saying 
there is no process or oversight for quality of care in seniors’ 
care facilities and the health region identifies this as a 
challenge, a gap, and a risk. Is this enough to finally get the 
attention of the Premier and the Health minister? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, one way that there was the ability to provide some 
oversight was the fact that the legislation, the regulations at one 
time did require the provincial government to inspect long-term 
care facilities. Mr. Speaker, that requirement was actually taken 
out by the members opposite when they were the government. 
So the role of the government, the provincial government to 
inspect special care homes was actually removed by the NDP 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve obviously had the Ombudsman’s report. 
We’re working very closely with the Ombudsman and our 
regional health authorities to ensure that we are, that the 
standards that are in place today and have been in place for 
some time as set out in the program guidelines, that they are in 
fact operationalized and implemented. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I can tell the House that working groups are 
reviewing, developing and recommending regional policies and 
procedures to ensure that those standards are operationalized. 
We are developing some training, an additional orientation for 
all of our regional health authorities and their staff when it 
comes to operationalizing the guidelines. As well, we’re 
working to determine what is going to be the most effective 
way to track and publicly report the implementation, and that 
work does continue. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the same document from the 
Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region talks about immense 
financial pressures, short-staffing, and “Severe physical 
infrastructure needs in several long-term care facilities.” 
Immense financial pressures, short-staffing, severe physical 
infrastructure needs and absolutely no process or oversight for 
quality of care . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . This is from Q1 
[first quarter] of 2015 to those heckling on the other side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Absolutely no process or oversight for quality of care. This, Mr. 
Speaker, is the state of seniors’ care under that government. To 
the Health minister: what will it take for the Sask Party to set up 
regulated minimum quality of care standards and finally fulfill 
its oversight role? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
with respect to aging infrastructure, certainly that is something 
that this government does acknowledge, that we have over 250 
health facilities in this province. Two-thirds of them were built 
before 1970 and little had been done, especially under the NDP, 
in terms of maintenance. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I can give the example. And I know a couple of 
summers ago the Leader of the Opposition was touring facilities 
and tweeting pictures. And he was in Grenfell; Grenfell has a 
facility, a special care home, that is over 50 years old. And I can 
tell you in the last seven years this government, in terms of 
maintenance, we’ve put over a half a million dollars into 
maintenance into a 50-year-old building.  
 
What the members opposite did in the seven years prior to this 
government, comparing our $500,000 in maintenance on that 
50-year-old building, they spent $50,000 over seven years in 
maintenance including, in their last year, $5,000 in maintaining 
a 50-year-old building, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we’ve put over 
$1 billion into health capital, and we will continue on that in the 
future. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — The independent Ombudsman said the 
government’s guidelines for seniors’ care are “. . . generally 
non-specific and high-level, such that they are open to wide 
interpretation.” She calls for a robust system of accountability 
and she says the government needs to fulfill this crucial 
oversight role. 
 
It’s critical that the government put in place specific standards, 
deliver the right resources to meet those standards, and fulfill 
the important oversight role. But the Sask Party government has 
not done that. The Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region says there 
is no process for or oversight for quality of care in seniors’ care 
facilities. Why won’t the Health minister just commit to fixing 
this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, we are following the 
recommendations that have been set out by the Ombudsman, 
Mr. Speaker. We are working closely with the Ombudsman and 
the RHAs [regional health authority] to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I will repeat one of my previous answers because I think if the 
member opposite would actually listen to the answer closely . . . 
The ministry and health regions are working to determine what 
is the most effective way to not only track but also publicly 
report the implementation and the compliance with the 
standards that are in place currently with the guidelines that is 
in keeping with the Ombudsman’s recommendations. So I can 
tell the House and the public that we will be following the 
Ombudsman’s recommendations, and we’ll be publicly 
reporting on not only how we track compliance but also 
publicly report that compliance. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Essential Services Legislation 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 2007 the Sask 
Party introduced the essential services Act and ignored 
warnings that the law was unconstitutional. Five years later the 
Court of Queen’s Bench ruled that this law was indeed 
unconstitutional, and by that point this government had already 
wasted tons of time and money defending this poorly written 



7334 Saskatchewan Hansard October 15, 2015 

and unfair law. Yet they decided to use even more taxpayer 
money to fund an appeal. 
 
To the minister: does the Sask Party now regret the time and 
money they spent defending this unconstitutional law? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, under the NDP, we had no 
legislation in place protecting and ensuring that essential 
services were made available for the citizens of this province. 
 
The commitment that this government has made and the 
commitment that this government will keep is that we will 
ensure the safety and security of our citizens. We live in a 
province that’s got inclement weather, difficult road times in 
January and February. We have emergency rooms that we want 
to keep open. We do not want those things to be held up or 
interrupted by a labour disruption. We want to have good 
alternate methods to resolve labour issues. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, our commitment is to the citizens of this 
province, and we will continue to fulfill that commitment. And, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s something we’ll make no apologies for. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — You know, Mr. Speaker, this is the government 
that says it can’t even fund little Kayden Kot’s desperately 
needed treatment, which would cost just $14,000. This is the 
government that says it can’t afford one extra nickel for the 
thousands of new students in our province’s schools. This is the 
government that hasn’t found a way to fix ER wait times or 
specialist wait times or the senior care crisis. And yet this is the 
same government that has blown a massive amount of money 
defending a really bad law all the way to the Supreme Court of 
Canada. 
 
To the minister: will he at least admit that the massive amount 
of money spent to defend the Sask Party’s bad law was a total 
waste and should have been used to address the things that 
really matter to Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we received direction from 
the Supreme Court to make adjustments to our legislation. We 
are going to do that. 
 
We consulted, Mr. Speaker, we consulted extensively with 
labour. We consulted extensively with the public sector. Mr. 
Speaker, we want to have something that satisfies the needs of 
labour, something that complies with the requirements of the 
court. But most importantly, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll make no 
apology for it whatsoever, we are going to protect the safety 
and security of this citizens of this province so that snow is 
removed, so that emergency rooms stay open, so that health 
care continues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Under the NDP, there was nothing. Under this government, 
there will always be protection, and it’s something that no 
government ought to apologize for. It’s something that no 
government ought to ever back down for, is the safety and 

security of the citizens of their province. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 183 — The Saskatchewan Employment 
(Essential Services) Amendment Act, 2015 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 183, The Saskatchewan Employment (Essential 
Services) Amendment Act, 2015 be now introduced and read a 
first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved first reading of Bill 
No. 183, The Saskatchewan Employment (Essential Services) 
Amendment Act, 2015. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
[10:45] 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Support for the Trans-Pacific Partnership 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 
great, I’m very happy and pleased and proud to be bringing this 
motion forward on the Trans-Pacific Partnership. 
 
For those that don’t quite know what it is, the TPP 
[Trans-Pacific Partnership] agreement comprises 12 countries: 
Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, 
New Zealand, Peru, Singapore, United States, and Vietnam. 
These represent a combined market of nearly 800 million 
people and a gross domestic product of 28.5 trillion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is very important to the province of 
Saskatchewan. It’s very important to Canada, but especially the 
province of Saskatchewan because we are such a 
resource-based economy here in Saskatchewan and some of 
these tariffs have really hurt us. You know, Saskatchewan 
exported more than $25 billion in goods to the 11 other TPP 
countries in 2014. That represented about 71 per cent of the 
province’s total international exports, valued at 35.3 million. 



October 15, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7335 

So consequently this is good news for Saskatchewan. And of 
course, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about how it’s going to 
affect actually right up in my area, northeastern Saskatchewan, 
because northeastern Saskatchewan, as everybody knows or 
should know if they’ve been watching the news at all, that 
Tisdale for years, for years has had . . . Their motto has been 
The Land of Rape and Honey. Well consequently the rape word 
referred to rapeseed which was the forerunner of canola. So you 
know, the wording was a little bad, so the town of Tisdale is 
actually going to be taking that back off of there. And they’re 
going to come up with a new slogan, Mr. Speaker. But the thing 
is, it still is basically a land of canola and honey. Northeastern 
Saskatchewan is well known for producers, huge producers of 
those products. 
 
Now one of the things we’ve always been hamstrung on 
basically — and I’m going to talk about canola just a little bit 
— was on the export market. Now the export market for canola 
was always . . . Canola oil, excuse me. Not canola itself but 
canola oil. Canola oil always had a tariff on it going over into 
the Pacific Rim countries. So consequently it stifled our 
economy here because this is where we should be producing the 
canola oil, right where the canola is, rather than shipping the 
raw product, the canola itself, over to the Pacific Rim. 
 
Now the way this is going to work . . . And I just did a little bit 
of figuring. I thought I would do some of the math because the 
opposition probably couldn’t figure it out. But anyway in Japan 
they have tariffs of up to 13.2 yen per kilogram on canola oil, 
and that will be eliminated within five years of signing this 
agreement. So let’s put this back into perspectives that us 
people here can understand. That’s fifteen and a half cents for 
every pound of canola oil, which works out to $1.47 per gallon. 
 
Now on the average, a bushel of canola has 1.83 gallons in it of 
oil. So that basically adds the price onto what we can get for our 
canola produced right here in Saskatchewan an extra $2.69. 
That’s a lot of money for our farmers right here in 
Saskatchewan. And not only is that a lot of money for our 
farmers right here in Saskatchewan, but it’s good for the 
farmers all across Western Canada. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ll just use an example. Let’s say if you 
were a farmer and say you had $10 canola per bushel and all of 
a sudden it went to 12.69. That’s more money in our pocket. 
That’s going to be more money in our community. That’s going 
to mean more money to build schools, hospitals, roads — you 
name it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other thing is, as I said, Tisdale’s old motto 
was The Land of Rape and Honey. On honey, which 
northeastern Saskatchewan is well known for, in Japan they 
have a tariff of 25.5 per cent on honey at the present time. 
Honey production, well even in my little community of Carrot 
River which is 1,200 people, we have three large honey 
producers. This is a big issue for them. This helps export the 
best honey . . . And it’s well known. The best honey that is 
produced in the world is produced right in northeastern 
Saskatchewan. And I’m not bragging . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well yes, I am, but I’m also stating a fact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and when you take a look at all the different 
things that this would help out, this is tremendously good for 

Saskatchewan. The other thing is dried peas. Now peas are a big 
money crop, a big cash crop in northeastern . . . well in all the 
province but especially northeastern Saskatchewan. In Japan, 
they have in-quota tariffs of 10 per cent, and they will be 
eliminated upon entry into force. So, Mr. Speaker, also they 
have an over-quota tariff, 357 yen per kilogram, which will be 
eliminated within 10 years. Vietnam is also going to be 
eliminating that. So, Mr. Speaker, this is very important for 
northeastern Saskatchewan and, like I said, all of Saskatchewan. 
 
The other thing is that we have up in northeastern 
Saskatchewan is we have a logging industry. Now I know it 
was all shut down under the NDP, but now it’s back up and 
running again. So consequently we want to see some of this 
product moved to help our hard-working logging industry up 
there, our lumber industry. In Japan, which has tariffs on 
lumber, that tariff of 6 per cent is going to be eliminated within 
15 years. In Australia, it’s 5 per cent. It’s going to be eliminated 
on entry into force. And Brunei, 20 per cent. They have tariffs 
up to 20 per cent and they are going to be eliminated when this 
comes into force. 
 
Oriented strand board, Japan had 6 per cent, which will be 
eliminated in 15 years. Malaysia had 20 per cent — and we 
have a strand board plant right in Hudson Bay — will be 
eliminated on entry into force. And Brunei, tariffs of 20 per cent 
will be eliminated on entry into force. So this is all good news: 
good news for Canada; good news for Saskatchewan. And I’m 
especially proud to say it’s great news for northeastern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now let’s see what the NDP would do under this. 
Now the NDP are trying to talk out of both sides of their mouth 
here because what they’re doing is the provincial NDP, the 
nimble nine over there are saying that, you know, while they 
actually . . . You know, they support trade. They want to have 
trade and everything else like that, but yet, but yet their federal 
cousins are sitting there saying, no way. They’re going to tear 
up the deal if they were ever, if they were ever to form 
government here come Monday night. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t quite know how to take this. I 
happened to listen to the NDP leader’s scrum on Tuesday and 
where he said, well yes, he supported trade and trade was good 
for Saskatchewan. Then he was asked how he voted. Well he 
said he was NDP, so consequently he’s going to vote with his 
federal cousins. It doesn’t make any difference whether his 
federal cousins want to rip up the trade agreement. But that’s 
what he’s going to do. So okay, which way is it? Which way do 
they really want? Do they want the trade? Don’t they want the 
trade? 
 
This is a federal issue and yet they, to my way of thinking, the 
way they’re saying it, they’re actually voting against trade. 
They’re voting against trade. They do not, they do not want to 
see this province move forward. They do not want to see our 
agricultural manufacturing moving forward. They do not want 
to see our producers, our crop producers, our honey producers, 
our lumber producers, they don’t want to see them moving 
forward because they are going to go with their federal cousins 
who would rip up the agreement. 
 
Not only that, Mr. Speaker. It’s a well-known fact they’ve 



7336 Saskatchewan Hansard October 15, 2015 

actually got three of their candidates, three of their candidates 
running in the provincial election who have put right on their 
social media that they are against this agreement. You know, 
it’s hard to believe. 
 
So how is it, how is it that the NDP can be so against a great 
agreement like this, other than they’ve got this ideology that 
they’re just going to keep Saskatchewan just this little place? Of 
course, I guess in the years previous, they did that. You know, 
they had the small Saskatchewan and the great, I think it was a 
statement made by Lautermilch about, you know, well the more 
people that leave, there’ll be more left for the rest of us. They 
really didn’t care. They really didn’t care, and they didn’t care 
about shutting down all those hospitals. While we’re sitting 
here building hospitals, well they shut down . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Yes, 177. We keep on saying 176 but, on 
rechecking the records, 177 schools in the 16 years that they 
were in power. 
 
We need these trade agreements so we can move Saskatchewan 
forward, so we can have the money to be able to move 
Saskatchewan forward. With that, we have the population. 
 
They stand up every day and talk about, basically it seems to be 
a constant theme on the health situation. And yet they were the 
ones who shut down the hospitals. They were the ones that got 
rid of the nurses and physicians because, well they couldn’t 
afford it. Why? Because they don’t want to go into agreements. 
 
Even back in the old days, you know, they were against 
NAFTA [North American Free Trade Agreement]. They were 
against the European trade agreement. They were against every 
kind of agreement that we could have to actually try and move, 
not just Canada forward but the province of Saskatchewan in a 
big way because we are such an exporting province. 
 
So I really am kind of curious as to what the NDP would do. 
They say, we want to see the province move. But yet, yet they 
are going to go along with their federal cousins and try and see 
Saskatchewan go backwards, try and see Canada go backwards 
as far as I’m concerned, and try and make this into a have-not 
province again like it used to be under the former government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House are supporting the 
TPP. And like I said before, I am very, very proud to be able to 
stand on my feet in this House today and protect the rights of 
our Saskatchewan producers, the rights of our Saskatchewan 
people, the rights of all of the people in Saskatchewan, and the 
rights of all of the people in Canada. To see this move forward 
is absolutely fantastic. Our machinery dealerships, or our 
machinery manufacturers need it, of which my good friend over 
from Melfort constituency has Bourgault Industries, which is a 
huge industry, a great economic driver for that constituency. 
Yet the NDP doesn’t want to see this go forward. 
 
But anyway, Mr. Speaker, I guess I’d better read my motion in, 
and my motion is: 
 

That this Assembly supports the Trans-Pacific Partnership 
that was signed on October the 5th, 2015, as it will 
economically benefit the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
I so move. 

The Speaker: — The member from Carrot River Valley has 
moved: 
 

That this Assembly supports the Trans-Pacific Partnership 
that was signed on October the 5th, 2015, as it will 
economically benefit the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
[11:00] 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to enter into discussion here today as it relates to the 
Trans-Pacific Partnership. As I have noted in this Assembly, 
certainly this is a deal that holds out significant promise for 
Saskatchewan and potentially for Canada. There’s also notable 
concerns that have been raised that need to be fully understood. 
And I think that’s what Saskatchewan people expect of each 
and every one of us and certainly they expect that of their 
governments, to make sure that when you assess these complex 
agreements that you make sure that you’re getting the net 
benefit you deserve for Saskatchewan people and certainly for 
Canadians. 
 
Certainly we are a trading province and trade is important to 
this province. Our exports are incredibly important to the 
people of this province and to our economy, and those for 
whom we hold trade relationships are incredibly important. And 
it’s important for a government to seek and work, to build and 
expand and diversify trading markets for the people and 
businesses of this province. This is something that’s 
exceptionally important. 
 
Now when it comes to an agreement like this, of course those at 
home are aware of course that the full text, the details of this 
agreement haven’t been released. They know that we’re in the 
middle of a . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes, they have. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Oh, the Premier says that they have 
been released. They haven’t been released, of course you know, 
unless they’ve been released to the Premier possibly and he 
may possibly . . . We know the Premier has a close relationship 
with Stephen Harper. And it’s notable, it’s notable, Mr. 
Speaker, that on a week where they showed back up to the 
Assembly and the legislature resumes, that the Premier forgot 
his Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. We’re not sure where it is. He 
forgot his Throne Speech to respond to the priorities, 
challenges, and opportunities of Saskatchewan people. But the 
Premier is focused sort of in on maybe a bit of stumping for his 
buddy, Stephen Harper, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now as I’ve said, with the TPP what’s initially been released 
seems as though there’s some definite aspects that hold out 
promise for the people of this province, but there are some 
concerns. Certainly we’re encouraged and would want to . . . 
Now the Premier’s awfully worked up here, Mr. Speaker. But 
we’re encouraged certainly and want to work towards ensuring 
that we expand good access to new markets for pulse crops, for 
our wheat, and for our barley, Mr. Speaker. This is certainly 
important for our agricultural producers here in Saskatchewan. 
 



October 15, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7337 

We certainly see that, you know, we’re anticipating economic 
benefits from better access to Asian markets, as an example, for 
our beef and pork producers. Certainly these are important 
goals that we need to be working towards and markets that we 
need to be working to open up. And you know, it’s important to 
recognize that we’re a trading province and, you know, most of 
what we produce here is exported relatively with little 
processing. Hopefully that’s something that can be improved 
upon. Maybe doesn’t have the focus from the current 
government, Mr. Speaker, here. So improvements to trade is 
certainly welcome. 
 
And what we also have to recognize as far as promises, that we 
have 12 countries that are certainly involved in 40 per cent of 
the world’s GDP [gross domestic product]. So this is a large 
portion of gross domestic product, certainly providing an 
important access to markets for Saskatchewan. 
 
But we do need to see the details of, you know, a deal like this 
to make sure that it’s in the best interests of Saskatchewan 
people and of Canadians. Certainly there’s been valid concerns 
that have been raised, Mr. Speaker, and details are important in 
these deals. And I think what gets, you know, funny around this 
place and which is strange with this government, Mr. Speaker, 
is they’re always in such a reckless rush on some of these 
matters that they are all too often signing taxpayers on to deals 
for which they didn’t understand the details. And details matter, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s sort of like those pesky little details a few years back when 
that government was signing taxpayers and ratepayers on to 
what they thought was some sort of great deal with an 
American manufacturer to put smart meters that were a major 
risk and fire hazard across the US [United States], Mr. Speaker. 
But there was no due diligence and no analysis of the details on 
that front, Mr. Speaker, before, you know, that government 
signed Saskatchewan people on to something that was certainly 
dangerous, something that put homes at risk, something that 
caused damage, and something that’s wasted untold millions of 
dollars of hard-earned ratepayers’ and taxpayers’ money, Mr. 
Speaker. An example of where details are important, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And you know as well, of course, the noted concerns that were 
in place with those smart meters and with that American 
manufacturer and that fact that there were fires present in 
Philadelphia at the time. The fact that the minister and others 
had been briefed directly on those concerns, you would have 
thought, Mr. Speaker, that the government would have taken 
some due diligence to protect taxpayers and the public in this 
deal. But they didn’t even do that in the contract, Mr. Speaker, 
being fully aware of the actual risks and challenges of these 
meters elsewhere, and of course put people at risk and have 
wasted millions and millions of dollars. So details matter, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
You know, it’s sort of like details matter as well when we’re 
talking about things like the complex and costly P3s that are 
ballooning in cost of this government, Mr. Speaker. We see it 
with the bypass, Mr. Speaker, where the government isn’t 
urgently working on the immediate safety concerns on Highway 
No. 1 East, Mr. Speaker. But what they are doing is signing 
taxpayers on without batting an eye, Mr. Speaker, on to a 

massive overrun, Mr. Speaker. Now these things are complex 
and they’re doing it with, you know, a Paris company who, Mr. 
Speaker . . . And you know, I don’t know what the interest and 
sort of obsession of this government is to sort of work with 
these foreign corporations on any front, Mr. Speaker, instead of 
looking to Saskatchewan companies and workers, but just 
signing us on to a massive billion-dollar-plus overrun, Mr. 
Speaker, when it’s on projects like this again, Mr. Speaker, that 
the details matter. 
 
You know, the details again, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen it on file 
after file where this government hasn’t been diligent in the 
details, and then they’ve been had by other entities, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s kind of like that John Black lean debacle, the 
American consultant who came in and left with bushels of 
taxpayers’ money, Mr. Speaker, and didn’t make things better 
for the people of this province. Didn’t really assess the details 
on that one. 
 
I remember a few years ago, Mr. Speaker, where the 
government couldn’t have been troubled enough to make sure 
they understood the royalty regime that they had in place or the 
economic conditions around them when they were looking at 
and projecting potash revenues. I remember the one year, Mr. 
Speaker, that they predicted I think it was $2 billion, Mr. 
Speaker. I know the minister at that point actually shouted 
across and said, don’t worry — to one of my concerns — 
saying, it’ll be 3 billion, he said. Well, Mr. Speaker, we didn’t 
get a single dollar that year. We ended up sending money back 
to those companies, so missed it by over $2 billion. Missed it by 
100 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when it comes to governing in the best interests of the 
public, details matter. When it comes to the Trans-Pacific 
Partnership, at this stage of the game certainly there’s promise 
to aspects here for Saskatchewan producers, for aspects of 
metals and minerals and machinery, Mr. Speaker. We need to 
understand and make sure that there’s not trade-offs that are 
unacceptable to Saskatchewan people. I know today The Globe 
and Mail is highlighting that a new detail that’s emerged, that 
wasn’t shared by government opposite, is that this may really 
open the door to temporary foreign workers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we believe in over here is good immigration and good 
solid economic opportunities and job opportunities for 
Saskatchewan people and Canadians, Mr. Speaker. And these 
aspects, these aspects definitely do matter. 
 
Certainly Saskatchewan New Democrats have always worked 
hard and been supportive of expanding and diversifying trade 
for the people of this province. It’s important to this economy, 
but we need to make sure that Saskatchewan people and 
businesses and our economic interests are protected. And 
certainly it’s important to have a full understanding of all the 
details. 
 
It’s sort of, you know, I know the government here, again, they 
forgot to come into the legislative session with a Throne 
Speech. They didn’t have any vision and plan, but here they are 
in the first week stumping away for their pal, Stephen Harper. 
Mr. Speaker, you know, I guess I just don’t have that same kind 
of blind faith in Stephen Harper. The same guy, Mr. Speaker, 
was out promising $800 million a year for equalization just a 



7338 Saskatchewan Hansard October 15, 2015 

few years ago, only to entirely break that promise. And of 
course not a boo from the Premier opposite on that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So what we are for is expanding trade. What we’re going to 
stand for is the best interests of Saskatchewan people. We 
definitely see promise in this deal, but we need to make sure we 
understand the concerns and consequences. The full details are 
important to make sure that Saskatchewan people’s best 
interests are protected and that we get a net benefit. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ll wait for 
all the excitement to die down. I’m pleased to stand up in 
support of the motion today and to have the opportunity to say a 
few words on it. 
 
The Trans-Pacific Partnership is the most important trade 
agreement ever for the people of Saskatchewan. And I would 
like to spend a few minutes talking about the opportunity that 
this agreement brings to the people of our province. 
 
But first I would like to point out that there is no status quo. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, there is no status quo. Either we move ahead 
with this agreement, with this partnership, or we let the world 
pass us by. Let’s talk about the opportunities that this brings to 
Saskatchewan. The Trans-Pacific Partnership will take off 
duties or other trade impediments from Saskatchewan’s 
agricultural products — the rock star, as the Premier likes to 
call our agricultural industry — products such as canola and 
malt and dried peas and dried beans and wheat and barley. It 
will take off tariffs on beef and on pork. It’s going to help our 
lumber and our wood industry. Just about everything that we 
produce will be helped by this agreement. 
 
It takes away damaging tariffs on our agriculture equipment, 
which is very important not only across the province but to my 
constituency especially, which of course is home to companies 
like Bourgault Industries and Bourgault Tillage Tools, Free 
Form industries, Doepker Industries, Schulte Industries, FPS 
[Failure Prevention Services], M & K, and so many more. 
 
But when you look around the province, what about companies 
like Brandt’s and Degelman’s and Flexi-Coil and Evraz that 
employs thousands and thousands of Saskatchewan people? 
They will all benefit from these opportunities. 
 
The TPP opens canola oil opportunities in Japan that will 
increase manufacturing and employment in places like Yorkton, 
in Nipawin, and right across the province in Saskatchewan in 
places that there are no plants today. 
 
It also increases opportunities for potash and for uranium and 
oil, and the list, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is almost as varied as our 
fine province. As the member from Carrot River Valley said 
that . . . I didn’t know that Japan had tariffs on Canadian honey, 
on Saskatchewan honey of 25.5 per cent. That’s a trade barrier. 
It will be gone and our honey industry will flourish. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How sweet. 
 

Mr. Phillips: — How sweet? This agreement opens market 
opportunity of 800 million people to Saskatchewan producers. 
It has a GDP of $28.5 trillion. Canada will grow and 
Saskatchewan will be a leader in this growth. Right across the 
board, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this deal is huge for our province. 
 
And who would be against this? I kind of sat here in amusement 
and I heard the Deputy Opposition Leader say, details matter. 
Did it matter to the federal leader of the NDP, Thomas Mulcair, 
when he was asked whether he would support this deal? And 
his quote to the Global news is that the NDP is opposed to it. 
Details matter. That’s a pretty clear statement of what their 
federal cousins say to it. 
 
And if the NDP were to form government on Monday, the 
federal NDP — I’m sorry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was just 
waiting for lightning to strike me down — but if they were, that 
would be the end of Canada’s participation in TPP. All the 
opportunities, Canada’s future, gone because they have no faith 
in Canadian people, no faith in our ability to compete with the 
world. Our dairy producers, egg producers, will be protected for 
up to 15 years to give up a market share of 3.25 per cent. They 
will do far better on this. I know they will. We have confidence 
in our people, in our industries. 
 
[11:15] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, sometimes in today’s environment and in 
today’s society, we accept numbers like 1 billion. We only have 
1 billion in the auto . . . [inaudible] . . . section to help them 
retool and to help them work towards competing in the world 
economy, $1 billion. That is one thousand million dollars for 
the auto industry. That’s a lot of money, but yet the NDP don’t 
feel that our industry will be able to compete. It will be 
devastating to our auto industry, they say, because somehow in 
their mind, Canadians can’t compete on the world stage. 
 
And you know, I want to just pull out some figures that kind of 
show what Saskatchewan can do in the world stage. Today we 
have an uneven playing field. We have places that charges us 
25.5 per cent for honey on the tariff. What has Saskatchewan 
done against this uneven playing field? In 2010 we exported to 
the 11 TPP nations. We exported $16.4 billion to those. By 
2014, in five short years, we had increased that to $24.99 
billion, a 51 per cent increase. Don’t tell us that we can’t 
compete on the world stage. We prove that each and every day, 
if only somebody would notice. 
 
But across the House, and I realize that I have talked about the 
federal NDP, and across the House, we have the Saskatchewan 
NDP. They want details. The details have been given out, even 
the details to The Globe and Mail article were given out to them 
on Tuesday, and yet they haven’t read them. So what good are 
the details if they don’t read them? They want to study the legal 
documentation which will come out later. They want to study it. 
They probably want to hold an inquiry on it. It’ll take two, three 
years, cost $15 million, but we’ll know that we don’t have an 
answer. 
 
And you know what really, really gets me, Mr. Speaker? What 
really gets me is that our provincial NDP, before they will sell 
pork, before they will sell beef, they want to check out the 
environmental laws in Vietnam to see if Vietnam is good 



October 15, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7339 

enough to meet the NDP’s standards. Just how arrogant is that 
when a provincial party here wants to check out Japan for 
labour laws to make sure they can buy our canola oil? That 
burns me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no status quo. If this partnership is 
unsigned by Canada, our beef in Japan will be 35 per cent 
higher, 35.5 per cent higher than Australian beef and US beef, 
because they will have the tariffs lowered. Our canola oil, peas, 
agricultural equipment, petroleum products, minerals, lumber, 
and a host of other products will be punished by trade barriers 
that won’t go away, that won’t exist in the other 11 partners. 
 
There is no status quo. That’s why we either move forward with 
this partnership, with this opportunity, or we sit back, as that 
side as always done, and watch the world pass us by. Make no 
mistake. There is nothing new about this party across the aisle. 
They are the same old NDP, wanting to take Saskatchewan, our 
province, backwards. And for all these reasons and many more, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be supporting the motion on the 
floor by the member from the Carrot River Valley. Thank you, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to rise to speak about this particular partnership agreement 
because I think that it is extremely important for Canada and for 
Saskatchewan because we are traders, we are people who sell 
products on a worldwide basis. 
 
And I think, it’s also important, after many years that we’ve 
been involved with the North American Free Trade Agreement, 
to understand that this agreement is effectively a replacement or 
an expansion of the North American Free Trade Agreement. 
And there were many good things that came from that particular 
agreement, but there are also a number of problems that have 
arisen. And clearly one of the issues that comes up is that we’re 
waiting for the details. 
 
And it’s quite surprising how dismissive the members of the 
government are in dealing with this particular matter. It’s 
almost as if whatever Harper says goes, and especially comes 
from, you know, some of the ministers and from the Premier. 
But let’s remember what the discussion is here. 
 
Why over the last few weeks, we know that there’s been 
incredible pressure on all of the countries who were signing up 
on this agreement because they were worried about the 
continued existence of the Harper government and that they 
wanted to get this deal done. And so in the last days or last 
weeks of the discussion, there were all kinds of threats around 
leaving the particular negotiations were there. 
 
And basically New Zealand, which has had a wide-open dairy 
industry, didn’t like the rules that Canada and the United States 
had about dairy products. Australia was not very happy with 
how the US and Mexico managed the trade in sugar. The US 
doesn’t like the way that Japan manages trade in rice. And 
Canada had some of its own issues, especially around the 
automobile industry and around dairy and other things. But the 
key word to remember is that it’s managing trade. It’s not about 

free trade. 
 
And I think that’s the point where the details are extremely 
important because what we have is, our job as members of this 
legislature is to protect our industries but also to protect our 
people and our consumers. And one area that’s of a special 
concern to me, and I think should be a special concern to the 
Premier, is as it relates to pharmaceuticals and the rules around 
pharmaceuticals. 
 
We know that the province is in tough financial shape. I know 
that the Premier needs to talk to the media about his issues on 
the wait-lists, and so we’ll have that discussion later. But I think 
it’s extremely important to recognize that the whole discussion 
is about managing trade and about balancing the work and the 
protection we have for consumers, for ordinary citizens, over 
and against the international corporate structures. And that’s 
where the details matter. 
 
Now we know, and we had a very interesting comment from 
one of the ministers yesterday when he passed over the Internet 
version of what we know about this whole partnership and said, 
oh you know, they’ll probably want to know about the details. 
Well yes, we do want to know about the details. We know that 
on this whole smart meter thing the Minister of Economy and 
others that were involved in that didn’t get the details. We know 
that on this bypass deal the Minister of Highways have 
basically signed into something which keeps escalating in price 
to the point where people around Regina are saying, what’s 
going on? There’s a total lack of, sort of, scrutiny on what’s 
going on. 
 
We know that in the health area, and also now spreading into 
other parts, that the John Black lean boondoggle has ended up 
causing all kinds of problems within the system itself, but it’s 
also spent an incredible amount of money on something that’s 
not helping what’s going on. And when we hear that children 
that are in difficulty can’t get some of the treatments they need 
because there’s no money, and we see all the money, millions 
of dollars that have gone out on those kinds of expenses, we 
know there’s something wrong. We know that over the last 
couple of years the government’s run out of money, so they’ve 
tried to figure out ways to borrow money that disguises that 
they’re borrowing money. And that’s the P3s [public-private 
partnerships] all over the place. 
 
Now one of the things that is a factor in the P3s is what kinds of 
clauses, what kinds of details are in these contracts as it relates 
to demand. And one of the difficulties in negotiating in a P3 
contract in Saskatchewan is we often don’t have sufficient 
numbers of people using a highway, using a facility, using a 
product that can allow for the traditional methods of funding 
these things. And so a good example and a warning to all 
Canadians is what happened in British Columbia when they 
built a P3 bridge between Langley and Port Coquitlam. The 
message right now seems to be that they had a demand clause, 
in other words, it was based on a certain number of predicted 
users of that bridge. And that demand clause means that the 
public is paying $45 million a year because there aren’t 
sufficient people using the bridge. 
 
We don’t know if that’s the same kind of clause that the 
Minister of Corrections has in the food bills or food contracts 



7340 Saskatchewan Hansard October 15, 2015 

that they have in the correctional centres, that’s based on certain 
numbers of average numbers, and if those numbers aren’t met, 
they’re going to have to put more money in. We know that 
there’s some problems there. 
 
Now it’s a Thursday and I think quite a number of us were here 
on May 7th, 2009, a Thursday, when the Premier was very 
happy to welcome Governor Schweitzer from Montana to sign a 
memorandum of understanding to build a $100 million pipeline 
to ship CO2 from Saskatchewan down to Montana. And there 
was all kinds of hype. The Premier says, well we’re putting in 
50 million and we’re going to ask the federal government for 
100 million, all these kinds of things. Well we’re still watching 
and we know on May 30th, 2011, just over two years later, the 
Premier confirmed that’s dead. That pipeline is dead. There’s 
nothing going to happen. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we know that there are a whole number of 
things that this Premier has announced that have just kind of 
disappeared. I often bring along my briefcase that says 
Enterprise Saskatchewan on it just to remind us all of the kinds 
of things that the Premier talked about as big, big projects that 
just go nowhere. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a difficult time. It’s a 
difficult place when we end up here in this province having the 
ministers who are supposed to be checking the details, checking 
that the programs are done in an appropriate way, that they have 
basically said, we don’t care about the details. The previous 
speaker to me from up in Melfort, you know, kind of laughed at 
that. The Premier laughed when the discussion of the details on 
smart meters were here. All of these things are very, very 
difficult for the people of Saskatchewan because what it means 
is that we are not getting the proper representation. 
 
The most difficult thing for me this week was when the Premier 
ignored the question about the 2006 federal election when the 
Conservatives promised to deal with the equalization issue for 
Saskatchewan. And what was even more frustrating is we 
know, and the Premier confirmed in the spring of 2008, that the 
Prime Minister asked me to stop the lawsuit of the province of 
Saskatchewan against the federal government over equalization, 
and we did it. And so I think that what we need to recognize is 
details matter. It seems like the Premier and others don’t care. 
 
[11:30] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Mr. Tochor: — Well that was bizarre. We have the 
Trans-Pacific Partnership, TPP, and the NDP would like to 
discuss traffic counts for a bridge in BC [British Columbia]. 
Mr. Speaker, isn’t that a bizarre way to enter debate on one of 
the most, it could be, and is the most important trade deal for 
Saskatchewan? Mr. Speaker, it’s somewhat arrogance we’ve 
seen from the other side, is that they know best. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m just going to list off a few groups. And 
we’ve got the Canadian Chamber of Commerce, the Canadian 
Manufacturers & Exporters, Forest Products Association of 
Canada. What insight or what would they have to say about a 
deal like this? The Mining Association of Canada, the Canadian 
Council of Chief Executives, the Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business, the North Saskatoon Business 

Association, the Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce, the 
Canadian agricultural food trade alliance, the Ag Producers 
Association of Canada, Cereals Canada, Canola Council of 
Canada, Canadian Cattlemen’s Association, the Saskatchewan 
manufacturers council, Sask Pulse Growers, Grain Growers of 
Canada, Western Canadian Wheat Growers Association, Beef 
Cattle Research Council, Saskatchewan Stock Growers 
Association, and the western wheat growers and SaskCanola. 
Mr. Speaker, that’s a list of people that have read the details, 
that have seen the agreement as being a net benefit. 
 
The Deputy Leader of the Opposition talked about net benefit, 
Mr. Speaker. The net benefit for this province is this deal will 
mean lower tariffs. Tariffs, Mr. Speaker, are just another word 
for taxes. They’re a foreign government taxing our products, 
Mr. Speaker, which is frustrating for our producers. It was in 
the past, Mr. Speaker, these taxes or tariffs accounted, for 
chilled beef in Japan, a 38.5 per cent premium for our producers 
they would have to pay to sell into the Japan market. Just 
consider that for a moment. The opposition would have us not 
enter into this agreement so that our producers would have to 
compete with people such as maybe the cattle in Australia. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, I believe the Saskatchewan 
Cattlemen’s Association would be so supportive of this, is 
because if we went down the NDP path and opposed this trade 
deal that their federal masters have . . . The position that they’ve 
taken is that they will tear up this agreement. Well our 
producers, if that would ever happen . . . Scary as it is, we never 
know what the election results will be. If the NDP would win 
the next election and tear up this agreement, our cattle 
producers in this province will be at a disadvantage to other 
producers such as in Australia, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the countries that have signed on — and we’ve heard the 
opposition wanting to question these countries, and question 
how they operate — well, Mr. Speaker, these countries, such as 
Australia, Brunei, Chile, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New 
Zealand, Peru, Singapore, United States, and Vietnam, these are 
the people that we’re going to be trading with. Actually, Mr. 
Speaker, we already trade with them; 71 per cent of our 
economy relies on these countries. 
 
And you know what? The people that are buying our products, 
the NDP want to question. How does that help trade? Who 
would they want to trade with? Probably Greece, probably 
Venezuela, North Korea, Cuba maybe. And that is actually 
going to help? How is that going to help our economy when 71 
per cent of our trade is with countries that the NDP would like 
to question? Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that is the best way to 
run a province or a country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this position that the NDP has taken is that this TPP, kind of, 
in the provincial realm, they’re somewhat supportive but 
waiting for details, similar to their position on CETA 
[Canada-European Union Comprehensive Economic and Trade 
Agreement], which I’ve never heard them clarify afterwards 
when they were asking for details. We have the Deputy Leader 
of the Opposition, never read the agreement that has been . . . 
the information passed over to him. We have their provincial 
candidates in the next provincial election being anti-TPP. 
 
So I would encourage the Leader of the Opposition to phone 



October 15, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7341 

Ottawa and clarify with his federal master on his position, or 
better yet phone their candidates within Saskatchewan and 
share their insight because right now we don’t know where they 
stand, Mr. Speaker. And this deal is so important for this 
province. 
 
Let’s just talk about the numbers briefly. So in 2014 we had 
around $25 billion in goods to the other 11 TPP countries. That 
represents 71 per cent of total exports valued at $35.3 billion. 
Mr. Speaker, this amount represents a lot of good-paying jobs. 
That’s a lot of families that are fed off the income produced by 
these segments of the population or segments of the industry. 
 
If you look at it, it affects every sector in our Saskatchewan 
economy. You look at beef. We look at pork. We look at wheat, 
barley, canola, malt, pulse crops, agriculture equipment, 
lumber, uranium mining. The list goes on. Every sector will 
benefit from this deal, and what do we hear from the 
opposition? We’ve got to see the details. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s not how things work with international trade, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
There is another number I’d like to share with you that we talk 
about. These sectors, we talk about the different importance of 
this deal. Take a guess, Mr. Speaker, on how much, in 2014, 
guess how much canola oil we sold to Japan. We are a great 
producer of canola in this province, but guess how much canola 
oil we produced. Zero exports to Japan. That’s pretty incredible, 
is that the market the size of Japan, and we sold zero canola oil 
to Japan in 2014. This opens up that market. What would the 
opposition say to those producers, those businesses that are 
reliant on canola, either the production of or the manufacturing 
of canola oil or all the spinoff activity of just that one crop, 
canola? And we know in 2014 that’s such an important 
agricultural component, and we sold zero canola oil into Japan, 
which is quite incredible. 
 
If we look at other parts of the economy such as . . . We all 
know that with commodities, prices go up, prices go down. But 
when we are possibly in the lower ebb of the price cycle, we 
don’t put more barriers to trade. And I just can’t wait until once 
we, you know . . . We’ll make it through these different cycles. 
Once commodity prices return, could you imagine what our 
economy’s going to be like with this deal in place? 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you look at the different industries such as 
manufacturing, which has been so crucial for our Saskatchewan 
economy, as . . . We’ve had some challenges with oil. We can’t 
control the price of oil, but we can control hopefully the climate 
of our economy so that we can diversify. Manufacturing is such 
an unsung hero really in our economy that has employed 
thousands of people. And that’s another area that this TPP 
would affect. We’re going to, with the agreement in place, we’ll 
have restrictions or tariffs removed, so an example being 
Vietnam. You would have hopefully a purchaser of our 
equipment in Vietnam where if they looked at product from, 
say, Australia and compare it to Saskatchewan, that product 
would have a 5 per cent premium put on if it was built in this 
province. Mr. Speaker, it’s the removal of such barriers that we 
would love to see on the world stage because the prosperity that 
we have in Saskatchewan is because we have a growing 
economy. 
 

Mr. Speaker, government can do a lot of things to get in the 
way of trade and, Mr. Speaker, I think any time that we have an 
opportunity to get out of the way of job creators, to get out of 
the way of our producers and exporters, and get out of the way 
of a growing economy, the better off we are as a province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In conclusion I just want to look back at the difference between 
the NDP and the Saskatchewan Party. We cherish growth 
because growth provides what this province supports. Mr. 
Speaker, as we wind down, I’d like to mention that I support the 
motion. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Always good to take my place in this Assembly and join the 
debate, in this case on the motion put forward by the member 
from Carrot River Valley as regards the Trans-Pacific 
Partnership agreement. 
 
It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. I have a great deal of affection for 
that individual as a person but when it comes to his political 
observations or prognostications, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m 
always sort of interested to see what the member from Carrot 
River Valley is weighing in on. 
 
I, of course, remember when the member from Carrot River 
Valley talked about how a budget in this Assembly was not just 
the best in Saskatchewan’s history or in Saskatchewan or in 
Canada, but in the world and in the universe. Of course, Mr. 
Speaker, that was the very budget where there was a shortfall of 
billions in terms of what had been projected off of resource 
revenue. And you know, it made a bit of, it really sort of hung 
that member’s statement out there to dry. 
 
Now I know that they get the different lines from, you know, 
the Premier’s office and House business over there to, you 
know, roll on into the debate and get with the kumbaya singing. 
But in the case of what that member had to say about that 
budget, you know, it was a bit of a whopper. It was a bit of . . . 
[inaudible] . . . And again, it’s unfortunate because as an 
individual he’s a heck of a nice guy. But in terms of setting out 
the record around political prognostications, it really, you know 
. . . All we need to do to get the alarms going off is to see that 
member on his feet saying that something is good or super good 
or the best in the universe and then you know, you start to 
check your wallet, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So in terms of that member leading off in the debate, it’s 
interesting to see him rolling in. But of course what he’s 
counselling us as an Assembly to do is to buy, sight unseen, the 
line that is being trotted out by the federal Conservatives, by 
Stephen Harper, that the TPP is an unmitigated home run, grand 
slam for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I guess, you know, that’s understandable because if you 
took a bit of a survey over there and asked them to, you know, a 
show of hands who’s voting anything but Conservative, Mr. 
Speaker, I think that’d be a pretty small number on that side, if 
not in fact zero. Because of course the Premier has weighed in 
and said that Steve Harper and the federal Conservatives, that’s 



7342 Saskatchewan Hansard October 15, 2015 

the best choice for the people of Saskatchewan. And you can 
bet that the caucus over there is taking notice, and they’ll be 
voting accordingly. 
 
Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, something which is quite 
interesting because this is of course a party that once upon a 
time portrayed itself as a coalition of Liberals and 
Conservatives and Reformers, but you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
. . . Possibly Green members, possibly former NDPers. But it’s 
interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think you’ll be hard pressed 
to find someone that’s not voting a straight Steve Harper line 
over there. 
 
So in terms of, you know, what’s . . . When Stephen Harper 
comes to the people of Saskatchewan and says, hey, we’re 
going to do something that’s really great for you, what does 
history show us we should be doing? Should we be checking 
our wallets, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Should we be swallowing it 
whole as apparently is the case over there on that side, Mr. 
Speaker? Or should we be a bit more circumspect? 
 
Now one of the lines that the Premier likes to quote from time 
to time is, the best indicator of future behaviour is past 
behaviour. And so in that regard, Mr. Speaker, you know, if the 
caucus over there is paying attention, if they are really into that 
kind of scrutiny of different records, then I’d ask them to look 
no further than promises that were made by the federal 
Conservatives as regards equalization fairness for the province 
of Saskatchewan, as regards the ability of the people of 
Saskatchewan to benefit in a better way from the natural 
resources that we’ve been so blessed with in this province. And 
I’d ask them to check the record where . . . That’s the federal 
Conservatives of the day, many of whom are, you know, still in 
the government benches currently in Ottawa and that are again 
out asking our people for their support and indeed, Mr. Speaker, 
some individuals that are very closely tied with that government 
and indeed with that very promise, that occupy the government 
benches right now. 
 
[11:45] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what did the leading lights of the federal 
Conservative caucus here in Saskatchewan have to say about 
what their promise on equalization would mean for us? And I 
would also submit, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this was a promise 
that they had the decency to put down on paper. They provided 
the details for it. What happened to that promise that they 
estimated, that Tom Lukiwski who is running in Moose 
Jaw-Lake Centre, you know . . . what did that mean for the 
province of Saskatchewan?  
 
Well according to Lukiwski back in 2006 . . . and again they 
know Lukiwski very well, former executive director of the 
Saskatchewan Party, former executive director of the 
Progressive Conservatives, so that’s their pal. We get that. We 
get that they’re close over there. What did that mean to the 
people of Saskatchewan? Well Lukiwski in 2006 said it would 
mean 800 million to $2 billion for the people of Saskatchewan 
per year, per year. And they had the decency to put their 
promise in black and white. And what happened after that party 
formed government? Well they promptly broke their promise. 
 
You know, political columnist Murray Mandryk was estimating 

that, you know, the low number on that would have been $4 
billion to the people of Saskatchewan in terms of what that 
promise, if it had been kept by those individuals that took the 
trouble to write it down, Mr. Speaker, that it would have meant 
$4 billion to date in terms of additional revenue for the people 
of Saskatchewan, you know, and what that would have meant 
for the things that we value here around health care, around 
education, around crumbling infrastructure, what that would 
have meant. 
 
But they broke their promise on that, and they also broke it to 
the people of Newfoundland. And you know, it was interesting 
to see former premier of Newfoundland Danny Williams come 
out earlier in the campaign and say that the people of 
Newfoundland and Labrador had been poorly treated by the 
Stephen Harper government and that the good people of 
Newfoundland and Labrador should put paid to any political 
aspirations that that party might have in that province. 
 
And you know, by comparison, what sort of action do you see? 
Because that’s how it goes, Mr. Speaker, when you have a 
bunch of politicians like the pack led by Stephen Harper come 
to your province and say one thing and then break their promise 
and do something very different. You know, what should you 
do? Should you just say, you know, the whole adage of fool me 
once, shame on you; fool me twice, you know, shame on me? 
You know, don’t worry about that. Just keep accepting 
whatever they trot out there as the gospel again and again and 
again. 
 
So you know, Mr. Speaker, there’s been a lot made about the 
details. And earlier in the week we had the Minister of Trade 
for that government — again a person that I have high regard 
for personally but, you know, an individual who I’ve got a fair 
number of political disagreements with — say that, you know, 
printing off the Stephen Harper analysis of what the deal meant 
as opposed to the actual deal and the details of the deal, what he 
had to say to the House was, well I hope they don’t want to 
have the details. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, I guess I’d leave it off here. If it lives up 
to its billing, great. But if past is indeed prologue, we’ve seen 
Stephen Harper say some things that didn’t quite add up to what 
was good for the province of Saskatchewan in the past. And 
again, you know, both my mom and dad come off the farm, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and one of the things they used to caution us 
about that we took a while to understand was, you know, don’t 
buy a pig in a poke. And you know, for those that don’t know 
what that means, it means, you know, watch out because if you 
buy something sight unseen, don’t know the details, then . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Time for debate has expired. 
Questions. I recognize the member from Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This 
partnership agreement will manage trade in pharmaceuticals 
through a variety of arcane rule changes that we need to see the 
details about, such as patent linkage, data exclusivity, and 
biologics. And the net effect of it is that pharmaceutical 
companies will effectively be allowed to extend, sometimes 
almost indefinitely, their monopolies on patent medicines, keep 
cheaper generics off the market, and block biosimilar 
competitors from introducing new medicines. All of these 



October 15, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7343 

things will cost individuals and people who run pharmaceutical 
buying programs more money. 
 
To the member from Saskatoon Eastview: has the Government 
of Saskatchewan looked at how much more this is going to cost 
our health system, and do we have the money? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to thank the 
opposition for the question. We talk about if government has 
the money. Well, Mr. Speaker, we are in a province that is 
finally growing again, Mr. Speaker. The economy, we have 
some spots that are a little bit suffering from low prices in 
commodities, but guess what? With this partnership, it’s going 
to help our trade with other countries. It is actually going to in 
return grow our economy. 
 
And what we’ve seen time and time again is that when the 
economy grows, it’s good for Saskatchewan. It’s good for the 
people of Saskatchewan. And that’s why we seek growth, is we 
can take those dollars and put it back into the important 
programs, such as health care that the member opposite just 
pointed out. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Doke: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, here is a list of a few of the 
organizations that have voiced their support for TPP. They 
include the Saskatchewan and Canadian Cattlemen’s 
Association, western wheat growers, Sask Pulse Growers, the 
Saskatchewan Manufacturing Council, the Canola Council of 
Canada, Canadian Federation of Independent Business, Forest 
Products Association of Canada, and SaskCanola, Saskatoon 
Chamber of Commerce. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the list goes 
on. 
 
To the member from Regina Lakeview: do the NDP think they 
know better than all the Saskatchewan and Canadian 
organizations that have come out in support of this historic 
agreement? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this is a very strange question 
because those are exactly the kinds of groups that we talk to as 
well, and we look at how we support the international trade. 
And they too are all in their respective industries waiting for the 
details because they know that there are clauses that might 
affect pulse crops or might affect honey or might affect other 
things, but let’s actually see what the details are. But what we 
all are supportive of is trade, and we want to make sure that that 
happens. 
 
The previous member did not answer the question about how 
much money does the Premier and the Finance minister have in 
their coffers to deal with the increased pharmaceutical costs or 
do they even know or do they even care. That’s important. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Again we hear the Premier offering that we should read the 
agreement. Well aside from the Harper analysis that they sent 
over in a binder, I mean having thoughtfully printed off the 
website for us, Mr. Speaker, we of course have not seen the deal 
itself. And as the details come out, some of them, you know, in 
dribs and drabs, some are good, some not so good, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But again what this has to do with is who’s making the promise 
to the people of Saskatchewan? And Stephen Harper saying that 
something is good for the people of Saskatchewan, history 
would show that people should be checking their wallets. But 
such is the devotion of members opposite to the word of 
Stephen Harper. 
 
So I guess my question is to the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview. If Stephen Harper told him to click his heels together 
three times and he could fly, would he? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Mr. Tochor: — This has been a bizarre debate for sure. We 
have them being opposed to the trade agreement because of 
traffic count in a bridge in BC. We have a fairy tale reference 
from the members opposite. Mr. Speaker, this is a trade deal 
that is good for almost every sector of the Saskatchewan 
economy and the NDP refuses to get behind it, Mr. Speaker. 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Jurgens: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP keep talking about how 
they are quick to stand up for the interests of Saskatchewan, yet 
their suggestions indicate otherwise. Current NDP candidates 
have joined the chorus of past anti-trade NDPers in voicing 
their opposition to the TPP. The members opposite are the same 
old NDP. The TPP is a trade deal that benefits Saskatchewan 
agriculture, forestry, the uranium sector, industry, resource 
development, and ultimately everyone in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
clarify how his party supports the TPP when his candidates 
clearly do not? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d urge that 
member . . . And it’s interesting because of course back when 
Steve Harper and the Conservatives were making their promise 
to the people of Saskatchewan, it was the member from Prince 
Albert, then Brian Fitzpatrick, that was writing as Chair of the 
federal Conservative caucus to his caucus colleagues that “All 
members present believed that anything less than substantial 
compliance with our commitment will cause us no end of 
political difficulty.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps that member is familiar with Mr. 
Fitzpatrick and what happened in 2006, but I’d urge her to 



7344 Saskatchewan Hansard October 15, 2015 

check the record and see what happens when Stephen Harper 
makes a promise to the people of Saskatchewan and then does 
something entirely different, and then the Premier and the 
members over there say, you know, no problem, just keep 
coming. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of course 
we’ve noted that we see promise for Saskatchewan in 
Saskatchewan’s interest in the TPP. We’ve noted that there is 
valid concerns and the important need to have proper oversight 
to ensure the details are in the interests of Saskatchewan people. 
We know this government’s been reckless at times with details, 
costing taxpayers big dollars, when we look at the lack of 
details in a smart meter debacle that they signed taxpayers on 
to, a massive overrun with a Paris company, right now over a 
billion dollars, Mr. Speaker. So details matter. 
 
As it relates to the TPP, I’m interested in knowing what 
members opposite know about the details around opening up a 
broader utilization of TFWs [temporary foreign worker], 
foreign temporary workers, in Saskatchewan. Certainly we want 
to make sure that we have the interests of Saskatchewan people 
and Canadians supported as a primary focus, and of course 
good immigration. So to the member from Eastview, I’m 
interested in what he knows about that concern. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First off, 
international trade agreements do not address temporary entry 
for low-skilled or general trade occupations, Mr. Speaker. This 
is the detail that is out there right now, Mr. Speaker, and if they 
would have read the binder of information that we sent over . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, they talk about details. In less than six months this 
province is going to be in the midst of another election, Mr. 
Speaker, the provincial election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it kind of bizarre that the opposition is 
worried about details when we have no details on their policy, 
their position, or a platform, Mr. Speaker. In less than six 
months, the people of Saskatchewan will take the opportunity to 
decide which way they would like the province to move 
forward, Mr. Speaker. I’m pretty confident they’re not going to 
go with the no-detail NDP. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I found 
this debate very interesting over the past 75 minutes, and the 
member from Elphinstone specifically. He had a chance to talk 
about the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which is one of the most 
important trade deals in recent memory for Saskatchewan 
people, for Saskatchewan citizens, and all he does is make jokes 
about this side, make jokes on what we’re going to stand for, 
what we don’t stand for. And we have no idea where they stand 
on this. 
 

Some of their candidates stand for it; some of them stand 
against it. Their spokesperson spoke in favour of it as soon as it 
came out. And Mr. Deputy Speaker, what the member from 
Elphinstone talked about 90 per cent of the time was receiving 
equalization payment. So when you want to have a conversation 
about economics, all they talk about is, we need to receive 
welfare from the federal government and not promote a 
growing economy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I think that’s one of the biggest problems on that side of 
the House. So my question is, if this is not in your economic 
plan for the platform in April, what is your economic plan for 
the Saskatchewan population? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. The 75-minute debate has expired. 
 
[12:00] 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 612 — The Respect for Diversity — Student 
Bill of Rights Act, 2015 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a pleasure to rise this afternoon and enter into debate on this 
bill. And I was very pleased to present this in the spring, and 
we’re glad to see that it’s still alive for the fall session. And we 
sure hope that the government members will take some time 
and think about this and join in and really work to see this bill 
pass. It’s one that really is an important bill. 
 
And you know, I want to say right off the bat, this bill, An Act 
to provide for the Respect for Diversity and the Rights of 
Students known as the short title, The Respect for Diversity — 
Student Bill of Rights Act. But this bill itself really is more than 
just us or parents or adults; it’s about the kids in our schools. 
 
And I think about two and a half years ago when Halla Scott 
came to the legislature. And what a brave young woman she 
was to come — it was April 16th, 2013 — and talk about her 
own experiences in her school when she wanted to establish a 
gay-straight alliance, also known as a GSA, and her own 
experience. And we raised those questions that day, and she sat 
in the gallery because she was so committed to ending 
homophobia and transphobia in her school that she really took a 
stand in a Catholic school to say, we got to do better. And it 
was affecting her and her friends in her school. And so these are 
kids that we’re talking about, and this is really, really important 
things that we can do to make schools a safer space for our 
children and our youth. 
 
Now I talk about Halla, but that was two and a half years ago. 
And I wish to say that I could say that’s it all stopped and it’s 
all been fixed and the government work has solved all of the 
problems. But the fact of the matter is, it hasn’t. It hasn’t. It’s a 
bit of a band-aid solution. And we know when we look across 
Canada that other provinces have moved to make sure that if a 



October 15, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7345 

student requests a GSA, that they would get one. We see it in 
Ontario under a Liberal government. We see it in Manitoba 
under a New Democratic government, but we also saw it being 
implemented in Alberta under a Conservative government. So 
this idea is not a partisan idea. It’s a common sense idea. 
There’s no reason why we can’t move ahead with it. 
 
But you know when I was talking about Halla, and that was two 
and half years ago, I wish to say that that was not the case and 
that everything is fine now. But I was shocked when I was at an 
event, a private event in one of our cities in Saskatchewan, 
where a young person came up to me. And she was signing our 
petition because she really believes in the issue, and she was 
relating her experience when she asked about a GSA in her 
school. And in this city, she was told she would just have to 
snap out of it. This situation that she found herself in terms of 
her gender identity and expression was something that she 
would just snap out of. 
 
And I couldn’t believe my ears when I heard that, Mr. Speaker, 
because that is something that would’ve been said 40 or 50 
years ago where a teacher would tell a student to snap out of it. 
Get straight. I can’t believe that but that’s happening in our 
schools and was happening in our schools last June, last June. 
So I hope that that person has found a way forward and has 
been able to talk to some more better educated teachers in that 
school and that she’s in a safe place now. But I can’t believe it. 
It sticks with me, that kind of language. And that’s what we’re 
really talking about, are young people. And we’re talking about 
young people who demonstrated in Saskatoon just a few weeks 
ago and talked about their experiences and how their schools 
can be better, safer places. 
 
Now we have a situation and we think . . . And I want to say 
that we’re very glad to see the government supporting Camp 
fYrefly. It’s a good initiative that’s really important. But we 
need to make sure that this is legislated and that every school 
has a poster. And we’ll talk about this because this is a big part 
of the bill, a student bill of rights. And so it’s in every school 
that a student should feel safe to do that. 
 
But I want to just . . . I say, you know, I reflected last night, 
preparation for this, about how Halla, and how she came, and 
what a brave young woman she was to be here in this 
legislature, her legislature, and talk about her experience. But it 
hasn’t changed. It hasn’t changed. 
 
And we know there are more GSAs this year — and we’re glad 
— because of the talk in the media. And that’s a positive thing 
and we’re glad to see that. But we worry about those schools in 
our province where that’s not the case, where students are 
suffering. And they’re thinking about . . . We know the facts are 
that students will have more suicidal thoughts. And we know 
that 64 per cent of LGBTQ [lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, 
queer and/or questioning] students feel unsafe at school. Eighty 
per cent feel that they’ve been bullied, and half of LGBTQ kids 
have suicidal thoughts. But we do know that GSAs in schools 
help kids feel better about themselves. In fact what’s interesting 
is all kids in the school feel better about themselves and have a 
positive experience because it just reduces the bullying in the 
school, reduces homophobia, but other bullying situations. So 
we think this is important. 
 

I want to just take a minute here just to reflect on the preamble 
of this bill because it’s important when we talk about the bill. 
And you know, obviously . . . And the GSAs is one that we 
really talk a lot about because in many ways it’s the most 
important part of the bill. 
 
But I want to talk about the preamble, where we talk about 
where “. . . parents want the best quality of education for their 
children and Saskatchewan should aim to have the best schools 
in Canada.” That’s our goal, and I think everybody in this room 
can agree to that. 
 
And: 
 

WHEREAS teachers, educational support workers, and 
school divisions strive to deliver the best quality of 
education to all students and need effective leadership and 
support from the provincial government; [and] 
 
. . . students are entitled to welcoming, caring, respectful, 
and safe learning environments that embrace diversity and 
nurture a sense of belonging and a positive sense of self; 
and 
 
WHEREAS the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms 
and The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code set out the . . . 
rights of all Saskatchewan people. 

 
So we set out what would happen. And we talk about what this 
bill really calls for. And the bill really calls for: 
 

Every student . . . has the following rights: 
 

The right to have any disability reasonably 
accommodated; 
 
The right [for] . . . and safe school environment, free of 
bullying and intimidation; 
 
The right to have any concerns about bullying and 
intimidation, including cyberbullying and other harmful 
actions dealt with by the school principal; [and] 
 
The right to freedom of conscience, opinion and belief, 
freedom of expression, and freedom of assembly and 
association; [and] 
 
The right to establish and lead activities and groups that 
promote a safe and inclusive learning environment, and 
acceptance of and respect for others, including activities 
and groups that promote: 

 
gender equity; 
 
anti-racism; [and] 
 
respect for First Nations, Métis and Inuit cultures and 
peoples; [and] 
 
respect for people with disabilities; and 
 
respect for people of all sexual orientations and gender 
identities and expressions. 



7346 Saskatchewan Hansard October 15, 2015 

And this would be communicated to all the students by the 
section no. 4 that: 
 

School administrators shall ensure that the Student Bill of 
Rights is respected and promoted in each school and that 
the Student Bill of Rights is posted in standard Canadian 
National Institute for the Blind (CNIB) print [Arial 14 
font] [located] in a location that is prominent and easily 
accessible by students. 

 
And then there are regulations. 
 
The key part here though is that they can establish and lead 
activities and groups that promote a safe and inclusive learning 
environment, and in definitions that means: 

 
student-led, teacher-supported events and organizations 
that do not infringe on time set aside for learning, 
including with the name “gay-straight alliance” or “gender 
sexuality alliance” or any other name which is consistent 
with the promotion of a positive school environment that is 
inclusive and accepting of all students. 

 
So that’s the heart of the bill. And I think in many ways it just 
makes common sense. It’s the thing that’s happening across 
Canada, and why this government refuses really to move on it is 
something that is worrisome. 
 
Now we’ve asked for feedback from many different 
organizations across the province, and we’re glad that we’re 
getting some feedback. We’ve had oral feedback. People have 
told us that this is a really good idea; this is something that 
makes a lot of sense. We’ve got a couple of letters back, and of 
course we’re meeting with the Saskatchewan School Boards 
Association shortly to talk about their concerns. And we had a 
debate last spring that talks about the autonomy. We want to 
respect autonomy. We think there are ways of making sure that 
they feel that their autonomy is intact. 
 
I do want to say we received a very interesting letter from the 
STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation], and really it shows 
why we should really send this bill to second reading. Because 
in many ways they say the bill could be improved, but they 
want to see something like this. This is a good start, they say, 
and this is important for us to move forward on. So they say 
thank you again for the opportunity to meet and we had some 
good discussions and they wanted to provide some feedback. 
And they really gave some very good feedback, particularly 
around student rights and teacher rights and obligations and 
what that means, and how we need to make sure that it’s clear 
and that they have their protections as well. And I think this is 
important, you know, and I just want to quote from the letter: 
 

For example, our members have indicated they are fearful 
of reprisals (either formally or informally) for volunteering 
to support groups and activities that support diversity in 
schools. Bill 612 as currently written provides no 
protection for teachers should they volunteer to support 
activities and groups that encourage diversity. 

 
And I think that’s a fair point. That’s a fair point. We could 
improve this bill, and this is why it’s important to get it to 
committee so that that question is resolved. And we would have 

an appropriate amendment so teachers do not feel that there will 
be reprisals for being involved with GSAs or encouraging 
GSAs or that type of thing. Hugely, hugely important. And I 
think this is the thing that we need to have, this kind of rational 
discussion, and we can have that in committee. 
 
Now they also talked about Bill of Rights must be respected and 
promoted, and I quote: 
 

Further to our comments regarding the responsibilities of 
school divisions being articulated in the bill, this section 
could be strengthened beyond the simply displaying a bill 
of rights within the school. Raising awareness regarding 
the rights of students, and more broadly children and 
youth, is only a first step. A legislated bill of rights should 
also inform and require school divisions to have policy and 
resourcing in place to support students, teachers, principals 
and officials in navigating and managing this important 
aspect of child and youth well-being. 

 
So there you go. They think it’s a good idea but we can improve 
on it, and there are some really constructive criticisms, and I 
think that’s excellent. And they conclude by saying: 
 

We applaud the attention being given to student rights and 
look forward to continuing conversations regarding the 
potential for a bill of rights that, along with The Education 
Act, 1995 and other legislation in our province, builds a 
more inclusive and supportive environment for all in 
schools and beyond. To that end, we recommend further 
analysis and inclusion in the Bill of any consequential 
amendments that would be necessary in other provincial 
legislation. 

 
Again, very, very worthwhile criticism. And I think that’s really 
important that we have that kind of conversation and we pass 
this legislation to the next step so we can address these kind of 
positive concerns. 
 
But you know, we’ve had community involvement and different 
groups out there who are saying, this is the right thing, do the 
right thing, and how important that is. We’ve had 
OUTSaskatoon supporting the initiative; they think it’s the right 
thing. Breaking the Silence; UR Pride; PFLAG Canada, the 
parents’ group; and USSU Pride Centre and Moose Jaw Pride 
have all come aboard to say this is the right thing. Let’s do the 
right thing. 
 
Now I want to talk just a minute about the government 
response. And that’s really something that is a bit concerning. 
We’ve had them talk about, last spring we had some issues 
around the policy statement. Now, we had the minister talk 
about a policy, but was actually a policy statement. And I don’t 
know what the bureaucratic definition is, but there is . . . people 
are starting to ask questions. Is it really a policy? Or is it a 
policy statement? And what does that mean in terms of the 
levels of regulation and legislation? 
 
[12:15] 
 
I know the Minister of Education once got on my case because I 
called the minimum wage legislation regulations and he 
thought, well, that’s a big difference. Now, here we have the 



October 15, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7347 

same difference. What is a policy? What’s a policy statement? 
People are asking about that. 
 
So we have some real concerns. Mr. Speaker, I want to just take 
a minute here and talk about, you know, last spring when we 
were really . . . this was really coming up in a big way, we had 
Rick Mercer in Saskatoon. And I remember his tweet: do the 
right thing. And that’s the key thing. Here’s a really simple, a 
really simple bill. It’s straightforward. We should send it to 
committee. We should address some of the concerns that have 
been raised because many groups might say, hey, we need to 
add some more things. But we really need to move on this. We 
really need to move on this. 
 
Now interestingly, and I know that many of us when we left the 
Chamber last May, that Thursday, we were really anxious to get 
on to other things in spring, but The StarPhoenix editorial board 
thought it was important to say their two cents around GSAs 
and the government response in the last week or two of the 
session. 
 
And this is an interesting editorial because they’re pretty 
straightforward about where they feel the government position 
is. Of course the headline on The StarPhoenix, May 19th, 2015, 
“Saskatchewan government weak on gay-straight alliances.” 
And I quote: 
 

The explanations offered by Education Minister Don 
Morgan for the provincial government preference for a 
policy stance instead of legislation to enshrine the right of 
students to establish gay-straight alliances (GSAs) in 
schools actually seem to make a better case for enacting a 
law. 

 
Faced with an array of facts, including internal Ministry of 
Education reports that sexual minority and gender-variant 
children continue to experience discrimination, prejudice 
and abuse within Saskatchewan’s schools, the minister and 
his colleagues insist that a policy that essentially leaves it 
up to school authorities to decide if GSAs can be formed is 
good enough. 

 
It goes on to say: 

 
This even though Mr. Morgan was on the radio this week 
admitting that he’s heard of students who wanted to 
establish a GSA being afraid to ask, didn’t know to whom 
they should make the request or even had their requests 
denied. The very fact that the minister is having trouble 
getting specifics about such incidents only underlines the 
reality of prevailing fears rather than discredits the notion 
that a problem exists. 
 
With ministry reports that indicate a heart-wrenching 47 
per cent of gay males, 73 per cent of lesbians and more 
than half of all homosexual, bisexual, queer and 
transgender students have contemplated suicide and studies 
that indicate GSAs provide gender-variant kids friendship 
and a refuge from the bullying and abuse that harms their 
well-being, it surely makes sense for Mr. Morgan to 
emulate Manitoba, Ontario and Alberta by legislating the 
right to form GSAs. 

 

It goes on: 
 

Responding to an Opposition question about whether the 
government is reluctant to offend certain groups by 
legislating the right for students to form GSAs, Mr. 
Morgan insisted, “This has nothing to do with social 
conservatives or a political spectrum. This has only to do 
with providing services that are necessary.” 
 
Yet the case he makes for sticking with the status quo that 
he acknowledges is failing a highly vulnerable segment of 
students is weak at best. It’s abundantly clear that Mr. 
Morgan’s threat to yank funds from schools that refuse to 
comply is a non-starter, given that the main victims will be 
the students. 

 
And that’s the case, Mr. Speaker. And it goes on, and I’ll 
conclude: 
 

Nothing about it removes the fears that make students 
reluctant to act, empowers them or sends a message that 
society, represented by the government, deems their right 
to a safe environment so important that it grants them a 
legal trump card that no adult in authority can ignore. 

 
And I think that last part is really the case. These kids in our 
schools, who are feeling vulnerable and who only want a safe 
place, should have that card, should be able to ask an adult to 
say, I’d like to form a GSA. I’m feeling that we need that in our 
school. I’m feeling that there’s bullying. I feel unsafe. And then 
the adult has to respond. The adult cannot pass it off to say, it’s 
just not part of what we do. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think that community groups are calling for 
this. Young people are calling for this. We see this by people 
like Halla two and a half years ago that came and really shone a 
light on something that is a weakness in our schools. And we 
know, and the stats are out there, in terms of the high rates of 
suicide. Our colleague from Riversdale in Saskatoon often 
raises the issue about mental health, and yet we see very little 
activity from this government around that. And yet the report 
that they commissioned even references how effective a GSA 
can be in making schools a safer place for all students. And the 
facts and the stats are there. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think that we need to step forward and we 
need to do the right thing with this. And I’m glad for the 
opportunity to have some time today, but I think it’s important 
that we review the facts that this is the right thing, and when a 
simple tweet, DoTheRightThing, can start such a movement. 
And we see the movement continue this fall. 
 
We see by the rally that happened a couple of weekends ago in 
Saskatoon in the rain. I have to say it was an impressive group 
of young people who came together. In fact we had one group 
from North Battleford, a GSA from North Battleford. The 
Sakewew gay-straight alliance of a high school there in North 
Battleford came down for this because it’s important to them. 
And it’s important because it does save lives, and we know the 
stats are there. And even more important for Saskatchewan 
because . . . And we know that stats are that Saskatchewan 
experiences higher rates of suicide. This is something that we 
have a tool that will solve the problem. And so, Mr. Speaker, I 



7348 Saskatchewan Hansard October 15, 2015 

know with the suicide rates that we can talk and we can go at 
length on that and we can talk about the movement, I know. 
 
I do want to make this one shout-out. This is a community 
group that’s doing some things on Facebook. They’ve started a 
Facebook page. So the folks who are listening at home or in this 
House, they can just do a search on Facebook for 
DoTheRightThing Sask. Just check that out. And they’re 
looking for people to like and share and join in the movement 
because this is the one, as I said, the community groups are 
really active this fall. They’re aware that this is the last few 
weeks we have in this term before we go to election. 
 
We would like to see this government move quickly. We know 
the Alberta government came in on March 10th last spring and 
just did it really quickly. And we have seen this government 
move quickly, I have to say. And we have recognized the good 
work that they did in the Human Rights Code last December — 
that was a real positive — and how quickly we can move. And 
so I would really encourage this government to do that. 
 
And I want to shout out as well that if people are watching and 
they want to send a message to government, we know hundreds 
of people have signed the petition around the support for Bill 
612. Community groups have got that up and going. And all 
you have to do is do a . . . I know if you go on Google and you 
do a search, DoTheRightThing, Bill 612, it’ll take you to the 
website change.org, and you can sign the petition. I encourage 
people in this room to do that. They’re going to be reaching out 
to members here over the next few weeks to encourage them to 
support Bill 612 and see if we can get this passed before we 
break for the election. I think this is one piece of legacy that we 
can all agree on would be the appropriate thing to do. 
 
And so again whether you’re talking about youth in Moose Jaw, 
youth in Prince Albert, Regina, Saskatoon, Melville, Melfort, 
out to North Battleford, this is a bill that can actually save lives 
and really work to really provide for safe spaces. And really, 
you know, I have been really touched by the strength of 
commitment for this, for young people who are working to 
make this happen because they see this as important. They see it 
as part . . . You know, when they’re in high school — and I 
think, well Halla’s not in high school anymore, obviously, but 
as a bit of a legacy — they want to see their school safer for that 
year and for future years, and if we can break this old-fashioned 
way that’s out of date . . . And when I talk about the young 
person who was told to snap out of it — what a thing, to be told 
to be snapping out of it. Let’s not snap out of it. Let’s do the 
right thing and get GSAs happening in our schools, you know. 
 
And I think that while the government has done some things, I 
was very disappointed last spring when we didn’t have the free 
vote. This government’s often talked about their commitment to 
democracy. We had an opportunity last spring to have a free 
vote on this bill, and the government decided to deny, deny that 
ability. And I think that was a real, real disappointment. 
 
And I know, and we’re waiting to hear, and I don’t know if the 
government is planning to release this or what they’re going to 
do, we understand the government undertook a survey this 
spring, or this summer. The minister took a survey about GSAs 
but the government has been silent about that, so we don’t 
know if it actually happened or what the results were or what 

the plan of the government is to release that survey. We’re 
anxiously waiting to see what the outcome of that was. We 
thought by now, as we are now in the six weeks past summer, 
that he would have had it together and would be sharing the 
results. But we await to hear what the government survey was, 
what they found. So we have some real questions about that. 
We’ll be looking forward to hearing that. 
 
Now we know the minister talked about a letter that if people 
had, if children or youth had a difficult time finding a GSA, that 
all they had to do was call him. But I don’t think that’s 
appropriate. Really need to do is to make sure we have 
legislation that requires that if a student does go to any adult in 
this school, that they will be able to respond in a positive way 
and a GSA will happen. This is an important thing for kids and, 
as I said, this is an important thing that we can have to make 
sure our schools are safer. 
 
And I just want to quote from Amanda Guthrie, one of the rally 
organizers. And she said, GSAs provide . . . and I quote: 
 

Our MLAs need to know that GSAs make a difference. 
They even save lives. GSAs provide a safe place for young 
people during a vulnerable time in their lives and provide 
the space to talk and learn about diversity, inclusivity, and 
accessibility. 

 
So we know that it’s the right thing to do. Egale Canada found 
that 64 per cent of queer kids felt unsafe at school and 80 per 
cent reported being bullied. And, as I said, half contemplated 
suicide. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, we know that this is the right thing to 
do and with that, for Halla and so many other youth, I am very 
pleased now to move second reading of Bill 612, An Act to 
provide for the Respect for Diversity and the Rights of Students, 
also known by its short title, The Respect for Diversity — 
Student Bill of Rights Act, 2015. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved second reading of 
Bill No. 612, The Respect for Diversity — Student Bill of Rights 
Act, 2015 be now read a second time. I recognize the 
Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 
honour to join in debate, but briefly. I want to quickly say that 
this is a very important subject and I want to thank my 
colleague, the member from Saskatoon Centre, for his 
commitment and his work on advancing the cause of diversity, 
on advancing the cause of respect for diversity that’s so 
important, and trying to get that guarantee on gay-straight 
alliances in our schools and the positive impact that they have 
on lives of young people right across this province. 
 
We’ve reached a point in the calendar where, or in the agenda 
today where we’re ready to move on to other things. So in that 
regard, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 612. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



October 15, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7349 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 
p.m. Monday. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:31.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
INTRODUCTION OF PAGES 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7327 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7327 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7327 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7327 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7327 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7327 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7328 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 International Day for the Eradication of Poverty 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7328 
 Spiritwood Collaborative Emergency Centre 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7328 
 Regina Business Celebrates 50 Years 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7328 
 New Athletic Field for Kipling School 
  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7329 
 Three Artists Inducted into Arts Hall of Fame 
  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7329 
 Home Ownership in the North 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7329 
 Reflections on the New Democratic Party 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 7329 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Wait Times for Specialists and Provision of Health Care 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7330 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7330 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7331 
 Standards for Health Care Facilities 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7332 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7332 
 Essential Services Legislation 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7333 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7334 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 183 — The Saskatchewan Employment (Essential Services) Amendment Act, 2015 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7334 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Support for the Trans-Pacific Partnership 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7334 
  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 7336, 7344 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7338 
  Nilson ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7339, 7342 
  Tochor ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7340, 7343 
  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7341, 7343 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7343 
  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7343 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7344 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 612 — The Respect for Diversity — Student Bill of Rights Act, 2015 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7344 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7348 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


