




















































Hansard: March 17, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 35A  TUESDAY, MARCH 17, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6577 

 March 17, 2015 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 

 

Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am 

honoured to introduce a group of very special women from the 

University of Saskatchewan. Joining us today in your gallery, 

Mr. Speaker, are Women in the Legislature student society: the 

president, Amanda Lindgren and 21 of her colleagues. They are, 

Mr. Speaker: Erin Pillipow who is the program director, Abby 

Holtslander, Anna Tsui, Anyssa Plan, Ashley Halko-Addley, 

Beth Thiessen, Cassie van Camp, Chelsea Laprairie, Chelsea 

Lavallie, Courtney Davies, Emily Sutherland, Janae Fehr, 

Jessica Iris, Mackenzie Paradzik, Maeve McLean, Mariana 

Souza, Priscila Tayna Ferreira da Silva, Renata Huyghebaert, 

Srini Samarawickrama, Richard Rothenburger, student 

supporter of the group, and Joel Seaman, student supporter of 

the group. Also joining us is Pat Faulconbridge who is the 

executive director of the Status of Women office. I ask all 

members to join me in welcoming this terrific set of students to 

the Assembly today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my privilege 

and pleasure here to join with the minister in welcoming the 

group from the Women in the Legislature from the University 

of Saskatchewan today. 

 

I know this is actually one of the highlights for me of the spring 

legislative session. I believe it’s the fourth year that the group 

has come, Mr. Speaker. And I know for me personally, 

increasing the number of women in this Chamber is vitally 

important. But the women also come to hear about women in 

public service, whether it’s in the bureaucracy, Mr. Speaker, or 

learning about some of the other jobs that people can hold in 

this legislature, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’m excited to know that there are women who are interested 

and wanting to pursue a career in government because, Mr. 

Speaker, government is a good thing for the people of 

Saskatchewan, and to have interested people and such inspiring 

young women do this I think is awesome. I sure enjoyed my 

time yesterday chatting with them and I look forward to our 

dinner tonight. And I want to encourage you to keep up your 

studies and pursuing a path in government, no matter what path 

that might be. 

 

So I ask my colleagues to join with us in welcoming them to 

their legislature today. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 

through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 

introduce a great group that’s been entertaining in the rotunda 

today: students, instructors, and chaperones of Prairie Gael 

School of Irish Dance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

With the group is Samantha Hope, Madeline Stang, Georgia 

Stang, Sophia Stang, Bronwyn Stang, Leshia Rybchuk, Emily 

Beggs, Kailey Beggs, Cailey Baseden, Lexie Sheard, Keegan 

Sheard, Caitriona Monaghan, Holly Wurster, Caroline Wurster, 

Adrianna Dizy, and two special people with them, Mr. Speaker, 

Petra Ottenbreit-Born, my niece from Regina here; and her 

mom is a chaperone, my sister, Glenna Ottenbreit-Born. I’m 

just excited to have them here today. 

 

With them, dance teachers accompanying are Caitlin Preston 

who has a TCRG [Teagascóir Choimisiúin le Rinci Gaelacha] 

certification from the world of Irish dance commission, also 

Emily Armer. And also with the group — I don’t know a lot of 

the other chaperones — but with them is Selena Beahm from 

my office, Mr. Speaker, my admin, and it’s just great to be able 

to introduce her today. So I’d ask all members to welcome these 

people to their Legislative Assembly. 

 

While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, we have a great group of 

65 grade 7 students from Yorkton, the Yorkdale Central School. 

They are accompanied by Mr. Noel Budz, Mr. Adam Neibrandt, 

and Mrs. Michelle Pfeifer. With them is a good friend of mine, 

and his dad’s a good friend of mine, Mr. Levi Genovy. Mr. 

Speaker, I’d ask all members to welcome them to their 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 

official opposition, I too would like to extend a big welcome to 

the Prairie Gael dancers and really glad to have you here today. 

You look beautiful with your outfits and your hair. It’s just 

wonderful to see you here and celebrating dance, which is such 

an important part of our culture, an important part of the Irish 

culture. In particular, a special thanks to your teachers, who 

without them, this wouldn’t happen.  

 

So I’m always happy when I know that people are spending 

time with children, extending the cultural knowledge and 

sharing. So in the words of Gaelic, you know, a thousand 

welcomes, we’d have to say Céad Mile Fáilte. Welcome 

everyone to the Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Parks, Culture 

and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce to you and through you to all members of the 

Legislative Assembly, three guests sitting in the west gallery 

today, and just give a wave when I say your names, but 

Brandon Hicks, Aadon Fieger, and Riley Moynes. Mr. Hicks is 

a constituent of mine and works as a lawyer with Mr. Fieger 

and recently expressed interest in experiencing the legislative 

process. Mr. Moynes is president of Living Sky Media group. 

And I’m happy to introduce these guests here today, sir, and I 

ask all members to help me welcome them to their legislature. 



6578 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2015 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased 

to rise once again to present petitions on behalf of concerned 

residents as it relates to the unsafe conditions created by that 

government on Dewdney Avenue. And the prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 

government to immediately take action as it relates to the 

unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 

damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on 

Dewdney Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the 

safety and well-being of communities, families, residents, 

and users; and that those actions and plans should include 

rerouting the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial 

funding, and be developed through consultation with the 

city of Regina, communities, and residents. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 

Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

pleased to stand today to present petitions of over 700 citizens 

of Saskatchewan. The group has been advocating for the 

government to reassess their plan for the P3 [public-private 

partnership] Regina bypass, and they have started a website 

titled, whytowerroad.net. 

 

And the petition reads as follows: that insufficient weight has 

been given to the concerns raised in regards to the location of 

the east Regina Highway 1 bypass and Pilot Butte interchange 

that’ll impact taxpayers and everyone using it. There are serious 

concerns about safety of the proposed bypass, Highway No. 1 

bypass, which is within city limits and too close to residential 

developments; that the Tower Road location and proposed Pilot 

Butte interchange risk functionality. They are at excessive costs 

and are not a suitable long-term solution. The prayer reads as 

follows: 

 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan cause a halt to the next phase of this project 

and cause the Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure to 

review the proposed location of the No. 1 bypass at Tower 

Road and select a suitable location further east, one that 

will bypass city developments and create a safer 

environment for the motorists using it and for the 

taxpayers of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are from 

all throughout the province of Saskatchewan, and I so present. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

Women in the Legislature Program 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the Assembly today to 

recognize an important initiative at the University of 

Saskatchewan. The Women in the Legislature program has been 

raising awareness about women in Saskatchewan politics and 

the public service for many years now, and I’m very pleased to 

see so many delegates here in the gallery today. 

 

It’s no secret, Mr. Speaker, that this Legislative Assembly fails 

to reflect the gender diversity of Saskatchewan society. 

Although our small women’s caucus was recently bolstered by 

the addition of the member for Lloydminster who’s resplendent 

in green today for St. Patrick’s Day, we still hold less than a 

quarter of the seats in the Assembly. When you consider the 

representation of Aboriginal women, women of colour, and 

queer women, the disconnect between this House and the 

Saskatchewan population is even more alarming. As a former 

civil servant, I can attest to the fact that these inequalities are 

not limited to our Legislative Assembly but extend throughout 

the management of the provincial public service as well. 

 

This lack of representation is what makes the work of Women 

in the Legislature so important. The leadership and 

encouragement that WiL [Women in the Legislature] provides 

to young women is exactly the type of work needed to ensure 

that women’s voices are truly heard in this House and across 

our province. It was my pleasure to meet with them yesterday. 

They are clearly engaged in politics and our democratic process. 

 

I look forward to meeting with them tonight to further our 

discussion, and I ask all members to join me in thanking the 

organization of this year’s WiL program and to commit to 

working to ensure that in the future there will be many more 

women holding leadership positions in this Assembly and 

across our province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Parks, Culture 

and Sport. 

 

Celebrating St. Patrick’s Day 

 

Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is St. 

Paddy’s Day, the annual celebration of all things Irish. But, Mr. 

Speaker, it is importantly a celebration for the Irish patron saint, 

St. Patrick, who was a Christian missionary in the fifth century 

who worked hard to bring Christianity to Ireland. He was 

beaten, harassed by the Irish royalty, and reprimanded by his 

British superiors. After his death, poor St. Patrick was largely 

forgotten, but over time his mythology grew. In an interesting 

and a far from sobering side note, Guinness consumption more 

than doubles worldwide in more than 13 million pints each St. 

Paddy’s Day. When this great province was founded, one in 10 

of our residents were of Irish origin. The Irish have been a 

crucial part of Saskatchewan’s history and it is fitting that we 

celebrate with them today. 

 

I’d also like to welcome the Prairie Gael School of Irish Dance, 

who already performed in the rotunda earlier today. Already in 

their 18th year of operation, Prairie Gael provides recreational 

and competitive classes for all dancers age 4 and up. Students 

compete in a number of feiseanna every year to show off their 

skills. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing 



March 17, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6579 

patron St. Patrick and celebrating all things Irish. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, today is St. Patrick’s Day, the 

feast day of the Emerald Isle’s patron saint. It’s a day when 

everyone, whether Irish or not, can honour and celebrate our 

province’s connection to Ireland and its people. 

 

That’s a connection that I am proud to share too, Mr. Speaker. 

Two sets of my great-great-grandparents came from Ireland and 

crossed the Atlantic to North America in the 1800s to build a 

better life. My grandmother, Elizabeth Moher, later came to 

Saskatchewan but never forgot her Irish roots. 

 

The Irish people of Saskatchewan, like my grandmother 

Elizabeth, have always served our province and our country 

with distinction. Through public service, our Armed Forces, a 

unique language and culture, Irish people in Saskatchewan have 

always contributed greatly to our province and helped make it a 

better place for everyone. 

 

As evidenced by the many St. Patrick’s Day celebrations, the 

amazing Irish dance schools like Prairie Gael here today, the 

vibrant pavilions at Regina’s Mosaic and Saskatoon’s Folk Fest, 

and with the more recent wave of Irish immigration here, Irish 

culture is alive and well in our province and is here to stay. 

 

So to you, Mr. Speaker, and to my colleagues and to the people 

of Saskatchewan, as my gran would say, “May your neighbours 

respect you, trouble neglect you, the angels protect you, and 

heaven accept you.” Happy St. Patrick’s Day. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

Qu’Appelle Valley. 

 

Supporting Women in Politics 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 

to rise today to highlight Women in the Legislature — a very 

important student group from the University of Saskatchewan 

who have joined us here today. Mr. Speaker, these students 

have been in the Legislative Assembly for a couple of days to 

learn about the provincial political system and how women in 

politics make a difference. 

 

This non-partisan group’s aim is to increase the awareness of 

under-representation of women in politics, to inspire women to 

consider entering politics, to give female students an 

opportunity to interact with female politicians and to encourage 

women to become active in political life. Mr. Speaker, I am 

proud that the alumnae of women in the legislative group has 

gone on to participate in politics and in governance. They are 

contributing to political campaigns, hold positions in provincial, 

federal, and First Nations governance, and are serving as 

leaders and mentors to those who have political aspirations. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Corrections and Policing and the 

member from Kelvington-Wadena, the member from Prince 

Albert Northcote, and the member from Saskatchewan Rivers 

and myself had a great opportunity to meet and speak with these 

women yesterday. I would like to take this time to thank them 

very much for coming, for showing a passion in politics, and 

wish them continued success with their respective ambitions. 

Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[13:45] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Carrot River Curlers Win Provincial Bronze 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, on March 6th and 7th, St. 

Mary’s High School in Prince Albert hosted the 2015 

Saskatchewan High Schools Athletic Association provincial 

boys, girls, and mixed championships at the Prince Albert Golf 

and Curling Club. 

 

After winning first place in the North East Sask Schools 

Athletic Conference and then again at regionals in Nipawin the 

following week, the Carrot River seniors mixed team moved on 

to provincials. This team was led by skip Nicholas Enns, third 

Taylor Kozun, second Brycen McCrea, lead Karlyn Johnson, 

and alternates Lydia Sauder and Brayden Janzen. Coach Barry 

Kozun has dedicated many hours to working with not only this 

team but has also coached junior and senior curling for several 

years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the team squared off in some tough competition 

with a few games being decided by the last rock. The final 

game was no exception. Going into the Bronze Medal game 

against Regina Thom team Saturday afternoon, our team 

struggled from behind but battled back to win 6-4 in this 

nail-biter game. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this team had a lot of pressure riding on them 

going into the provincials since it’s been 59 years since Carrot 

River High School has medalled in provincial curling. I would 

ask all members to join in congratulating the 2014 provincial 

bronze mixed championships from Carrot River High School. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Agricultural Safety Week 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in this 

House today to announce March 15th to 21st is Agricultural 

Safety Week in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, there are risks in 

farming and ranching and we want to remind our province’s 

producers to take the steps necessary to keep themselves and 

their families safe. Each year approximately 14 people are 

killed and many others injured on farms in incidents that could 

have been prevented. Whether you’re working, living, or 

visiting a farm, we want you to be safe. 

 

The theme of this year’s week is Be the Difference! which 

focuses on encouraging individuals, organizations, and 

communities to be the difference and make Canada’s farms a 

safe place to live and work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Sask Ag provided $125,000 in funding to the 



6580 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2015 

Canadian Centre for Health and Safety in Agriculture at the 

University of Saskatchewan. This funding provides agricultural 

health and safety programming to the farm families in the 

province. Saskatchewan Ag has also provided $30,000 in 

funding to the Saskatchewan Association of Ag Societies and 

Exhibitions for farm safety workshops for youth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like this Assembly to join me in asking our 

farmers and ranchers to take care this spring as you put your 

crop in or assist with the calving. Mr. Speaker, we wish every 

farmer and rancher a safe and healthy growing season. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 

Knife-Turtleford. 

 

Plans for the Economy 

 

Mr. Doke: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve noticed that the NDP [New 

Democratic Party] leader almost never talks about the economy, 

and now we know why. Yesterday he was trying to explain 

what he would do to offset the downturn in the oil sector. And 

what was his answer? He would bring back the film tax credit. 

Brilliant, absolutely brilliant. 

 

He said, and I quote, “It would be great to have the industry 

here to make up for any temporary dip that might be with the 

oil.” Let me repeat that. The NDP leader’s economic plan is to 

have the film industry make up for “any temporary dip that 

might be there with oil.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can debate what is the best way to advance the 

film industry in our province: the old FETC [film employment 

tax credit] or the new system under Creative Saskatchewan. But 

either way, the film industry is only a tiny fraction of the 

economic activity and provincial revenue generated by the oil 

industry in Saskatchewan. I think everyone in Saskatchewan 

understands that, everyone but the Leader of the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is why the NDP can’t talk about the economy. 

They don’t understand the economy. They don’t understand the 

relative size of different sectors of the economy, and their plans 

just don’t add up. The good news is our government does have 

a plan to keep our economy strong, and we don’t have to rely 

on the tree book or the NDP’s shaky Brotenomics. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Quality of Care and Staffing Levels in Long-Term 

Care Home 

 

Mr. Broten: — Kay Shumaker is 89 years old. Her 

daughter-in-law Terry is here today. Elizabeth Martens is 92 

years old. Her daughter Betsey Ryan is here today. And Ray 

Cherpin is 84 years old. His daughter Eva Mastel is here today. 

 

Kay, Elizabeth, and Ray live in the Prairie Pioneers Lodge in 

Swift Current. Their family members have travelled to the 

legislature today because they’re tired of hearing this 

government pretend the problems in seniors’ care are isolated. 

They’re concerned that this government, they keep 

congratulating themselves for a new model of care that they’re 

rolling out because they’ve been part of this pilot project, Mr. 

Speaker, this family. They’re hugely concerned about the 

quality of care being provided, and they are especially 

concerned about the safety of their loved ones. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, is for the Premier. Will he agree to 

meet with his constituents today so he can hear first-hand their 

very real concerns about the quality of care being provided in 

Swift Current through this pilot project? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — The answer, Mr. Speaker, is absolutely. We 

can have that meeting later this day. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m certainly aware of the project that’s under way 

in the health region with respect to a model of care, have 

received and monitored correspondence on the issue from 

constituents and also from front-line workers, Mr. Speaker, and 

have engaged with the region on the issue as well to follow 

progress or potentially the lack of progress so that we can 

determine whether or not this is an effective way to go. 

 

Mr. Speaker, long-term care in my constituency and across the 

province remains a priority for the government. It’s why we 

have made unprecedented investments in long-term care in 

Saskatchewan, not just in terms of human resources, of 

additional nurses, additional caregivers who are on the front 

lines in greater numbers than certainly they were not very long 

ago and years ago when members opposite were the 

government, but also in the case in Swift Current where we had 

and still are working with facilities that frankly are not good 

enough. And now under way in Swift Current is the 

construction of a new long-term care facility to provide at least 

a better structure. 

 

With respect to this model of care though, I’d be happy to meet 

later this day, and we do continue to monitor the 

implementation of this project. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the families who have travelled 

here today have raised concerns on numerous occasions, but 

they haven’t been listened to, Mr. Speaker. They’ve come to the 

legislature because they’re concerned about the quality of care 

and they’re concerned about the safety for their loved ones. 

 

They’re concerned, Mr. Speaker, especially about the ratio of 

just 1 care aid to 10 residents. That care aid is expected to do 

absolutely everything, including personal care, cooking, 

feeding, cleaning, and laundry, and that care aid has just one 

half-time floater to help them out with all of those tasks, all of 

those duties. When looking after 10 residents with significant 

care needs, all of whom have dementia, it’s incredibly 

challenging for one full-time care aid and a half-time floater to 

do all of the personal care, all of the cooking, all of the feeding, 

all of the cleaning, and all of the laundry. 

 

My question to the Premier: does he recognize that? Does he 

share this concern that family members from Swift Current are 

expressing? 



March 17, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6581 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I share the concern. The 

government shares the concern with everybody in the province 

with respect to optimum care for their loved ones with respect 

to our long-term care facilities or any facilities across our health 

care system. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the health care system is undergoing a process of 

continuous improvement. We’ve seen some significant 

successes in trying different things. We for example have seen 

some great success in new innovations in the surgical wait 

times initiative, Mr. Speaker, where we’re using private clinics 

to drastically reduce wait times for surgery, especially 

orthopedic surgery which of course is important for not just . . . 

but many seniors across the province. 

 

On this particular issue I look forward to meeting with the 

guests that have joined us today, my constituents. Mr. Speaker, 

we continue to monitor this particular project. Long-term care 

remains a priority for me as the MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] and for this government. Witness the 

investment we’re making in my hometown of Swift Current and 

right across the province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this is the model of care that the 

second Health minister said last week was second to none. 

Clearly, Mr. Speaker, it’s not working, this government’s 

approach. 

 

Now we have regulations in this province for child care which 

specify the maximum number of children one person can care 

for. In child care centres, that maximum ratio is one worker for 

every three infants and one worker for every five toddlers, and 

the ratios are actually even lower in family child care homes. 

But this government, Mr. Speaker, despite this talk, they refuse 

to properly regulate seniors’ care here in Saskatchewan, and the 

model of care that they are rolling out is holding this up as an 

amazing example. It has only 1 worker to 10 residents. And I 

hear, Mr. Speaker, in Rosetown actually the ratio is even worse. 

 

So my question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: we have 

regulations that specify appropriate staffing levels for child 

care. Why does he refuse to have proper regulations for seniors’ 

care? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s very important to correct 

the record. This government has regulations and standards with 

respect to seniors’ care in the province of Saskatchewan. This is 

a matter of public record as presented by the Health minister 

and by the Minister of Rural and Remote Health. 

 

Moreover, Mr. Speaker, the number of people working on the 

front lines to take care of people remains a top priority for the 

government. That’s why there are over 750 more caregivers in 

long-term and integrated care in the province of Saskatchewan, 

750 more than there were when members opposite had the 

chance to do something years ago. It’s also why there are more 

doctors practising, 400-plus more in the province today.  

It’s why we are, rather than closing long-term care facilities and 

beds — which members opposite did, to be fair, when they 

were in government — we’re opening them. We are replacing 

them. We are adding to them. In the case of Swift Current, 

we’re going to add to the number of long-term care beds that 

are available today currently in facilities that need to be 

replaced. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we have the same complement of seniors in care 

— and that’s roughly the case today — as we did prior to ’07 

when our government took office, and we have 750 more 

caregivers in long-term care and in integrated care, then the 

argument that we’re not providing staffing resources I think is 

problematic. The fact of the matter is that we are. 

 

Now in terms of continuous improvement, models are being 

tried. If they do not end in better care, if the net result is not 

better care for people, for constituents of all of ours, then those 

particular models of care, those particular pilot projects will not 

continue. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, there are no regulations in place 

for staffing ratios in seniors’ care like we have in child care, Mr. 

Speaker. That is very clear. Even the Health minister’s chief of 

staff described the guidelines that this government put in as 

extremely general once they pulled away the regulations that 

had been in place, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The families who are coming here today are coming because 

they are concerned. They’re concerned about the quality of care 

for their loved ones. They’re concerned about this practice that 

they have seen in place now through this pilot for about six 

months, and they don’t like it. 

 

In the fall, Betsey Ryan wrote to the Premier and she said this: 

“What happens when the continuing care assistant is in a 

resident’s room getting ready for the day, and some of the other 

residents are wandering in the hall, pushing and fighting?” She 

went on to write, “I am very concerned about my mom’s safety 

in such an understaffed facility.” 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: does he at least 

recognize that there are major safety concerns both for staff and 

residents when staffing ratios are so poor? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the hon. 

member opposite, this government has been and continues to be 

concerned about the ratios that he references. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government was very concerned, upon its 

election, to see the state of long-term care in the province, to see 

that so many long-term care beds had been closed by members 

opposite, to see that they had stopped funding training for 

nurses in this province. So there was a shortage of 1,000 nurses 

and caregivers to seniors that we had to deal with, that we still 

must deal with. We were concerned to see the massive shortage 

in doctors across the province. 

 

You bet we were then concerned and remain concerned today. 



6582 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2015 

That’s why there are 2,600 more nurses of every designation 

practising today, and there are 750 more caregivers in integrated 

and long-term care in the province than there were just a few 

short years ago when members opposite had the chance to make 

a change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the work’s not done yet. What was left behind, 

that particular deficit in care for people has not yet been fully 

repaid, and this government will not stop its efforts until we’ve 

caught up. Are we there yet today? No. Are we trying models 

that might improve care and use more resources than were there 

previously as effectively as possible? Yes. 

 

The ultimate measure will be the care that the patients receive. 

And so I’ve been watching that correspondence and involved in 

the correspondence, watching this particular model happening 

in my own backyard. Mr. Speaker, if it doesn’t result in better 

care for seniors, for my constituents and for his, we’ll not go 

ahead with it. 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the families that are here today 

talked about multiple residents being involved in altercations, 

and they say that one worker would not have been able to 

properly deal with it. They talk about residents, Mr. Speaker, 

not being properly fed their entire meals or not even getting 

lunch until 3:30 in the afternoon because the aids were simply 

run off their feet. They see staff doing everything that they 

absolutely can, but they just can’t keep up. They also talk about 

seeing the morale of care aids plummet, Mr. Speaker, seeing 

care aids becoming frustrated and leaving their positions. 

 

My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: how many more 

families have to come to the legislature expressing their 

concerns right now about quality of care before this government 

will take chronic short-staffing seriously? Does he stand by this 

pilot that has a ratio of 1 worker to 10 residents? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we have done nothing but take 

seriously the issue of human resources in long-term care in the 

health care system since we had the good fortune of being 

elected in 2007. I mean we can canvass what the situation was 

that we inherited again. I’m happy to do that. I’m happy to 

point out that we have been and continue to deal with a massive 

deficit in care, in human resources, in long-term care facilities, 

left behind by members opposite. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the last seven years we have been 

consistently and determinedly adding investment, adding 

human resources. The objective of the Government of 

Saskatchewan remains to be to provide the best possible care 

for people in long-term care, people in integrated care, people in 

acute care, people who are waiting for surgeries. 

 

And we have followed those words up, that goal up, with 

actions: significant millions, hundreds of millions more in 

budget after budget to replace long-term care facilities that 

needed replacement; to add new long-term care beds that are 

needed, including in my constituency; to add more care aids, 

not take them away; to add more people in care on the front 

lines for long-term care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in terms of continuous improvement projects, this 

one and others, we are going to . . . The measure will be the best 

care for the patient, the patient-first approach. That will be the 

case here, and I look forward to meeting with the families and 

talking further about their own experience with it, with this 

particular model. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the families that have come today 

speak of an approach that we see, through this model of care 

and the resources that’s not being backed up into it, Mr. 

Speaker, as being far more task oriented than patient or resident 

oriented. And the families who are here today, Mr. Speaker, 

they talk about some staff being added on. But you know what? 

It’s not onto the front lines. It’s not where their mothers and 

their family members need the care, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They talk about last month, for example, for three whole weeks 

the family members say that there were about 13 lean 

specialists deployed in the seniors’ care home, Mr. Speaker. 

With stopwatches they were roaming the hallways, taking time 

of front-line providers, Mr. Speaker, timing everything from 

how long it takes a nurse to go to the bathroom to how long it 

takes to open a can of soup in the kitchen. 

 

These family members want permanent staff added where it’ll 

make a difference in the lives of their family members, Mr. 

Speaker, to improve safety, to improve the quality of care. They 

don’t want 13 stopwatch-carrying lean specialists, Mr. Speaker, 

taking workers away from what they should be doing, as 

front-line workers burn out, as they leave, and as the care for 

their loved ones suffers. 

 

My question to the Premier: when will all of this stopwatch 

nonsense end? When will quality of care and dignity and 

respect for seniors in this province be the priority? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, quality of care and the dignity 

of all of those in care has never stopped being the priority of 

this government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is one thing for the Leader of the Opposition to 

stand in his place and ask questions, as he should, and for 

constituents to come from wherever they live in the province 

and present their case to the government, and they should. But 

let’s not forget the history of this particular issue. Let us not 

forget what members opposite failed to do when they had a 

chance to do it for 16 long years, in my constituency as well. 

 

What they didn’t do, Mr. Speaker, was keep long-term care 

beds open. They shut them down. What they didn’t do is train 

enough nurses, so there was a chronic shortage by the end of 

their term. They didn’t do the same thing for doctors. There was 

a chronic shortage by the end of the term. The member from 

Lakeview is heckling. Mr. Speaker, what they left behind in my 

constituency were facilities that desperately needed to be 



March 17, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6583 

replaced, which is now going to get done. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to this particular pilot project, I want 

to say to the members opposite that the notion here was that 

continuing care aid numbers were to increase through this pilot. 

That’s my understanding, Mr. Speaker, and if that’s not 

happened, then I think we’ll want answers just as well as 

anyone that’s joined us here today or as the Leader of the 

Opposition will want answers. We’ll want to make sure that 

there are a greater increase in the complement of care aids, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I can tell you that the region reports there’s not to be, not to be 

any reduction in staffing levels period, not reallocated staff for 

any other project, notwithstanding what he might want to 

engage in on the floor of the House. If these things aren’t 

happening, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to want and we’re going 

to receive answers. And we’re going to watch this particular 

project go forward. I understand it’s happening at Sherwood as 

well in Saskatoon. And if it’s not about the best care for our 

residents and our seniors, it won’t continue. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Costs and Benefits of the Lean Initiative 

 

Ms. Chartier: — The family members who have travelled here 

from Swift Current are not only concerned about the quality of 

care and they’re not only irritated by the stopwatches, they’re 

frustrated by the massive amount of money this government has 

poured into the John Black lean project. 

 

Betsey Ryan was a family participant in two John Black 

workshops. She was asked to be a part of other workshops but 

declined because she saw how ridiculous it all is, and she was 

especially frustrated that most of the changes don’t stick. Each 

one of these workshops cost $34,000 over and above the John 

Black contract, and each of these workshops involves over two 

weeks of work from the government’s legion of lean specialists. 

How can the minister justify such a massive waste of money 

and time on these kinds of workshops, especially when these 

changes don’t stick? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 

comments from the member opposite are not totally true. We 

have two camps when it comes to lean. There are those that are 

somewhat apprehensive to learn new ways and change and 

adapt to the new formats, Mr. Speaker, but there are many that 

are seeing the change. They’re seeing the efficiencies: financial 

and the care to patients, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So you know, if we look at the John Black contract, it has been 

pointed out, it’s been said in this House in the last number of 

days and the members opposite are very aware that contract is 

ending the end of this month. However we have a lot of lean 

capacity built into this system. There’s well over 600 lean 

leaders trained in this province. Lean will continue in this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We can point to significant savings, at this point 125 million in 

accumulated savings, and more to be seen in the future, Mr. 

Speaker, whether it’s efficiencies and care, whether it’s savings 

financially, or efficiencies in systems and facilities. The Moose 

Jaw Hospital is a case in point that I’d love to speak about more 

in the following questions. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Betsey talks about a meal prep workshop 

which resulted in Ninja ovens being purchased and used to cook 

a turkey and roast ham as part of the workshop. But Betsey says 

those Ninja ovens have hardly been used since then because the 

staffing ratios don’t actually allow time for proper meal 

preparation, so the Ninja ovens sit there while the staff 

frantically open up a can of soup or make sandwiches. That’s 

not nutritious or even practical for many of these residents, but 

it also shows how wasteful many of these John Black 

workshops are. To the minister: how can you explain this? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked about the 

language around the lean contract and lean implementation in 

this Assembly before. And I’ve explained, you know, initially I 

maybe had some questions about Japanese terminology, but 

when I talked to the front-line workers, the lean leaders, Mr. 

Speaker, what they’ve said to me . . . If you look at, if you 

compare English to Japanese, quite often Japanese has few 

words that mean a lot; English has a lot of words that mean 

little. We can see that in the Assembly from time to time, Mr. 

Speaker. What the lean leaders have said to me personally was 

that the language is very specific once you learn the 

terminology. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’re looking forward to, as lean rolls out in 

the province, Saskatchewanizing lean and implementing it in 

different ways that there’s more Saskatchewan focus, Mr. 

Speaker. But when front-line workers say to me personally that 

they don’t know how they would communicate with staff as 

efficiently, as effectively as they have been trained through lean 

processes and using some of the Japanese terminology, Mr. 

Speaker, I take their word. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, that question had nothing to do 

with language and had everything to do about ensuring seniors 

have nutritious meals. 

 

The waste doesn’t end with unused Ninja cooking ovens. This 

government’s $40 million American lean consultant also has 

closet organizing workshops. Those are called 5S [sort, 

simplify, sweep, standardize, self-discipline] processes, and 

they last five days. Betsey has seen the same closet space at 

Prairie Pioneers Lodge reorganized several times through 

separate 5S processes. First, it stored incontinence supplies. 

Then it was changed to store food. But those results didn’t stick 

and they had to haul it out into the hallway to 5S it again. The 

last 5S closet reorganizing process even involved the health 



6584 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2015 

region’s CEO [chief executive officer]. To the Health minister: 

how does that make any sense? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you what 5S has 

done. Specifically the primary health clinic in Yorkton, when 

speaking to the officials there, the people that designed, the 

front-line workers and the citizens that helped design that 

facility, Mr. Speaker, going from what would have needed 10 

separate 10-by-10 rooms for storage and stocking and health 

care professionals not used to having their stock where they 

need it, stockpiling and hoarding and not knowing where things 

are, Mr. Speaker, where they’re to the point now they have a 

4-by-12, effectively a large closet that’s well organized, the 

stock systematically coming in, no waste, stock where they 

need it, and stock in the patient rooms where they need it, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We’ve heard some concerns about the Swift Current facility 

but, Mr. Speaker, you know, what lean is doing as well is 

looking at staffing levels and in fact with the Swift Current 

project, increasing staffing levels, Mr. Speaker. I think the 

members opposite, the leader would know, would have seen 

this maybe, this tweet, Mr. Speaker. I’m looking forward to one 

more question so I can get this on record. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Community-Training Residence 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, Normanview residents and 

those throughout northwest Regina were shocked to learn that 

the CTR [community-training residence], a correctional facility 

for male adult offenders, is being moved into their 

neighbourhood by this government without any consultation, 

across the street from a school, near other schools in the heart of 

a family neighbourhood. Can the minister explain why families 

in northwest Regina were not consulted about this major change 

to their neighbourhood? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Corrections and 

Policing. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank, you, Mr. Speaker. The 

community-training residence program is a highly successful 

part of Corrections and Policing’s focus on building literacy and 

job skills for low-risk offenders. In other words, Mr. Speaker, 

we want to help turn offenders into taxpayers. 

 

The move will increase the space from the current 

community-training residence to the Dales House. It will 

increase space for low risk — and I’m going to correct the 

members opposite — it’s for low-risk offenders, Mr. Speaker. 

There are no sex offenders in this program. There are no violent 

offenders in this particular program. This move, not only will it 

house more offenders, low-risk offenders, but it will also save 

the ministry over $30,000 per year in lease payments from the 

current location, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s absolutely appalling 

and unacceptable that that government would ram forward with 

a change of this nature and to inundate a community and change 

this facility into an adult offender unit without engaging the 

communities and the residents who live within the 

communities. 

 

You know, we’re joined today by people here in this legislature 

that are residents and that are concerned. What they’re hearing 

is that government is telling them that in just a couple of weeks 

they’re going to occupy and actually operate that facility. In fact 

they said they’ll invite them to an open house next week to tell 

them what it’s all about. That’s ridiculous, Mr. Speaker, by 

month’s end. 

 

This is absolutely unacceptable. Will the minister and this 

government agree to scrap this timeline, this plan, and start 

listening to the community? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Corrections and 

Policing. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, I am going to correct the 

member again. The community-training residence program has 

seen a 90 per cent success rate of placing low-risk — it’s 

low-risk — offenders into programming to help them build the 

skills that they need to participate in our communities because 

it’s not very long, Mr. Speaker, these people are going to be 

released into our communities. I’d much rather have them 

prepared to reintegrate successfully. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as a result of some of the conversations that we’ve 

had with the community, and we understand that 

communication with the community is essential, the dialogue 

for this particular move and with the community was not 

extensive enough. Mr. Speaker, we can do better and we will do 

better. As such, Mr. Speaker, we are pausing this move for a 

short period of time to ensure that this community has received 

and continues to receive information from government, factual 

information, and we have heard more from the community as to 

what they wish to have. Thank you. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — The minister says they’re going to pause 

this for a short period of time to give them more information 

about their decision. That’s not consultation, Mr. Speaker. 

 

It’s absolutely unacceptable for that government to fill that 

facility and to make this change within this neighbourhood 

without listening and working directly with the community and 

hearing the very valid risks about safety, the very valid 

concerns, about parents concerned about their kids and how 

they’re going to get to school and walking up the streets, and 

the very specific security concerns related to this facility, Mr. 

Speaker. The communities affected don’t deserve lip service 

after the fact. They deserve a real voice and real concerns. 

 

We haven’t heard a thing from their MLA, the member from 

Walsh Acres. We haven’t heard anything from the member for 

Coronation Park. In fact I don’t even . . . I understand they 



March 17, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6585 

haven’t even connected with the communities on this front. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister and to this 

government: why won’t they come to their senses and scrap this 

plan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Corrections and 

Policing. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, what does the opposition have 

against successful reintegration of low-risk offenders? Mr. 

Speaker, these offenders must be in the community somewhere. 

We will continue the dialogue with the community. We will 

listen to what the community has to say, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[Interjections] 

 

The Speaker: — Order. 

 

Hon. Ms. Tell: — We will listen to what the community has to 

say, Mr. Speaker, and ensure that the community has factual 

information about these offenders and how the programming 

works, how they get to their jobs if they’re working outside the 

community, how they get to school, Mr. Speaker. The criteria is 

strict, Mr. Speaker, as to what offenders actually go into this 

particular program. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we look at this as a bigger front. Our correctional 

system is overloaded. This is another way for us to reintegrate 

low-risk offenders into the community, Mr. Speaker. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

to report Bill No. 153, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 

without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? 

 

I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 

this bill now be read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

153, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 without 

amendment. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 153 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move this bill be now read 

a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 153, The Statute Law 

Amendment Act, 2014 be now read the third time and passed 

under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

to report this is a bilingual bill, Bill No. 154, The Statute Law 

Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and this 

bill be now read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 154, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 

(No. 2). Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 154 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 

(No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2014 modifiant le droit législatif 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move this bill 

be now read a third time and passed under its title. 

 



6586 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2015 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 154, The Statute Law 

Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) be now read the third time and 

passed under its title. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Ms. Ross: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

this is a bilingual bill, Bill No. 155, The Health Care Directives 

and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act, 2014 without 

amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 

this bill now be read a third time. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 155 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute 

Health Care Decision Makers Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 sur les 

directives et les subrogés en matière de soins de santé 
 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 155, The Health Care Directives and 

Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act, 2014 and that the 

bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

to report Bill No. 156, The Health Care Directives and 

Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2014 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 

this bill now be read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — Do the members wish to debate this bill on 

third reading? The Minister of Justice and Attorney General has 

requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 156, The Health Care Directives and 

Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2014 without amendment. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 156 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute 

Health Care Decision Makers Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2014 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move this bill 

now be read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 156, The Health Care 

Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 



March 17, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6587 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 144, The Victims of 

Domestic Violence Amendment Act, 2014 without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 

the bill now be read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has requested leave to 

waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 

144, The Victims of Domestic Violence Amendment Act, 2014 

and that the bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 144 — The Victims of Domestic Violence 

Amendment Act, 2014 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill now be 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 144, The Victims of 

Domestic Violence Amendment Act, 2014 be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

to report this is a bilingual bill, Bill No. 152, The Victims of 

Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 2014 

without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 

the bill now be read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 152, The Victims of Domestic Violence 

Consequential Amendment Act, 2014 and that the bill be now 

read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 152 — The Victims of Domestic Violence 

Consequential Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 portant 

modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Victims of 

Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 2014 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that this 

bill now be read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 152, The Victims of 

Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 2014 be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 



6588 Saskatchewan Hansard March 17, 2015 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Ms. Ross: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 

Bill No. 145, The Fee Waiver Act without amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 

the bill now be read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 145, The Fee Waiver Act and that the bill be 

now read the third time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 145 — The Fee Waiver Act 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill now be 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 145, The Fee Waiver Act be 

now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 

Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 

 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report this is a bilingual bill, Bill No. 146, 

The Fee Waiver Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 without 

amendment. 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 

Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 

the bill now be read a third time. 

 

The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 

Whole on Bill No. 146, The Fee Waiver Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2014 and that the bill now be read the third 

time. Is leave granted? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 

reading. 

 

THIRD READINGS 

 

Bill No. 146 — The Fee Waiver Consequential Amendments 

Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la 

loi intitulée The Fee Waiver Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill be now 

read a third time and passed under its title. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 146, The Fee Waiver 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 be now read the third 

time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 

question?  

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — Government orders. Orders of the day. I 

recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. To facilitate the work of committees taking place later 

this afternoon, I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — Sorry, I got a little bit in advance of myself 

there. Government orders, written questions, we should have 

gone to. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 



March 17, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6589 

Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 

answers to questions 670 to 675. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 

to questions 670 through 675. 

 

Government orders. I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. To facilitate the work of committees taking place later 

this afternoon, I move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 

p.m. tomorrow. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 14:28.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6577 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6577 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6577 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6577 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6577 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6578 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6578 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Women in the Legislature Program 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6578 

 Celebrating St. Patrick’s Day 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6578 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6579 

 Supporting Women in Politics 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6579 

 Carrot River Curlers Win Provincial Bronze 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6579 

 Agricultural Safety Week 

  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6579 

 Plans for the Economy 

  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6580 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Quality of Care and Staffing Levels in Long-Term Care Home 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6580 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6580 

 Costs and Benefits of the Lean Initiative 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6583 

  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6583 

 Community-Training Residence 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6584 

  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6584 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 

  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6585 

THIRD READINGS 

 Bill No. 153 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6585 

 Bill No. 154 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2014 modifiant le droit législatif 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6585 

 Bill No. 155 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act, 2014 

 Loi de 2014 sur les directives et les subrogés en matière de soins de santé 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6586 

 Bill No. 156 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 

 Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6586 

 Bill No. 144 — The Victims of Domestic Violence Amendment Act, 2014 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6587 

 Bill No. 152 — The Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 portant 

 modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 2014 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6587 

 Bill No. 145 — The Fee Waiver Act 

  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6588 

 Bill No. 146 — The Fee Waiver Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 

 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Fee Waiver Act 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6588 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6589 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


