






















































Hansard: April 30, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 57A  THURSDAY, APRIL 30, 2015, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7055 
 April 30, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
Clerk: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker 
will not be present to open today’s sitting. 
 
[Prayers] 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Members, I have received the annual 
report for the Advocate for Children and Youth, and I do now 
lay it on the Table. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to make an introduction this morning. Yesterday we had in the 
legislature guests from the state of South Dakota, including an 
elected member of the legislature. They learned a lot about the 
difference and the comparables between their system and our 
system. And on their recommendation, we today have four 
guests from the state of North Dakota visiting us, and I’d like to 
through you and to all members of the legislature, introduce our 
guests who are sitting in the west gallery this morning. 
 
With us today are Shawn Wenko, the executive director of 
Williston Economic Development, of course Williston, North 
Dakota. We have Jeni Fleck who is the sales director for the 
Williston Convention and Visitor Bureau, and we have Kristie 
and Brent Bogar who are here from Bismarck. Brent is the 
owner-operator of a consulting firm. I’d like all members of the 
legislature to make our guests feel welcome here today and 
encourage their questions of our system when we have a chance 
to visit after today’s session. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the member from Cypress Hills in welcoming the guests 
from North Dakota. People often forget how close Williston is 
to Regina. For anybody who likes to travel on the train, it’s 
almost worth going down to Williston and catch the train to go 
to Minneapolis or to go to Seattle as it is to go out to Melville 
and catch the Canadian train. I’ve done that a few times because 
it’s interesting but also a good place to go. 
 
Williston has changed so much in the last number of years with 
the oil industry. I think a lot of our Canadians don’t recognize 
that this group of people here helped facilitate the purchase of 
the Olympic village at Whistler and move it to Williston so they 
could have housing for their oil workers. So I’d like to say 
thank you to these people for coming here, and we look forward 
to many more years of working together with them. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and 
Remote Health. 

Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, to you, through 
you to all members of the Assembly, I’m pleased to introduce 
another school group today from Yorkton, a group of 43 grade 
4 and 5 students from Yorkdale Central School in Yorkton. 
With them are their teachers, Ms. Julie Wilson, who I had the 
pleasure to spend some time with at the SSTI [Saskatchewan 
Social Sciences Teachers’ Institute on Parliamentary 
Democracy] banquet and conference that was here just a few 
short days ago. Also Ms. Kathleen Henderson is with them and 
chaperone Sharon Walker, Mr. Speaker. So I ask all members to 
welcome these fine people to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I see we have a 
bunch of fine firefighters from Moose Jaw in your gallery. So I 
just ask all members to welcome them and join me in thanking 
them for their service to the community of Moose Jaw of the 
province of Saskatchewan. And I look forward to meeting with 
them, I think, a little bit later with some other members of our 
government. So, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to welcome 
and acknowledge these Moose Jaw firefighters to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to welcome 
the large delegation that we have in the Assembly, as members 
will recognize many of these faces. The firefighters have been 
here on different days and sharing information with members. 
 
In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, we have the president of the 
Saskatchewan Professional Fire Fighters Association, Mr. 
Kirby Benning, who is no stranger to the Assembly of course. 
Welcome, Kirby. We have a number of Moose Jaw firefighters 
who have come here to share some concerns today. We have 
Ian Clark, Chris Mealing, Ken Neff, Craig Flanagan, Sterling 
Macdiarmid, Matt Murray, Robin Anweshey, Matt Crocker, 
Bill Howes, Gord Hewitt, Jason R. Hutchinson. Mr. Speaker, 
those are the firefighters and we also have a private citizen 
along, Mr. Brent Evan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in welcoming 
this important delegation here to the Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — I’d like to join with the Minister of Rural 
and Remote Health and the Leader of the Opposition to 
welcome our fine firefighters from Moose Jaw and the president 
of the association. Looking forward to sitting down with you 
folks again and having a chat a little later. So looking forward 
to that, and we’ll see you after question period. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member of Parks, 
Culture and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 
leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave for 
an extended introduction. Is leave granted? 



7056 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2015 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sitting in the 
west gallery, I’d like to introduce to you and through you to all 
members, the province’s 2015 Saskatchewanderer, Ashlyn 
George. Give us a little wave, Ashlyn. 
 
Since January, she’s toured Saskatchewan, experiencing 
everything from a kiteboarding festival in Regina to a 
cross-country ski festival in La Ronge, from the innovative 
Rayner Dairy Research farm to the Great Western Brewing 
Company. Ashlyn is busy promoting our province to the world, 
and she’s doing a wonderful job. 
 
Since she’s started, Ashlyn has gained thousands of followers. 
Her audience, between Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram, has 
grown to more than 13,000. Back in March, she posted a photo 
of herself and the Saskatchewanderer vehicle under the northern 
lights outside of Saskatoon. That photo received more than 600 
likes. More recently she posted a video showcasing Solo Italia, 
a pasta supply business in Ogema. This video was viewed on 
Facebook more than 20,000 times and shared nearly 400 times. 
Ashlyn has outstanding social media photography and 
videography skills. 
 
She also has a passion for travel. Ashlyn applied for the 
Saskatchewanderer position back in the fall while touring 
Madagascar. She spent the last five years traveling the world — 
Australia, New Zealand, to Europe, Asia, South America, and 
most recently Africa — but she promises us she’s thrilled to be 
back in her home province, rediscovering the place she grew up 
and showcasing Saskatchewan to the world. Mr. Speaker, 
please join me and all members in welcoming Ashlyn to her 
legislature. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
too would like to welcome Ashlyn — I can’t quite see her this 
morning — to the Legislative Assembly. On behalf of the 
official opposition, we just want to thank you for the bang-up 
job that she’s doing representing Saskatchewan, and also our 
complete envy at the wonderful job opportunity she has. I think 
all of us would love to tag along with her on her adventures 
because we know how wonderful Saskatchewan is and that 
there’s so many things to see and do here. So, Ashlyn, you’re 
doing it for us, but on behalf of the official opposition, I’d like 
to welcome you to the Legislative Assembly as well. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
like to welcome Joanne and Richard Lepp to the Legislative 
Assembly today. They’re seated in the west gallery. Richard 
and Joanne are with the Saskatchewan House of Prayer. I had 
the opportunity to have a really nice visit with Joanne this 
morning, and she again presented me with petitions of informed 
consent. So please everyone extend a warm welcome to Richard 
and Joanne for their hard work. They sit up there, and they pray 

for us lots, and some days we really need it. So thank you very 
much, Richard and Joanne. We appreciate your vigilance. 
 
Also I’d like to welcome Kirby Benning who’s also a 
constituent of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. So thank you very 
much for attending today, Kirby. So if everyone here would 
give them a warm welcome. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce a school group that’s here today. The school group is 
from St. Luke School, which is about five houses from where I 
live in Saskatoon. Seated in the west gallery are 42 of the best- 
and brightest-looking students in the province. They are joined 
today by their teachers, Curtis Wagner and Cari Karakochuk. 
And they have some chaperones with them today: Jill Mierke, 
Scott Gregor, Lyndsey Newton, Gail Prefontaine, Leslie 
Schreiner, Jenna Shenher, and Cory Kos. 
 
So I am asking all members to join with me in welcoming them. 
I look forward to meeting them later in the day and hope that 
they have a pleasant day in the provincial capital. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition in support of better schools here in 
Saskatchewan. And we know that far too many of our 
classrooms are overcrowded and under-resourced and that the 
Sask Party government has eliminated hundreds of educational 
assistant positions and that students often do not get the 
one-on-one attention they need. None of this is acceptable, 
given the record revenues this government has had over the last 
eight years. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
call on this government to immediately stop ignoring 
schools and start prioritizing students by capping 
classroom sizes, increasing support for our students, and 
developing a transparent plan to build and repair our 
schools. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition are from Regina. I 
do so present. Thank you very much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. Homelessness is a major problem in La Ronge and 
other parts of the North, and it is getting worse. Shelter is a 
basic need for everyone, but under this government it’s getting 
harder and harder for people to find adequate housing, 
especially families, seniors, women and children who face 
abusive situations. The problem is getting worse because of the 
rising level of poverty, skyrocketing home ownership costs. 



April 30, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7057 

And the prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the Saskatchewan 
government to build a homeless shelter in the Lac la 
Ronge area to meet the needs of addressing homelessness 
in the Lac la Ronge area. 

 
It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I 
so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 
pleased to rise again today to present a petition in support of 
maintaining hyperbaric services at the Moose Jaw Hospital. The 
petitioners point out that the people of Moose Jaw have worked 
hard for many years through fundraising and community 
activism in order to procure a hyperbaric chamber for the 
Moose Jaw Hospital. 
 
They point out that hyperbaric treatments are essential for the 
proper treatment for many people living with diabetes, cancer, 
and other conditions. The petitioners point out that the existing 
hyperbaric chamber is the only unit of its kind currently in 
operation between Edmonton and Toronto. And they also point 
out that hyperbaric services will no longer be offered in the new 
design for the Moose Jaw Hospital because of the changes to 
the hospital design initiated through the John Black version of 
lean. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly require the Sask 
Party government to reverse its decision to scrap the 
hyperbaric chamber and to instead ensure that this service 
continues to be provided in the new Moose Jaw Hospital. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of 
Moose Jaw. I so submit. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition in support of retaining the Yarrow Youth 
Farm. The government has closed Yarrow Youth Farm and 
created an open-custody wing in Kilburn Hall, which is a secure 
custody unit for youth considered a greater risk to their 
communities. The provincial Advocate for Children and Youth 
has declared he cannot endorse such a rationalization, as 
low-risk teens could be influenced and pressured by close 
proximity to high-risk youth who may be involved in serious 
crimes or gangs. Kilburn Hall is a much more institutional 
environment that could intimidate and alienate teens that have 
committed minor offences. So I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the government to keep 
Yarrow Youth Farm open, to ensure a caring home 
environment for youth who have committed minor 

offences, and provide support to help these young people 
redirect their lives by setting more positive goals. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is signed by folks from Saskatoon. I 
so submit. 
 
[10:15] 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

May Day Significant for Workers’ Rights 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, tomorrow is May Day, a very 
important day for workers and workers’ rights everywhere. 
Also known as International Labour Day, May Day traces its 
roots back to the 19th century fight for an eight-hour workday, 
something many of us take for granted here in modern times. 
 
It was on this day in 1886 that thousands of workers from all 
over North America came together to fight for a change in 
Chicago’s Haymarket Square. For more than 100 years, 
workers have marked May Day as a time to remember the 
hard-fought gains that have been made to advance workers’ 
rights and to improve workplace safety but, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it’s also a time to reflect on what we can all do to 
make our workplaces safer and what the idea of workers’ rights 
mean in the modern era. 
 
May Day has always been about promotion and protection of 
rights on the international scale, and when we look around the 
world, we know that there is so much more that needs to be 
done. Too many people continue to work in unacceptably 
unsafe conditions and millions work long hours for poverty 
wages and some earn no wages at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing May 
Day today and in committing to continue the fight for fairness, 
safety, and workers’ rights around the world. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 

Bronze for Pat Canadians at Telus Cup 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last weekend the 
Regina Pat Canadians won the bronze medal at the Telus Cup 
held in Rivière-du-Loup, Quebec. The Pat Canadians defeated 
the Strathmore Bisons 6-3 in a third-place game. Arthur Miller 
led the charge, netting two goals and assisting on another. And 
a name we all might find familiar in Regina, Owen Sillinger, 
added a goal and assist, and Curtis Meger made 25 saves in 
that. Sillinger was also the tournament’s leading scorer and 
MVP [most valuable player] with six goals and 17 points in 
seven games, following the footsteps of his famous father. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was a first appearance in 16 years for the Pat 
Canadians at the midget AAA national championship. Brad 



7058 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2015 

Herauf, the coach of this year’s team, was a player back on the 
team in 1999 when the Pat Canadians brought home the 
national championship. 
 
This year’s bronze medal is the team’s seventh medal in eight 
appearances at the nationals. Mr. Speaker, the Pat Canadians 
dominated throughout the Saskatchewan Midget AAA Hockey 
League playoffs, losing just one game and defeating North 
Battleford in the final. At the western regional tournament, the 
team carried one win, one loss, and one tie record into the 
championship game. 
 
Last week at the Telus Cup, the Pat Canadians went undefeated 
in the round robin before falling 3-1 to Toronto in the 
semi-finals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
Regina Pat Canadians on a great season, an impressive playoff 
run, and winning a bronze medal at the national championships. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 

Hockey Championships for First Nations Youth 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I was honoured to take part in a 
great sporting event over the weekend in Saskatoon. The FSIN 
[Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] youth hockey 
championships were hosted by the Lac La Ronge Indian Band 
at the Jemini 4 arena. There were 80 First Nations teams from 
all over Saskatchewan, with teams in the novice, atom, peewee, 
bantam, and midget divisions, as well as a female division. 
 
The FSIN youth hockey championship has been ongoing since 
2002. They were created to give kids more opportunity to 
participate in hockey and to create youth empowerment in our 
First Nations communities. Youth involved in sports help build 
character in many positive ways. Co-operation with teammates, 
working towards a common goal, is important to teach the value 
of courage, humility, perseverance. Research proves that youth 
hockey has a positive effect on First Nations children by 
providing them with the opportunity to explore their identity, 
develop initiative, learn to control their emotions, and acquire 
social skills. 
 
I ask all members to join me in thanking everyone who helped 
to make this event a success, including the Lac La Ronge Indian 
Band sports, culture and recreation director Kevin Roberts, 
Chief Tammy Cook-Searson, Team Woodland coordinator 
Barrett Halkett, and all of the coaches, parents, volunteers, and 
the referees. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, 
Culture and Sport. 
 

Know Your Rights Conference 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
privileged to rise in the House today to acknowledge an 
empowering event I hosted in my constituency last Saturday. 
On April 25th the Islamic Youth Centre of Regina, in 
conjunction with the Prairie Somali-Canadian community, 

gathered in a day-long event of family activities, prayer, 
potluck, and concluding in a panel discussion with 
representatives from groups that provide support to newcomers. 
We had 170 participants attend this discussion, Mr. Speaker. 
This event was organized to better understand some of the 
social, language, and integration issues that the Somali 
community is facing. 
 
Many of the attendees reside in my constituency, and they 
asked to have representatives from several ministries and 
organizations to provide information, direction, and support to 
their families and their community. 
 
The community panel consisted of the Multicultural Council of 
Saskatchewan, Rhonda Rosenberg and Meka Okochi; the 
Ministry of Justice, Corrections and Policing, Mari Petroski; 
Ministry of Social Services, Ashley Young from the Regina 
Children’s Justice Centre; Lesley Kitsch who runs the ongoing 
protection involvement for immigrant families; Regina Police 
Services, Constable Dale McArthur; Regina Open Door 
Society, Laura Strong; Street Culture Kidz, Mike Gerrand; 
SaskCulture, Paul Gingras; Ministry of Economy, Kirk 
Westgard, the executive director of immigration services. 
 
I ask that all members join me in thanking our panel and guests 
for their involvement with the program which was titled the 
Know Your Rights Conference. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 

Regina Women of Distinction Awards Gala 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Last 
Thursday the 34th YWCA [Young Women’s Christian 
Association] Regina Women of Distinction Awards Gala was 
held at the Conexus Arts Centre here in Regina. There were a 
total of 46 women nominated and awards were presented to 12 
nominees at the end of the evening. The Regina Women of 
Distinction award program is an integral part of the YWCA’s 
commitment to supporting women in the realization of their full 
potential. 
 
Since 1981 the awards gala has recognized women whose 
outstanding achievements contribute to the health, the future of 
our community, and are an inspiration to others. The YWCA 
Women of Distinction nominee is a woman who displays a 
substantial, significant contribution in her field of endeavour 
whether it be locally, nationally, or internationally. These 
women are making a big difference in their community every 
day, whether it be in the fields of their business, arts, science, or 
volunteering. 
 
Presented by PotashCorp, all proceeds of the night went directly 
to support the YWCA’s Regina program for women and 
children including Big Sisters of Regina, the Isabel Johnson 
centre, and My Aunt’s Place and many others. I would ask all 
members to join me in congratulating not only the 12 winners 
of the Regina Women of Distinction Awards but all 46 
nominees who work hard within their community. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 



April 30, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7059 

Jaw Wakamow. 
 

Habitat for Humanity Day 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 
pleased to rise today to advise all members that May 1st is 
Saskatchewan Habitat for Humanity Day. This day is being 
celebrated to honour all the work that Habitat for Humanity 
does in our province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan 
recognizes the continuing need for affordable housing in our 
province. Through our partnership with Habitat for Humanity, 
we continue to support families in realizing their dream of 
home ownership. 
 
On Tuesday this dream came true for three more families who 
received the keys to their new homes which were constructed as 
part of the Habitat Plains project. The Habitat Plains project 
consists of nine new townhouse-style homes for families in 
need of a safe, affordable place to call home. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this is what supporting Habitat is all about. It’s about 
helping families embark on a brighter future, knowing that their 
housing challenges are behind them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Habitat for Humanity Day is a wonderful 
opportunity to celebrate the achievements of Habitat for 
Humanity as we work together to keep Saskatchewan strong. 
Our government is proud to partner with Habitat. Since March 
2009, we have committed $7.85 million to Habitat. Mr. 
Speaker, I ask that all members join me in thanking Habitat for 
Humanity for the vision and continued dedication to improving 
the quality of life for Saskatchewan people. Thank you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 

Correspondence Regarding Member’s Comments 
 
Mr. Doke: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, almost every day the 
government has to correct misinformation brought forward by 
the NDP [New Democratic Party]. A couple of days ago in 
Highways estimates, the member for Athabasca raised a number 
of concerns that he said came right from Saskatchewan Heavy 
Construction Association. Yesterday that same member 
received a letter from the association regarding his performance 
in estimates. The letter reads, and I quote: 
 

I am writing to express concern with your 
misrepresentation of our association’s working 
relationship with the Ministry of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
At no time has the Saskatchewan Heavy Construction 
Association or any member been contacted by the NDP 
opposition or any of your staff to provide an opinion on 
the current working relationship between the organization 
and our respective partners. Nor have we asked to 
comment on any particular aspect of the pavement quality 
index as noted by you during the 26th session of April. 
 
The views and opinions highlighted during the meeting 

were not obtained through consultation with anyone within 
the Saskatchewan Heavy Construction Association and do 
not properly represent the views of our board. 

 
So once again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NDP is just making 
stuff up, and this time they tried to pass off their nonsense as 
coming directly from the Saskatchewan Heavy Construction 
Association. 
 
Will the member opposite do the right thing today, correct his 
misrepresentations of their position and apologize? If he wants 
to take a moment before QP [question period] to do that, we 
would certainly give him leave. Will he do that today? We’re 
about to find out. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Release of Information Concerning Worker 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Privacy Commissioner has 
officially opened four investigations into the Premier’s personal 
decision to leak confidential information. I wonder if the 
Premier has read the legislation and if he is aware of the 
consequences of breaking it. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in the absence of the Premier, I will take that question 
on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan. Certainly it is 
our understanding that the Privacy Commissioner, as stated by 
the Leader of the Opposition, has begun his work. Mr. Speaker, 
he has an established process for conducting a review of this 
nature and, out of respect for that work, I wouldn’t comment 
further on that work. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s important for me to just 
place once again on the public record what in fact took place on 
March 30th. The Leader of the Opposition came into the House 
and asked on three occasions for an assurance from the Premier 
that an employee of a health region, of a facility would be 
protected for coming forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That 
assurance was given in good faith, not knowing what else may 
have been occurring with respect to that employee’s record, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
What was provided on a background basis to reporters was an 
indication that we had assurances from the region and from the 
facility that the employee’s suspension with pay had no direct 
relationship with his attendance at the legislature on March 
30th. Certainly that is the position of the government, and that’s 
why we took this step. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, no one in the province is 
believing that story, Mr. Speaker, because we know it was this 
Premier that leaked confidential, private information of this care 
aid whistle-blower, Mr. Speaker. And you know, yesterday we 



7060 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2015 

asked the Premier if he would release the email leaks, Mr. 
Speaker. If they’re so general, if they’re so specific, if they’re 
so innocuous, why is the Premier afraid to table the emails that 
he directed to be sent by his chief of operations and 
communications? 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, you think the members opposite would 
take this much more seriously. The consequences, as I asked in 
my question, the consequences of breaking this particular law 
include a fine and jail time. Was the Premier aware of that 
before he asked for the private information from the Saskatoon 
Health Region CEO [chief executive officer], and before he 
ordered his chief of communications and operations to leak this 
confidential information about the care aid? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again 
in the absence of the Premier, I’ll take that question on behalf of 
the Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What 
the Saskatoon Health Region CEO has indicated, and I quote, 
“We suspended with pay because of receipt of numerous 
complaints that were serious enough that they required his 
removal from the workplace.” This scenario that’s playing out 
right now actually predates when he went to the legislature. He 
went on to say, “This was the culmination of numerous 
complaints. The significance of those complaints prompted our 
action.” 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I hope all members of this House can 
agree that when complaints are raised by co-workers against 
one of their co-workers, that the obligation of the facility and 
the region, the employer, has an obligation to treat those 
complaints seriously. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would hate to think 
that the Leader of the Opposition doesn’t believe those 
complaints were serious enough in nature, and in fact that they, 
in some cases, predated his attendance at the legislature. That’s 
why the facility, the region, and this government takes this very 
seriously. 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, what this government takes 
seriously, what this Premier takes seriously, Mr. Speaker, is 
how he can discredit and drag this care aid’s name through the 
mud, Mr. Speaker, by leaking confidential, private information. 
It is absolutely appalling. And for this government to be 
sticking to its lines, Mr. Speaker, is absolutely unbelievable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the consequences for breaking this law are 
significant. Now I’m not arguing for specific consequences. I’ll 
leave that up to the proper authorities. But the fact, Mr. 
Speaker, is that this is a serious matter . . . [inaudible 
interjections] . . . They make fun of it, Mr. Speaker, because 
they don’t think this is important, Mr. Speaker. But they should, 
because it is. It’s about the law in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier was personally and heavily involved 
in the leaking of confidential information about a health care 
whistle-blower that came to the legislature. The occupant of the 

highest office in this province has done everything that he can 
to drag this care aid’s name through the mud, Mr. Speaker. And 
now the Premier, and very high-ranking . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . The Deputy Premier says this is exaggeration. 
He should read the legislation, Mr. Speaker, and see how 
serious this is. 
 
Now the Premier and very high-ranking people in his 
government are under investigation, Mr. Speaker, by the 
Privacy Commissioner. The consequences for breaking this law 
include a fine and include jail time. Does the Premier . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . And the member from Sutherland 
says I said that. It’s because it’s important. My question to the 
Premier: does he recognize how serious this is, or is he still just 
shrugging this off as no big deal? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again, 
we’ll let the commissioner do his work. Mr. Speaker. What I 
know absolutely that the Premier and this government take 
seriously is the commitment that he made in this House in 
relation to a request from the Leader of the Opposition. On 
three occasions the Leader of the Opposition asked, on March 
30th, for protection for an employee based on coming forward. 
And the Premier in good faith, not knowing — and certainly I 
don’t know the information at the time, the Premier didn’t know 
that information at the time — but in good faith provided that 
commitment. 
 
What the Premier wanted to demonstrate is that his commitment 
remained intact because the employee was not suspended with 
pay for coming forward. That has been made plain and clear by 
the health region, Mr. Speaker. It’s plain and clear in terms of 
the timeline of when complaints were lodged against this 
employee, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, unfortunately the Leader of the 
Opposition didn’t take the time to actually find out about the 
gentleman in question before he asked for that assurance, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. That is what is clear, and that is why the 
Premier made the commitment that he did, but also why he 
wanted to correct the record, that in fact this employee was not 
suspended because he did come forward. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Here we go again, Mr. Speaker, this 
government trying to sully the reputation, as opposed to 
allowing due process to take place. Straight from the mouth of 
the Health minister, Mr. Speaker. Unbelievable. 
 
What is absolutely clear in the government’s actions, in this 
Premier’s actions, Mr. Speaker, is that he was not acting in the 
public interest. He was trying to act in his political interest. And 
now they are simply digging that hole deeper and deeper, Mr. 
Speaker, and it’s absolutely appalling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Attorney General. Will the 
Attorney General assure us today on the public record that the 
results of these four investigations will be referred to an 
out-of-province prosecutor? 



April 30, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7061 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, certainly we are going to let the Privacy 
Commissioner do the work that he is responsible to do, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I think that that’s appropriate. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s also appropriate to say, to put 
on the record that Saskatoon Health Region and every other 
health region, and specific to this region, has in its collective 
bargaining agreement section 4.03 that does provide protection 
for employees with respect to coming forward, Mr. Speaker. So 
that assurance was already put in place. 
 
The Premier gave his assurance, not knowing what in fact had 
taken place with this particular employee but in light of the 
questions from the Leader of the Opposition on three occasions 
— who apparently didn’t bother to do his homework, big 
surprise on that front, Mr. Deputy Speaker — but gave his 
assurances that because of this employee coming forward that 
there would be no retribution in the workplace. The region has 
confirmed that in fact that did not take place, that the 
suspension with pay was unrelated to why he attended, and the 
Premier simply wanted to maintain and verify that the 
commitment that he made in good faith on March 30th to the 
Leader of the Opposition is intact. And it remains to this day. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we have four investigations going 
on, the Premier and very high-ranking individuals. My question, 
Mr. Speaker, was to the Attorney General, not to the Health 
minister. A straightforward question: will the Attorney General 
assure us today on the public record that the results of these 
four investigations will be referred to an out-of-province 
prosecutor? Will he confirm that? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Justice minister and 
the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Leader of 
the Opposition talks about due process. We should let the 
Information and Privacy Commissioner do his work. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m not going to speculate on the results of that work 
or what recommendations he may or may not make. And once 
those recommendations are made, after his investigation is 
done, which the Premier has indicated on the record that we 
will fully co-operate with, we’ll deal with the consequences of 
that once those reports are done. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Hyperbaric Chamber in Moose Jaw and Provision of 
Hyperbaric Services 

 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we’re joined by a large delegation 
of firefighters from Moose Jaw today. They’ve come to the 
legislature because they want this government to save the 
hyperbaric chamber. Firefighters raised money so our province 
could get a hyperbaric chamber, and they do not want our 
province to lose this valuable, valuable asset. Will the Premier 

and the two Health ministers listen to these firefighters today 
and commit to keep the hyperbaric chamber? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and certainly we look forward to having an 
opportunity to speak with the firefighters later this day. I know 
the rural and remote minister will be there, as well as members 
of this side of the House. I’ll also be making an effort to attend. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I’ve said publicly is that we are 
looking for a way to continue to provide hyperbaric services to 
the people of this province. We’re going through a process right 
now to make that determination of what is the best way to do 
that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’re looking at different options 
currently. That may be an in-hospital type of setting. It may also 
be an outpatient type of setting, knowing that the nature of this 
type of service, the vast majority of services are provided on an 
outpatient basis. They’re provided that way in other 
jurisdictions as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So we look forward to the information that they’re able to 
provide for us later this afternoon. That’ll obviously be a part of 
the decision that we’ll have to make coming up, and we look 
forward to those deliberations. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this government’s dragging of its 
feet on this issue is very concerning to people here in the 
province. These firefighters, Mr. Speaker, and many other 
firefighters across the province are frustrated that this 
government keeps minimizing the tremendous value of the 
hyperbaric chamber. 
 
They point to the 4,000, over 4,000 treatments given, and they 
say that attention needs to be given to the significant number of 
hours required in treating the most serious cases. We’ve heard 
similar frustration from the doctor, David Amies, who said that 
he doesn’t think that the Premier and the two Health ministers 
are getting the right information about the value of the chamber, 
or they’re choosing not to listen to that information. 
 
How much evidence does the Premier and his two Health 
ministers need to hear before they will recognize the 
tremendous value of the hyperbaric chamber? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, as I’ve said a number of times in this House and 
outside the House, we are going through a process of 
identifying options for how to continue to grow our hyperbaric 
services in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a number of decisions that need to be 
made in terms of a location, whether it be continue in the city of 
Moose Jaw, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or perhaps could more people 
in fact be served by the hyperbaric services if it was in one of 
our larger tertiary centres or in a larger city. Those are some of 
the options that we’re looking at. 



7062 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2015 

We’re also looking at the fact that this piece of equipment is, 
portions of it are reaching the end of its lifespan, and so that 
there will be some dollars that would be required for some 
components of that, that would need to be changed out. That is 
a part of the consideration as well. So we’re looking at, both on 
a capital side in terms of the location, but as well in terms of the 
services that provided. We know that nearly 50 per cent of the 
services is in relation to radiation therapy. Does it make sense 
to perhaps have the service located closer to one of our centres 
that provides cancer treatment? Those are all the types of things 
that we’re looking at in terms of the options, how to best utilize 
the service. And we will be making the decision accordingly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — And what the minister failed to say is that he’s 
looking at sending patients out of province and clawing back 
these important health care systems out of this province. Mr. 
Speaker, in a time when we’ve had record prosperity in this 
province, reducing health care services in the province, it makes 
no sense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, instead of getting agitated here, Mr. Speaker, I 
want the minister to hear the story of Brent Evans. . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . The man is up in the gallery, Deputy 
Premier. Unbelievable. Unbelievable, Mr. Speaker, that they 
would be . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Currently the Leader of the 
Opposition has the floor. Members will be given a chance to 
respond. I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Brent Evans is here today. He 
was a victim of carbon monoxide poisoning. His son found him 
lying on the shop of his floor close to death. He was transported 
to Moose Jaw Union Hospital and was treated in the hyperbaric 
chamber three times in one day. He suffered no side effects of 
the carbon monoxide poisoning. So it’s no wonder why he says 
the hyperbaric chamber’s invaluable and he wants to see this 
life-saving piece of equipment stay in Moose Jaw, stay in the 
hospital. 
 
Why won’t the Premier and his two health ministers just listen 
to Brent Evans and the Moose Jaw firefighters today and finally 
make the decision to keep the hyperbaric chamber in Moose 
Jaw? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all, Mr. 
Speaker, I do want to correct the Leader of the Opposition once 
again in this House. Not just under this government but under 
the former government as well, not every person in this 
province that requires hyperbaric services is provided that 
service in the province. We do send people out of the province 
for hyperbaric services, depending on their condition, knowing 
that hyperbaric services are not a primary treatment. They are a 
secondary treatment, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So yes, we are 
looking at the cost to provide the service out of the province 
because that’s a part of what we already do today and what 

happened under the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to carbon monoxide poisoning, I can 
tell the members opposite over the nearly 16 years of service for 
the hyperbaric services, roughly 3 per cent of the time that it 
was provided as a secondary treatment in relation to carbon 
monoxide poisoning. I’m not minimizing the fact that it has 
been used. But, Mr. Speaker, the majority of the time that the 
hyperbaric chamber has been used, well over 90 per cent of the 
time is on an outpatient clinic type of basis. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to make an evaluation of 
whether or not it makes sense to have it in a hospital or whether 
or not it makes sense to have it in a clinic type of setting, an 
outpatient setting, where the vast majority of patients have been 
served over those 16 years. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this government should listen to 
Dr. Amies. This government should listen to the firefighters. 
This government should listen to Brent, Mr. Speaker, whose life 
was saved because he had access to this treatment in a hospital 
when he had carbon monoxide poisoning. The government can 
try to continue to minimize, can try to downplay the importance 
of this service here in Saskatchewan, but that is a disservice to 
the patients and the people of this province. No question about 
it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the firefighters who have joined us today . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . The member from Wood River is 
heckling. That’s how serious he takes it. Mr. Speaker, the 
firefighters that have joined us today question whether this 
government has given proper thought to the reduction in health 
care costs that can be achieved through hyperbaric treatment. 
They question whether this government has calculated how 
much it will cost to send patients out of province, and they 
question the lives that will be lost because of the delay in 
getting people into a hyperbaric chamber if we have to send 
those patients out of province. And they especially question, 
Mr. Speaker, why it is taking so long for this government to 
make a decision. My question to the Premier: what’s his 
answer? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again 
in the absence of the Premier, I’ll take that question on behalf of 
the Government of Saskatchewan. Mr. Deputy Speaker, again I 
just want to correct for the record, because of what I think the 
Leader of the Opposition is trying to, the information he’s 
trying to pass on. 
 
In terms of the delay in sending people out of the province and 
the concerns that that may raise, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
currently send people out of the province. We always have, and 
that will probably be a part of the considerations going into the 
future. That took place; it does today. It took place under the 
NDP. Not every single person that has hyperbaric services from 
Saskatchewan is treated in Saskatchewan because hyperbaric 
services are a secondary treatment. We need to ensure that 
we’re treating the primary way to treat somebody before we 



April 30, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7063 

look at secondary ways like hyperbaric. 
 
So for the Leader of the Opposition to cause further concern 
that people will not have the services that they need because of 
the delay of transferring people out of the province for 
hyperbaric services, that currently happens today, and it 
happened under the NDP. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we are looking at is all of the options 
on how to continue to provide hyperbaric services to the people 
of this province. I don’t want to allow for the Leader of the 
Opposition to leave the impression with people that we’re not 
going to provide this type of service. We are going to provide 
this type of service, but we’re trying to determine the way to 
most efficiently provide this service for the greater number of 
people. 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Protection for Children in Care 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There are 
many concerning issues in the report from the Advocate for 
Children and Youth, including the number of critical injuries. A 
shocking number of kids in this government’s care attempted 
suicide over the past year, and that’s heartbreaking. And the 
report identifies major shortcomings into mental health services 
for our kids. To the minister: what’s the government going to 
do to address this? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social 
Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
thank the Children’s Advocate for all the work that he does and 
the report that he brings forward every year, as well as the 
special investigations that he does. The work that the Children’s 
Advocate does is critical. 
 
We are happy that there is progress in this report that is being 
pointed out, but there’s also more work that needs to be done. 
And he touches on a number of ministries where that work 
needs to be done, Social Services being only one of them. Mr. 
Speaker, we will work with the Children’s Advocate on how we 
can make improvements for all the children within our 
province. 
 
What we won’t do is go back to a system where, seriously, we 
didn’t even know how to track our children, and where we had 
up to 21 children in a foster home. And that’s the way it was 
when the NDP were government. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, this is a pretty serious matter and 
the minister tends to want to play political games with this, 
talking about, you know, going in the past. This is what’s 
happening now in this province. She needs to take it seriously, 
and the government over there needs to take it seriously. 

When you have 16 children in the government’s care attempting 
suicide, and when you have 3 children in the government’s care 
who has died as a result of suicide, this government should be 
taking significant steps, significant steps to address 
shortcomings in mental health services for kids. Ten children in 
this government’s care were not kept safe and were victims of 
physical or sexual assault. What is the minister going to do to 
address this now? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social 
Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, a lot of work has been 
done, including in the Ministry of Health, where there was now 
a mental health and addictions action plan. And we’ll be acting 
on the recommendations of that report in due course. Mr. 
Speaker, what we’ve done is we have introduced an electronic 
system so that we can track our children around the province. 
That was never there before. 
 
We have brought down the caseload, the number of children in 
our care, quite significantly by adding more supports to homes 
and families before the family becomes at risk, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve added more front-line workers, even though we have 
fewer children in our care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s interesting that the member opposite wants to do a dramatic 
act on how, you know, why don’t we show that this is 
important. Well, Mr. Speaker, this government has committed 
more dollars each and every budget since we’ve been 
government to child and family protection issues. And we’ve 
increased that budget by over 150 per cent, Mr. Speaker. But 
when the NDP put out a press release where the opposition 
wants budget to reroute spending to priority areas, there was not 
one mention of child protection in that document. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 

Child Care Spaces 
 
Ms. Chartier: — The Children’s Advocate is expressing 
concern today about the lack to access to child care. He 
confirms that only one in five children have access to licensed 
child care, the lowest level in the country. Despite years of 
record revenue, this government has failed to get serious about 
child care. To the minister: when will this government finally 
start delivering safe, affordable, regulated child care spaces? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of the 
things that we’re going to do is continue on the direction that 
we’re going, which is to increase child care spaces, something 
that did not happen under the previous administration. Since we 
formed government we’ve increased licensed child care spaces 
by 53 per cent, or 4,935 since 2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve also made a commitment in our joint-use 
schools that are under construction that we will add a 90-space 
child care centre in each one of those. We’re going to continue 
doing that. We know that there’s a huge need for it. We hear 



7064 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2015 

from families. We hear from parents. As part of our growing 
economy, there’s more people working. There’s a greater need 
for child care and, Mr. Speaker, we’ve increased it by 53 per 
cent, which is something that never happened when the 
members opposite were in government. We’re going to 
continue to do that. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — This is the government that scrapped its 
commitment this budget to 500 child care spaces. Eighty 
thousand children in the last five years; there are less than 
14,000 spaces in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
advocate says this government’s neglect of child care means 
that: 
 

. . . most children in childcare settings are in unregulated 
care in private residences, meaning that we have little data 
about quality and availability, and that it is not operating 
within a system that can be monitored, supported or 
regulated to ensure that it is safe and developmentally 
appropriate. 

 
To the minister: does this concern him? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, what concerns me is the 
record that we took over from the NDP. Mr. Speaker, I want to 
quote Pat Atkinson in May of 2011 because I agree there’s been 
a significant ramping up in child care because there’s been a 
different government. Mr. Speaker, Pat Atkinson, Hansard, 
March 29, 2011: 
 

Saskatchewan has the poorest record when it comes to 
child daycare. And, Mr. Speaker, I take some 
responsibility for that because I was part of a government 
that did not put a lot of new resources into child daycare. 

 
Mr. Speaker, when we formed government, there was 8,850 
spaces in our province. We’ve increased that by over 50 per 
cent. We’re going to continue doing that. Mr. Speaker, we’ll 
take no advice or no direction from the members opposite. 
We’re going to work with families. We’re going to work with 
children. We’re going to do the right thing for this province, 
unlike the members opposite who let it decline and decay. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report that it has 
considered certain estimates and to present its sixth report. 
 
I move: 
 

That the sixth report of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy be now concurred in. 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Chair of the Standing Committee 
on the Economy has moved that their sixth report be now 
concurred in. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Why is the Opposition House Leader on his feet? 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Point of order. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has a 
point of order. Would you please state your point of order 
briefly? 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 
his member’s statement right before question period, the 
member for Cut Knife-Turtleford used language which has been 
repeatedly found to be unparliamentary, using the same 
language that both the Premier and the Deputy Premier have 
had to apologize for in the last several weeks. And it’s the same 
language that the Minister of Social Services apologized for on 
March 25th, 2013. 
 
I would ask you to make a ruling on the unparliamentary 
language used by the member for Cut Knife-Turtleford in his 
member’s statement. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I was listening very closely to what the member had to 
say during members’ statements. Certainly I know that he used 
a series of quotes, and what he did say was in a letter that was 
certainly directly sent to the member opposite, the member 
from Athabasca, so I think the quotes were factual. The 
information that was brought forward was certainly in context 
and well within the rules of this Assembly, so I would suggest 
that the point of order is not well taken. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When the member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford was making his member’s statement, there 
was quite a bit of discussion across the floor, and frankly I 
didn’t hear all of his statement. So what I will have to do is 
review the record and come back with a ruling on Monday. 
 



April 30, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7065 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Uranium Energy Agreement 
 
Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. At the end of 
my comments I will be moving the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly supports the historic uranium energy 
agreement between Cameco and the Department of 
Atomic Energy of India of April 15th, 2015; furthermore  
 
That this Assembly reaffirms its support for both the 
provincial and federal governments to continue work on 
similar trade and export opportunities for Saskatchewan 
companies across the globe. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is absolutely great news for our 
Saskatchewan and especially for our North. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, our North is a very beautiful part of the province. It’s 
like none other on earth. It is full of diversity, full of people, 
and rich resources. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I remember very well the very first time 
that I had met our North. The stark, pristine beauty of that 
North is like none other on earth. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was 
abundantly clear that the power of mother nature was all around 
me. She spoke ever so silently to my heart. She sang to my soul, 
and she embraced my spirit. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is like 
yesterday that I remember that meeting of our North. It is what 
resonates with me today. 
 
Since becoming an MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly], some of my colleagues on this side of the House 
and I have had the opportunity to have a tour of the McArthur 
River uranium mine. Meeting the employees of that mine was 
the absolute highlight of the tour. Looking into their eyes, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I saw pride, pride in their skill set, pride in 
their abilities and knowledge to help provide a rich resource to 
the rest of the world so that they could include electricity in 
their quality of life. Mr. Speaker, I saw the pride in the ability to 
provide for themselves, for their families, for their 
communities. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also saw a company that cares. They care 
about employees. The living quarters and recreational activities 
that were available were better than adequate. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we took a tour of the cafeteria. Now when you’re 
providing food to hundreds of employees, well there are strings 
and of strings of buffet tables and dessert tables, and well the 
food is just second to none. But I think I’m digressing a little 
bit. We’ll get back to the topic. The company also shared how 
they work diligently to ensure reclamation plans and efforts are 
in place. This ensures a peaceful coexistence with mother 
nature. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, uranium is a big deal for Saskatchewan, 
especially for our North. We have approximately 3,750 people 
employed at uranium mines. This includes contractors. Imagine, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s just about the size of Pinehouse and 
La Ronge put together. The number of employees that are 
residents of the North is 47 per cent. 

I think the rest of the employees that work in the northern mines 
live in Prince Albert. At least when you go look at our parking 
lots, they are dedicated to Cameco employees, and there are 
dozens upon dozens if not hundreds of vehicles there. As I 
indicated, the equivalent population of two northern 
communities work in our mines. Forty per cent are of 
Aboriginal ancestry. That is a clear indicator of how our First 
Nations and Métis peoples are participants in our strong 
economy. 
 
[11:00] 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, did you know that Canada has a very long 
history in nuclear? According to The Canadian Nuclear 
Factbook produced by the Canadian Nuclear Association, based 
on data available as of November 2014, George C. Laurence 
designed one of the world’s first nuclear reactors at the National 
Research Council in Ottawa in 1941. 
 
The same fact book goes on to point out that there are 434 
operable nuclear reactors worldwide which provide about 11.94 
per cent of global electricity. Around the world, there are 72 
reactors under construction, and 92 of them are in the planning, 
and there are another 92 in planning stages. Right here in 
Canada we have 19 reactors. They produce just a little over 16 
per cent of Canada’s electricity. 
 
In Saskatchewan, our Ministry of the Economy points out that 
our province has been producing uranium continuously since 
1953. We are the only province in Canada that has uranium, and 
we account for 15.6 per cent of the primary production in 2013. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is only second to the top producer 
around the world. We are behind Kazakhstan in production of 
uranium. 
 
Our government is interested in attracting value-added activities 
in the nuclear cycle. We provide funding to the Sylvia Fedoruk 
Canadian Centre for Nuclear Innovation at the University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As we know, Sylvia Fedoruk was an amazing woman, a 
brilliant scientist, and she called Saskatchewan home. Through 
her efforts in developing effective cancer treatments, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, she also saved many lives. Because of her 
tenacity, determination, skills, and knowledge in turning 
uranium into treatment and sometimes cure for cancer, we see 
many lives that are saved. Those lives are manifest in our 
parents, in our brothers and sisters, in our daughters and our 
sons, in our friends and our relatives, people who enrich our 
lives and continue to make Saskatchewan strong. 
 
Mr. Neil Alexander is the executive director of the Sylvia 
Fedoruk Centre for Nuclear Innovation. In an article in On 
Campus News dated April 24, 2015, we gained an 
understanding of Mr. Alexander’s background. 
 

Before moving to Saskatoon, Alexander worked as part of 
a group working on solar, wind and other renewables 
including using garbage as fuel, both to generate energy 
and as a method of recycling. 

 
The article goes on to say: 
 



7066 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2015 

“As part of that experience, I realized we could do the best 
we could with efficiency and we could do the best we 
could with renewables, but there was still going to be a 
pretty large gap,” he said. “The only way I could see 
filling it is with nuclear.” 

 
That’s a quote from Mr. Alexander. Mr. Alexander, in the same 
article, goes on to point out that we have many applications: 
 

From sterilization of medical equipment to scanners that 
look through welds to jet engine turbine fans, nuclear 
technology helps to keep [Saskatchewan] people safe, 
buildings standing and planes in the air . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is no secret that our government has a plan. We 
call it a plan for growth, vision 2020 and beyond, and within 
that plan we have six growth activities that government can 
foster to undertake to encourage economic growth and address 
the challenges of that growth. Two of those activities are what 
I’ll be discussing in the next few minutes. One is educating, 
training, and developing a skilled workforce; the other is 
supporting increased trade investment and exports through 
international engagement. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to point out that it 
takes more than just wishing. It takes more than words on 
paper. It takes more than talk. It takes some real action. So let’s 
discuss what is happening in terms of the growth activity for 
educating, training, and developing a skilled workforce. 
 
In the most recent balanced budget that our Finance minister, 
the MLA from Canora-Pelly delivered in March of this year, we 
see that Northlands College is dedicated to recruit northern and 
Aboriginal residents and provide them with the specialized skill 
training needed to fill higher paying jobs in Saskatchewan’s 
hard rock mining industries. So through the International 
Minerals Innovation Institute, IMII, it is providing $1.86 
million to create the mine training centre and expand mining 
programming. We provide IMII, the International Minerals 
Innovation Institute, with $1 million annually through 
Innovation Saskatchewan. In partnership, the federal 
government provides another $2.5 million. Central Services 
donated a building to be used for mine training. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that is a way that our government is increasing the 
activities to help our education, training, and developing of this 
workforce. 
 
We have $32.5 million for the Student Aid Fund. We have 
another $9 million for the Saskatchewan Advantage 
Scholarship, 6.5 million for the Saskatchewan advantage grant 
for education savings, and I could go on and on. We’ve 
increased operation funding by 2 per cent to technical institutes 
and federated colleges. 
 
I was talking about the Northlands College. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it is the largest college, regional college in 
Saskatchewan and located in our North. We contribute $6.5 
million from our balanced budget to help this college. They 
have a dedicated mining school. They offer three mining 
programs: radiation environmental monitoring, mine 
engineering technician, and underground mining. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that is one way that we are helping to achieve our plan 
for growth. 

The second piece that I would like to talk about is regarding 
supporting our increased trade, investment, and exports through 
international engagement. Mr. Deputy Speaker, our province is 
well served by the MLA from Swift Current who holds the 
position of Premier. Our Premier is a strong leader that does 
something exceptionally well: he creates relationships: strong 
relationships with the 47 MLAs on this side of the House, 
relationships with the people of this province, with leaders in 
other provinces, and indeed with leaders around the world. 
 
It is in no small part to his reaching out to Prime Minister Modi 
of India over the last few years that this agreement could be 
achieved. It is in no small part to his constant and consistent 
conversations with our Prime Minister of Canada about the 
strengths and needs of Saskatchewan that this agreement was 
achieved. It is in no small part to our Premier’s work with the 
ministers of Economy and Trade and Innovation, along with the 
dedication and determination of the officials within those 
ministries that we, here in Saskatchewan and especially our 
North, are able to participate in trade with other countries. 
 
But more than that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our people get to 
continue to work and provide their skills, knowledge, and 
capability toward a better quality of life in this world. In turn 
these employees receive a paycheque. That paycheque is what 
helps them to provide for themselves, to provide for their 
families, and to contribute to their communities. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that is what makes our province so strong. 
 
On behalf of our government, a heartfelt thank you to all the 
people of our province who just go quietly about their daily 
lives, making their future and ours a better place. Thank you. 
April 15th of this year moved us another step forward towards 
the full potential of Saskatchewan, another step forward into the 
brighter future of our people, our communities, and our 
province. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I now move the following . . . 
One more second. In our plan for growth: 2020 and beyond, we 
clearly state we will undertake to foster economic growth by 
supporting increased trade, investments, and export through 
international engagement. April 15, 2015 is a tangible outcome 
of our plan for growth. Therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I now 
move the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly supports the historic uranium energy 
agreement between Cameco and the Department of 
Atomic Energy of India of April 15, 2015; furthermore 
 
That this Assembly reaffirms its support for both the 
provincial and federal government to continue work on 
similar trade and export opportunities for Saskatchewan 
companies across the globe. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the member 
from Prince Albert Northcote: 
 

That this Assembly supports the historic uranium energy 
agreement between Cameco and the Department of 
Atomic Energy of India of April 15, 2015; and further 
 



April 30, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7067 

That this Assembly reaffirms its support for both the 
provincial and federal governments to continue work on 
similar trade and export opportunities for Saskatchewan 
companies across the globe. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to speak about this topic of uranium in Saskatchewan 
because it’s been part of my legal career and my political career 
for close to 37, 38 years.  
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think what we need to understand is that 
agreements like what we’re talking about here are important as 
we develop relationships around the world, but they’re part of a 
much bigger perspective and a much longer history. And over 
the years the uranium industry in Saskatchewan has gone 
through quite a number of phases, and they include obviously 
the phases in the ’40s when the war was on and it was identified 
that Saskatchewan had this resource. And over the years there 
has been many, many efforts to make sure that the development 
of the uranium industry has been done in a positive way. Now 
practically what we have now is a continuation of that process. 
 
When I first started practising law in Regina in 1978, one of the 
first tasks I had was to sit at the Bayda Commission as one of 
the observers on behalf of clients. And it was very interesting, 
the kind of public debate that took place during the Blakeney 
administration around how to develop this resource in 
Saskatchewan. As we all know, the commission laid out a 
number of conditions, I guess, or ideas or ways to describe how 
the business should go forward, and that is what happened. And 
practically over the years various things have happened. 
 
One short story from that time for me was that I was the lawyer 
who was designated to go to Germany with the agreement 
between the Government of Saskatchewan and the Uranerz 
uranium company to have them sign the deal that created the 
Key Lake Road. And all of us who have travelled north to go to 
the uranium mines know the importance of that road for both 
taking supplies in but also bringing out the product. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that was in 1978. And what’s happened since 
then has been the dramatic work in engineering and problem 
solving, I guess I would say, that have allowed for our 
Saskatchewan mines to be developed in some actually quite 
difficult terrain to get the uranium out of the ground. And we 
have everything from the largest freezer plant probably on the 
Prairies, located underground to freeze the ground so they can 
actually do the mining, to the largest cement plant in 
Saskatchewan, located up by the mines up north. And all of 
those things relate to how to get this valuable resource out of 
the ground. 
 
[11:15] 
 
Now one of the longer term issues that is being addressed today 
as we look at the agreement that was made with India relates to 
this marketing of the uranium. As we know, in 1974 there was 
quite a bit of concern with India as a customer of Canadian 
technology and uranium related to the, you know, proliferation 
of nuclear weapons. What we, I think, now understand was that 

India has its own uranium. It’s only maybe 1 per cent of the 
world’s supply, but they do have their own uranium. 
 
In 2005 the United States and India entered into discussions 
which culminated in an agreement that was signed by President 
Bush and Prime Minister Singh of India on March 2nd, 2006. 
It’s called the India-US [United States] civil nuclear 
co-operation agreement. 
 
And what India did as part of that agreement was they separated 
out all of their civil nuclear, in other words their nuclear power 
plants, their nuclear research, their radiation treatment, medical 
treatment. I think they had about 25 of these plants that were 
operating, and they separated those from the research and things 
that they were using with, around nuclear weapons. And they 
effectively allowed for international inspection of the civil 
nuclear things, nuclear plants, but they specifically wouldn’t do 
that and wouldn’t sign the non-proliferation treaty as it related 
to the non-civil nuclear plants. And so that agreement in 2006 
allows, moves us forward to discussions between Canada and 
India. But I think they are directly related to that particular 
situation. 
 
Almost immediately after the agreement in 2006, France, which 
was one of the largest suppliers of uranium both from their 
nuclear companies — we know Areva in Saskatchewan as 
being a major company from France — they did enter into an 
agreement with India that allowed for supply. And so what we 
end up having now with the agreements that are being 
developed by Canada in this year are building on some of these 
things that happened earlier, and I think it’s a recognition of the 
role that Canada plays on the supply side of the fuel, of the 
uranium. I think it’s a recognition though that maybe some of 
the technical side, our CANDU reactors in Canada that were a 
major export from Canada, have not been as popular or as used 
around the world in the last couple of decades. 
 
Now another aspect of this agreement related to India with US 
and France, other countries and now Canada, relates to an issue 
of another fuel which is related to uranium, which is called 
thorium. And some people call thorium the superfuel because 
it’s sort of uranium plus plus, if you’re going to put it that way. 
But the technology and the research have not developed to the 
full extent to use that. And one of the concerns from the 
countries that have much invested in uranium as a fuel — which 
includes US, Canada, France, Germany — is that this thorium 
would be used and replace uranium. 
 
One of the interesting factors for India is that they have 25 per 
cent of the world’s thorium in their country. And they talk 
about how on some of the beaches on the coasts of India, they 
have enough thorium in the beach sands to basically fuel the 
electrical needs of the city of Mumbai for a year in just in small 
amounts. So we’ve got an interesting issue, interesting point 
raised here. 
 
Now what we know in Saskatchewan is that the development of 
uranium as a product has been important for our economy and 
will continue to be important. One of the most important factors 
from my years here in politics relates to Mr. Keith Goulet and 
his work in negotiating the various surface agreements that 
would make sure that northern people would get jobs in this 
industry. And that model that was developed in Saskatchewan, 



7068 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2015 

in northern Saskatchewan has been used worldwide in the 
development of resources around the world. 
 
And so what we know is that uranium industry continues to be 
an important part of Saskatchewan’s economy. And we want to 
make sure we do it in a measured way, that we do it by looking 
at both the positive parts and the negative parts and making sure 
that we provide some of the long-term protections that are 
necessary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this motion also refers to making sure that we go 
into other similar trade and export opportunities. I would 
encourage the Premier to look at how we can export grain. 
We’ve got a lot of issues around how we get our grain to 
market. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, 
and I’m very happy to join in the debate on this motion that we 
support the historic uranium energy agreement between 
Cameco and the Department of Atomic Energy of India. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just hot off the news is Cameco is going to be 
increasing its capital expenditures here from 370 million to 405 
million. Mr. Speaker, this is great news for Saskatchewan, for 
all the people who work within the uranium mines. And 
actually there’s quite a few of them right from my constituency 
in Carrot River Valley that go there and work in the mines. It’s 
a wonderful thing to see, Mr. Speaker. And we have to give, we 
have to give credit to our Premier, to this government, and to 
the federal government for going along with this, for pushing 
forward to get this agreement signed with India. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to back up a little bit and start talking 
about some of the things that we’ve been exporting to India. Of 
course me being from an agricultural end, we have exported 
chick peas, peas, all sorts of things to India. And this has been 
great. One of the reasons these things are happening is that this 
government on this side of the House actually believes in trade 
missions, on going to India. 
 
Now that is in stark contrast, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of the 
previous administration who didn’t believe in trade missions 
over to India, who didn’t believe that we should help move 
Saskatchewan forward, actually didn’t believe we should have 
this strong economy in Saskatchewan. Fact is when you go to 
that side of the House, their federal cousins actually don’t like 
seeing Western Canada being in the strong economic position 
because it kept on calling Western Canada having Dutch 
disease, Mr. Speaker. And I wonder if that side of the House 
goes along with their federal cousins on that. 
 
You know, even though, even though Mr. Mulcair comes from 
Quebec, which gets anywhere from 40 to 50 per cent of the 
equalization which Western Canada supplies, for some reason 
he doesn’t want to see that. He wants to see us all just down, 
down, down. So consequently, you know, Mr. Speaker, we 
really have to question just exactly how much they actually do 
support this. And I’m really hoping that they’ll support this 
motion, Mr. Speaker, and they will reaffirm their position that 
they’re very happy to see the uranium mining. 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, there should be some people who are actually 
jumping for joy in this. And we hear the member from 
Cumberland every day bringing up his petition for housing and 
talking about housing in northern Saskatchewan. Well take a 
look at this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Forty-seven per cent of the 
people in the North actually work in the uranium mines or 47 
per cent of the workers work there, and another 40 per cent of 
them are Aboriginal. Now I would think that the member from 
Cumberland would be absolutely ecstatic to see agreements like 
this come forward and would praise this government for 
working hard to get a deal such as this made because this is 
putting money into the jeans of the people of the North, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
When you start looking at that and you start looking at the 
strong position that Saskatchewan is having in Canada, you 
know, Saskatchewan has become the place to be because we 
have jobs. We have people coming here to work in the mines. 
We have people coming here to work in agriculture, Mr. 
Speaker. You know, this is how come we can actually . . . we 
are so diversified we can go down that road of having the oil 
prices go down but yet still provide a very high quality of life to 
the people within Saskatchewan. 
 
And let me get this straight, Mr. Speaker. This is not 
government money. This is the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan’s money. And when they’ve got more money in 
their jeans, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re going to spend more 
money here. And these are great-paying jobs. The member from 
Athabasca and the member from Cumberland should be 
absolutely, absolutely ecstatic and jumping up and down for joy 
for something like this being signed because this really puts 
them on the map. 
 
These are long-term agreements that, Mr. Speaker, will help 
provide power for India and it also, when you improve their 
lifestyle over there, it all works in. And what’s going to happen 
is they’re going to want to get more grain, more foodstuffs from 
Canada because, you know, they got close to 1 billion people 
and some of them were living in some pretty primitive 
conditions. And if they can supply them with more electricity, 
Mr. Speaker, so be it. Those people are going to want to eat 
better food and have a better quality of life coming straight 
from Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, also there is that point about royalties. You 
know we, of course, the government gets the money on 
royalties. These are things that the opposition should be very 
happy with too because what this does is . . . They talk about 
their social standards and everything else. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
what you have to do is you have to have a strong, strong 
economy. If you are going to supply hospitals for people, if 
you’re going to supply schools for people, if you’re going to 
supply roads for people and a high quality of life for people, 
you have to have a strong economy. 
 
This government’s plan for growth works on that strong 
economy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and having this agreement is 
one of the things that will help with Saskatchewan’s growth. 
And there again I go back to the point that this government, this 
government on this side of the House believes that that’s why 
these trade missions are so very, very important to all of the 
people of Saskatchewan, to help Saskatchewan move forward. 



April 30, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7069 

Mr. Speaker, you take a look at Saskatchewan with its uranium. 
You know, we’ve got basically 100 per cent of all the uranium 
in Canada is being mined right within Saskatchewan. This is a 
great thing in the province, but it’s also kind of unique because 
of our geography. And you know, we did have a chance at one 
time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of actually adding enrichment to 
Saskatchewan, but it seems to me that it was under the former 
administration that they really didn’t want that. So that 
enrichment ended up going out to Ontario. Those were jobs that 
we could have had in Saskatchewan, and that’s why this 
government that we have here now is different. 
 
We believe in jobs, prosperity for the whole, for all of the 
province. And that also turns around, Mr. Speaker, and makes 
Canada move forward in the world. Mr. Speaker, would you 
take a look at some of the things that have happened in this 
province in the past seven and a half years, or basically since 
2007, and it’s not all due to us being as government, Mr. 
Speaker. You know what? It kind of started a little bit before. 
But I think what happened was that when companies started 
looking at the government that was coming in, when they 
started looking that the Saskatchewan Party was going to end 
up being in power in Saskatchewan, they saw a government that 
was more business friendly, a government that did not want to 
sit there and take over mines, did not want to sit there and run 
everything such as a Canadian Wheat Board. They were 
looking at a government that wanted to give people choice, 
freedom to work, and to be able to find those jobs within this 
great province of ours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is in stark contrast to the 16 years of basically 
ineptitude we had when hospitals were closing, when schools 
were closing, and when we used to give our kids as a graduation 
present a suitcase so they could go to another province to work. 
Mr. Speaker, this is something, this is something that 
Saskatchewan needs. This is something that Saskatchewan 
enjoys, and I’m proud of our government to be able to help, to 
be able to help facilitate the movement of this forward. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[11:30] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to stand in my place to basically respond to the 
75-minute debate in which we are speaking about the value of 
the uranium industry in northern Saskatchewan and throughout 
the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to focus my comments not necessarily on the great work 
that Cameco is doing and certainly the notion that we want to 
see the mining activity continue in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s great opportunities in the northern part of 
Saskatchewan. As I often tell my constituents, northern 
Saskatchewan is rich. We have an abundance of fresh water, a 
beautiful landscape, and now we see all the resources that are in 
our backyards, Mr. Speaker. And we always know in northern 
Saskatchewan that the future of the province really is dependent 
on making sure that the North continues being vibrant and 
making sure that the North continues building forward for such 
activities like mining, forestry, tourism, and the list goes on 

and on. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to . . . I notice the debate was on the 
merits of the mining sector. Cameco has done a great, 
phenomenal job in terms of creating opportunity for many 
northern Saskatchewan communities and families. We want to 
continue that particular work and the relationship with Cameco 
is certainly, myself as an elected leader from northern 
Saskatchewan, we have always had a lot of time for Cameco 
and we continue pressing them to continue on with the 
employment effort that is necessary for many of our 
communities and certainly try and maximize contracting for 
many of our northern-based communities, Mr. Speaker, and we 
will continue that type of work. 
 
But what I want to premise my discussion on, Mr. Speaker, is 
what this government is not doing to facilitate some of the work 
that Cameco is trying to do in the northern part of our province, 
Mr. Speaker. And I’ll give you some of the examples. What 
people in northern Saskatchewan see is they see a lot of these 
mining companies and forestry companies that are creating 
opportunities in the North, that they’re hauling a lot of their 
resources out of the North on really poor roads, Mr. Speaker. 
That is a contrasting picture that I want to draw for the people 
that may be listening to this debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because what the northern people are saying is basically a 
couple of really and solid important points. Number one is they 
want to see opportunity for their young people. So they 
obviously want to see continued employment and continued 
nourishment of their families to having a really good attitude, 
providing the means to support their family. I think everybody 
certainly wants to see that objective achieved for their family. 
So northern people know the importance of having good jobs. 
Northern people know the importance of having young families 
strengthened, and the list goes on as to a lot of the great 
comments that they make. 
 
So the second thing that they also want to point out is that yes, 
it’s important to attract investment. Yes, it’s important to 
continue supporting companies like Cameco and yes, absolutely 
the North is part of the province, and we should all do our part 
to strengthen our economy and strengthen our community 
overall. Those are statements I think many northern people have 
made time and time again. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what they have seen is not so much the 
failing of any company in particular, Mr. Speaker, but the 
failings of the provincial government. And I’ll give you a good 
classic example, a couple of good classic examples that many 
northern people have said. And this is some of the points that 
they had made to me on numerous occasions where they have 
said, if you cannot leave some of the opportunity in the North to 
make sure that we have decent highways, good housing for our 
families, Mr. Speaker, great opportunity to train our young 
people, and to really nourish northern communities to the extent 
that they should be nourished so they’re allowed to grow and be 
strong, Mr. Speaker, then what they should not be doing is 
hauling out the resources at the rate they are and yet still being 
critical of northern people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That is one of the underlying messages that I hear on a 
continual basis as a northern MLA. And I say shame on the 



7070 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2015 

government for failing to deliver on some issues that have been 
paramount to some of the success in the North for companies 
like Cameco, to ensure that the public know that when you see 
their resources being taken out of their backyards that there 
really is some benefit for the community, Mr. Speaker. And the 
large number of communities out there really haven’t seen 
evidence of that from this particular government. 
 
A couple of points I would make, Mr. Speaker, is that you look 
at our highway system in northern Saskatchewan, There has 
been very little effort made, being made to improve highways in 
northern Saskatchewan. And I asked the Minister of Highways 
that particular question during estimates and, Mr. Speaker, she 
said, we’ve increased the budget for the North. Okay. What 
particular highways are you fixing up in northern 
Saskatchewan? And, Mr. Speaker, there was a mute silence 
certainly from the Sask Party benches during that discussion, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what we found out, the Premier made a reference to a road 
being built in the North. There’s a new road going up in 
northern Saskatchewan, is what he yelled across to me one 
afternoon. So I asked him, which road? Because it was 
confusing me. We didn’t hear any announcement, any 
comments at all, Mr. Speaker. And the road that the minister 
was referring to, or the Premier was referring to, was a road 
connecting the two northern mines, Mr. Speaker. And I believe 
that was an investment made by Cameco themselves, or by the 
mining companies themselves, Mr. Speaker. It is not an extra 
effort being made by the provincial government. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as you look at what the province has failed 
to deliver in northern Saskatchewan when it comes to roads, 
Mr. Speaker, they have cancelled the Wollaston road project, 
Mr. Speaker. They have put no money into roads in northern 
Saskatchewan at all, and yet they talk at great lengths, Mr. 
Speaker, about how they’re doing all these wonderful things for 
the province. But they forgot about the North, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In northern Saskatchewan as you travel some of the northern 
communities, whether it’s the Patuanak or English River First 
Nation highway, whether it’s the Turnor Lake road, the Pelican 
Narrows main highway, Mr. Speaker, we have seen no effort 
and no progress by this government to fix our northern roads. 
Because many people suffer travelling down those roads and 
there’s great risk and safety concerns from many people that are 
coming south, travelling on roads that are in very poor shape, 
that are in disrepair, and people are getting angrier and angrier 
as each kilometre is travelled, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because all this government is doing is taking the resources out 
of the North and putting nothing back in. And that’s exactly 
what frustrates a lot of people in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s a lot of people out there that are angry about 
it. 
 
And the other issue that’s really concerning, Mr. Speaker, about 
a lot of the issues in northern Saskatchewan — I went through 
the example — is housing, one of the points that I find that I get 
really angry about when you look at northern development as a 
whole, Mr. Speaker, and what this government is doing. And 
this is a really classic example of how they’re hurting northern 
families. We have people in the North that have rented houses 

off the government for years. They have rented houses off the 
government for years. And when the NDP were in power, we 
gave these working families the opportunity to own their own 
home. So we sold them those houses, Mr. Speaker, and many 
families thrived under the opportunity to own their own home. 
What did this government do, Mr. Speaker, when they got into 
office? They cancelled that program. 
 
So working people that go to work at Key Lake or at any of the 
other mines — McArthur mine, Mr. Speaker — what happens 
now when they own and rent a . . . when they’re renting a 
government house, Mr. Speaker? They were told that you don’t 
have the opportunity to buy that house off the government 
anymore because you’re making too much money. That was the 
argument made by the Minister of Housing, Mr. Speaker. Why 
didn’t they have the decency to afford the opportunity to that 
family to buy that house off the government so these families 
could become more financially stable and more independent? 
 
And you look at some of the issues around training, Mr. 
Speaker, around training where they have refused to work 
closely with many of the communities in the North to try and 
provide opportunity for these families when it comes to work 
and the enjoyment of employment, Mr. Speaker. They have 
taken that away. 
 
So my point being is that as we sit here in the Assembly and 
discuss the future development of the North, northerners want 
to see the North develop. They want to work with companies 
like Cameco, Areva, and the list goes on. They have embraced 
the role that these mining companies have made in the North 
and they have made some significant strides. But what you have 
as the result of this government’s poorly placed priorities is 
they have working people being forced out of their homes, 
working people being forced out of their homes. Why? Because 
they got a job. That’s why they’re being forced out of their 
homes. 
 
And you see some of the people travelling on the very bad 
highways throughout northern Saskatchewan. This government 
has not invested in northern highways and again, Mr. Speaker, 
that really upsets a lot of people in the North. Training 
opportunities — the list goes on. So while the companies have 
done wonderful to develop opportunities, this government has 
failed to deliver and that’s why many northerners get so upset 
when they see all the resources being hauled out of the North 
and none of the benefit stays. 
 
So my final message is that if they do not want to deliver, the 
provincial government does not want to deliver based on the 
resources they’re taking out of the North, leave our resources in 
the North. We’ll make a deal with the company and we’ll 
develop a better life for ourselves as opposed to waiting for the 
Sask Party government to deliver on any front, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I wanted to ask for leave to 
introduce guests that are here today. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
asked for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 



April 30, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7071 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to introduce a great bunch of students, grade 11 
students. There are 15 grade 11 students from the northern 
community of Pinehouse. And a lot of people like to refer to our 
northern communities as villages. Mr. Speaker, Pinehouse is not 
a village. It’s a really burgeoning, bustling community. 
 
And they’re accompanied today by a couple of great 
chaperones, Catherine Currie and Joe Durocher. And they 
brought these kids down, these students down, and I really want 
to thank the chaperones for making this trip. And, Mr. Speaker, 
they are from the Minahik Waskahigan High School, which is 
of course the translation in Cree for Pinehouse. And I want to 
thank them all for making the effort to come here, and to point 
out that it’s a long ways to get to Regina. 
 
And I’m always very pleased to see students from the North 
learn how the Assembly works and, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be 
meeting with the students. And I want to point out in my final 
comment is that, welcome to your Assembly. This is your 
House. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
So thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I too 
would like to ask leave to introduce school groups. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member asked for leave to join 
in the introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Thank you very much to Catherine and Joe for bringing their 
students here today. We’ve got 15 grade 11 students from 
Pinehouse Lake. And I’m going to do a special shout-out to 
Chad McCallum. Chad, give me a wave . . . Chad’s family, so 
we want to kind of acknowledge that he’s here. 
 
So they’ve had a very busy day, and tomorrow they will also be 
busy. They went to the U of R [University of Regina]. They 
toured the U of R. Then they’re going to the RCMP [Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police] Heritage Centre. They came here. 
They’re touring their Legislative Building. Then — I know this 
is probably going to be the best part of all — we’re having a 
pizza party at Boston Pizza on Rochdale Avenue. Yes, what can 
I say? Boston Pizza has been very kind. Larry Aitken, the 
general manager, and Darcy, the manager of the restaurant, are 
helping to provide an all-you-can-eat pizza party. I know the 
students are really going to enjoy that. My husband, Terry, and 

I are going to be joining them for that. And then tomorrow 
they’re off to Moose Jaw to tour the Saskatchewan Polytechnic. 
 
So these students have come here; they’ve got a full couple of 
days. And I welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melfort. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Uranium Energy Agreement 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Before I 
begin with my remarks, I would also like to welcome the 
Pinehouse students to the Assembly. Pinehouse is one of the 
communities that signed an agreement, a $600 million 
agreement with Cameco, and has been one of the communities 
that had benefited from our discussion here today. 
Unfortunately the member from Athabasca missed that in his 
remarks. 
 
[11:45] 
 
But first and foremost, when we’re talking about this sale, 
we’re talking about 7.1 million pounds of uranium, and it’s very 
good for northern Saskatchewan. It’s very good for all of 
Saskatchewan, but especially northern Saskatchewan. This will 
bring in some $350 million into the Saskatchewan economy 
over a five-year period. And probably, before I get too far into 
it, I would like to thank the Prime Minister and the Government 
of Canada for their efforts in bringing this sales agreement into 
a reality. And I would also like to note that our Premier has 
built a relationship in India, in the Philippines, in China, and 
actually around the world. 
 
You see, the Premier believes, in fact on this side of the House 
we all believe that Saskatchewan is now taking its rightful place 
as an economic superpower. Saskatchewan has what the world 
wants, and we have what the world needs. In fact at a potash 
reception last night, the speaker mentioned that this morning 7.1 
billion people will eat today because . . . thanks in part to 
Saskatchewan potash — 7.1 billion people. We are a 
world-class supplier of food, food products, known for our 
grain which the Premier calls “the rock star of our economy.” 
 
We have an ever-growing manufacturing sector that seems to be 
setting records each and every month. And we have fuel. We 
have the second-largest reserves of oil in an oil-rich country. 
We also have huge reserves of uranium, the richest uranium in 
the world, and the topic of today’s debate. 
 
The sale is important for what it is. It’s important for northern 
employment, secondary industry — usually Aboriginal-ran — 
and royalties for all of Saskatchewan. More importantly this 
agreement is important for what it could be in Saskatchewan’s 
future. India has 21 nuclear reactors online today, and they have 
another six nuclear reactors currently under construction. But 
today only 3 per cent of the electricity generated in India is 
generated by nuclear. Their long-term plans, or mid- to 
long-term plans, will increase that up to 25 per cent of their 
power by 2050. This is our first sale to the world’s 



7072 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2015 

second-fastest economy, and represents just a small fraction of 
what India uses in their year-to-year consumption today. 
 
But when you think about this sevenfold increase, when you 
think about going from 3 per cent to 25 per cent, when you 
think about the 400 million people who live in India that have 
not got power today, you can see what kind of opportunity in 
the future for Saskatchewan’s North is much, much brighter 
because of this sales agreements. 
 
The company making this agreement, making this sale is 
Cameco, of course. Cameco has a long history of working with 
the people and the communities of northern Saskatchewan. It 
has 3,600 employees; 47 per cent of those employees are from 
the North, and 40 per cent are Aboriginal. This company is one 
of the foundation of the economy of the North. We have seen 
community agreements, as I spoke to just a minute ago, with 
Pinehouse and other communities that runs into the hundreds of 
millions of dollars. The company flies in their workforce from 
13 different communities across the North, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. As well, they work with many, many Aboriginal 
suppliers. In short, this is a very, very good deal for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So where does the opposition stand on this? I hear we support 
it. I heard that today. Today they support it. Mr. Google and I 
went for a walk last night. We walked through the Internet, and 
I put in “Cameco uranium sale to India,” and I put in the Leader 
of the Opposition’s name. And you know what came up, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? Nothing. Nothing came up. He had nothing to 
say on it. 
 
Maybe that’s to be expected because here’s a Member of the 
Legislative Assembly that spoke in this room 51 times about a 
new school and couldn’t even be bothered to show up at the 
announcement for that school. You know, maybe he was too 
busy to attend. You see, with them it’s not about Saskatchewan. 
It’s all about politics. 
 
Both the MLAs from northern Saskatchewan are from the NDP 
Party. But in spite of that, this government works very, very 
hard to get the economy of Saskatchewan and northern 
Saskatchewan working. And we all know, at least I think we all 
know and the member from Athabasca just said he knows that 
this sale is good for the North with a company that has always 
been a friend to the North. This is what the member of 
Athabasca has to say about the, up until today, about this sale. 
He has said, and I quote . . . End of quote. 
 
So that leaves the member from Cumberland, the member who 
is being challenged by a young, well-known, and well-liked 
mayor from La Ronge. What did he have to say about this 
outstanding opportunity? And I don’t know if I can use the 
same one twice so he had nothing to say about this. In fact, he’s 
not even in the House. He wasn’t in the House. I’m just trying 
to get out of this because I know I just crossed a line. With 
apology, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I did notice they both had much to say and in fairness, they both 
had a lot to say about Cameco before 2007. They spoke very, 
very highly of this company because it’s always been good for 
Saskatchewan. And prior to 2007 what was good for 
Saskatchewan was good for the NDP. But that has changed 

now. It’s changed because what is good for Saskatchewan, they 
feel somehow, is bad for the NDP. 
 
You see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, once again, it’s all about politics. 
In fact, all three MLAs voted against a long-term care home in 
La Ronge, against the expansion of Northlands College, against 
expanded education, job training, family services. Everything 
for the northern constituency, they voted against because what 
is good for Saskatchewan is somehow bad for them. 
 
And what is a really strange thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that 
they have not brought one solid proposal, policy, program into 
this Legislative Assembly to try to suggest something that 
works better. You know, maybe they’re afraid that the 
government are going to steal their ideas. Well we’ve seen what 
their ideas do to Saskatchewan, and we don’t want any of them. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in wrapping up . . . I get some heckling 
from the member from Athabasca, and maybe I’ve been a little 
tough on him because he was quiet. We saw a couple days ago 
in committees what happens when he’s not quiet, so there’s 
good reason why he’s quiet at times. And he seems to be quiet 
only when he’s in front of his own people. In this type of 
situation he always has lots to say. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this agreement is very, very good for the 
people of Saskatchewan. It’s very, very good for all of us, 
especially the North, and I will be supporting this motion today. 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s in fact my 
pleasure to enter debate here this afternoon or discussion this 
afternoon as it relates to the new agreement, sales agreement 
with India, certainly an important agreement to industry in our 
province, here in Saskatchewan. And the other part of the 
motion is urging continued action towards similar trade and 
export opportunities for Saskatchewan companies across the 
globe, and that’s critically important work that this government 
needs to be focusing on. They also need to be focusing on 
making sure we have a transportation system that will allow 
those exports to actually get to market, Mr. Speaker, 
recognizing the broken system on that front. 
 
But I’m pleased to enter in and discuss a few different aspects 
here today. Certainly our relationship with India is a very 
important one, both to Saskatchewan and to Canada. You know, 
India is Canada’s largest trading partner, and that’s a critical 
relationship, and we see this as expansion of that relationship. If 
you think of India, this is, you know, the world’s largest 
democracy, a growing economy, a growing population, and 
certainly a country for which a relationship is critically 
important to Canada and to Saskatchewan. It was important for 
Prime Minister Modi to visit Canada and to be a part of 
building that relationship and hopefully strengthening that 
relationship as we move forward. We know that’s an important 
trade relationship. 
 
We know it’s important for a host of other reasons as well. We 
know that those individuals that are of Indian extraction are no 
small part of being big contributors to building and shaping the 



April 30, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7073 

province that we so love here in Saskatchewan, in all facets, 
from business through to all aspects of our economy and civil 
society and academia and health care, Mr. Speaker. So we have 
a very important relationship with India. 
 
Certainly when we talk about the uranium industry and those 
companies here in Saskatchewan, this is an important industry 
to this province, has been for many years, Mr. Speaker, and 
should be for years moving forward. Certainly government 
plays an important role on deals like this, and with that industry 
specifically, to ensure the important and needed and necessary 
oversight, Mr. Speaker, the regulation that needs to be set, and 
making sure that government is providing the management that 
it must. But certainly this industry and the companies engaged 
in this industry here in Saskatchewan are very important to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I think of the presence they have in northern Saskatchewan. It’s 
a very important one. I think of, they have of course many 
different operations. I’ve had the chance to go up and tour some 
of those operations. It’s certainly exciting this year to see Cigar 
Lake coming back online, of course lots of investment that’s 
been made, lots of employment that’s provided through places 
like Key Lake, through McArthur River, through McClean 
Lake, through Rabbit Lake, Mr. Speaker. And these are 
investments in jobs that are important to an entire province but 
certainly to the North. 
 
When you look at the uranium industry in Saskatchewan, we 
know that it’s about 5,000 jobs, Mr. Speaker. That’s critical in a 
region for which governments need to be focused on, quite 
frankly, measures that will improve strengthened employment 
aspects throughout the North, greater opportunities. Those 
5,000 jobs are critically important. I know that workforce I 
understand also is 45 per cent Aboriginal, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
really an important statistic, but it’s more than a statistic, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s lived out in the lives of communities throughout 
the North. It’s lived out in the lives of families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I often think of a gentleman that I ran into once on the Sturgeon 
Weir River, Mr. Speaker. We were well off the highway, well 
off the beaten path, and we were on a little tributary lake that 
was off the Sturgeon Weir River. We were navigating our way 
with our canoes and came around into a little lake that was 
beautiful, copper in colour. The walleye were biting. It was a 
fabulous spot. And there was some smoke coming up from the 
island up around the way, Mr. Speaker. As we made our way up 
around, as a group, we recognized that there was a moose that 
was strung out across a fairly elaborate drying and smoking 
rack, Mr. Speaker, and a family that was at play in the water 
and catching fish, and had a wonderful time to chat that day. 
 
I still remember the name of the individual, the dad of the 
family. His name was Simon. He lived in Pelican Narrows, and 
he had long been employed in the uranium industry. And he 
said to me that it’s just the best of a couple worlds from his 
perspective because he’s allowed and able to have meaningful 
employment up in the North. He’s able to remain within his 
community in Pelican Narrows. He’s able to provide for his 
family, a family that you could see the strength within as they 
played on the rocks in this beautiful island up on the Sturgeon 
Weir, a tributary lake up on the Sturgeon Weir River, Mr. 
Speaker. He said that he had a chance he’d go in for I believe a 

week. I think this changes from time to time, going for a week 
and then would be out for a period of time, which allowed him 
to really connect again with the land and as well his family. 
 
[12:00] 
 
I thought that was just a telling example of the meaningful 
example that goes beyond the statistics that we share, which are 
also important. A $350 million trade agreement is important. 
The 5,000 jobs that are in place, those are important. But it’s 
important for us to represent and understand what that means in 
the lives of families through the North, what this industry 
means for the province as well. 
 
As we move forward, I know that there are concerns around the 
industry and making sure that the oversight’s in place to track 
and make sure that uranium is used for all of its productive 
purposes, Mr. Speaker. That’s important, and it’s an important 
consideration of a government, and it’s one to follow up on. 
 
Certainly our healthy, strong relationship with India as well, 
and this agreement, should allow us to have thoughtful 
discussions moving forward about non-proliferation treaties and 
being able to advance the security and stability of our world but 
also the security and stability of that industry here in 
Saskatchewan. Certainly it’s important from a perspective of 
global peace, but certainly it’s also important from a 
perspective of stability and security to an important industry 
here in Saskatchewan, to the returns that are delivered to the 
province of Saskatchewan, and the returns that are delivered in 
the lives of many families all through northern Saskatchewan, 
people like Simon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now government has a job to do though, Mr. Speaker. Those 
companies do a good job. This industry’s important. The 
workers are world class, Mr. Speaker, but government has to do 
a better job when it comes to the North of delivering the 
benefits back to northern communities. And when I see matters 
of the inequity and lack of fairness with the funding for 
on-reserve schools, Mr. Speaker, 60 per cent of what a 
provincial school is funded at, that’s an injustice that not a 
single one of us should stand by, Mr. Speaker. Now that’s not a 
critique of this industry in any way. This is a critique of 
government and an industry that’s in the North and in ways that 
we can better support the North. 
 
We regularly hear of the road conditions and some of the social 
conditions that aren’t being addressed by government, by the 
member from Athabasca and the member from Cumberland, 
and we know them as well when we tour and meet with leaders 
throughout the North, Mr. Speaker. And it’s fair to say that on 
too many important files, to the people of northern 
Saskatchewan, this government is an absent and negligent 
partner, Mr. Speaker. And so when it comes to delivering for 
northerners, Mr. Speaker, we should expect a lot more from this 
government, and that’s of course critically important in the life 
of all those communities as well. 
 
But as it relates to this agreement, certainly it’s an expansion of 
or a new agreement that’s important to an important industry in 
our province. I would urge government to take on some 
leadership and not sit idle on the transportation system and its 
failures in Saskatchewan because for our export-driven 



7074 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2015 

economy and for us to be all we can be, Mr. Speaker, we need 
to be able to get our product to market. And I’d urge 
government to make this an urgent priority for building the 
future of Saskatchewan for people like Simon and his kids, Mr. 
Speaker, and for all of us all across Saskatchewan. It’s been my 
pleasure to enter in debate here this afternoon. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Time for debate has expired. 
Questions. I recognize the member from Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My question 
is for the member from Prince Albert Northcote. One of the 
important factors for Saskatchewan as a province and our 
economy is that we have good access to the North to make sure 
that our businesses can provide the supplies that are needed in 
the mining industry, the mining industry related to uranium. 
Can the member from Prince Albert Northcote tell me what her 
position is on the building of another bridge in Prince Albert 
which will actually deal with this specific question and make 
sure that the uranium mining industry isn’t caught in a jam 
when something happens with the existing bridge? Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Jurgens: — Thank you for the question. As the member 
well knows, there was a very public announcement for our 
commitment to building that second bridge. We have created, 
we continue to create partnerships, and we are willing to partner 
with the federal government and with the city of Prince Albert 
to get that second bridge done. We’ll see what happens with 
that. Our commitment stands. We’ll see what happens with the 
city. 
 
The other thing that I’d like to point out is when the members 
opposite had the power of the province in their hands and the 
Diefenbaker bridge needed repairs, they said, it’s not our 
responsibility; make the city pay for it all by themselves. Well, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minute our bridge needed repairs, we 
put $4.2 million into bringing it back to standard. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Lloydminster. 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 2013 
our government introduced a new uranium royalty structure that 
attracts new investment in uranium mines along with increases 
in jobs for First Nations people in the North. The then Finance 
critic and now Leader of the Opposition would not take any 
position on this royalty structure. Mr. Speaker, I guess that’s no 
surprise to us as, after over two years of being the party leader, 
he hasn’t yet presented a policy document to stand on anything. 
So, Mr. Speaker, as we have yet to see any policies from the 
NDP, will the member from Regina Rosemont tell the people of 
Saskatchewan whether or not their election platform will 
include a royalty review of uranium? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, I 
know sometimes members and maybe new members get caught 
up in the politics of this place, but the fact of the matter is that 

from CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] 
governments all the way through New Democratic Party 
governments and forward, if you look at basically the timeline 
of resource development and specifically uranium development 
in Saskatchewan, it’s been under a success of CCF-NDP 
[Co-operative Commonwealth Federation-New Democratic 
Party] governments, Mr. Speaker — established in 1952, a 
significant expansion and new mines brought on through 1975, 
the Blakeney government playing a very direct role. We 
continue to maintain an important relationship with those 
companies, and we need to make sure there’s stability for that 
industry, Mr. Speaker, because as I’ve said in my speech, this is 
an industry that’s so critical to the future of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well of course the royalties themselves, members should know, 
are not actually disclosed because of commercial sensitivity, so 
it’s awfully difficult to engage in some of the technical 
discussion here, Mr. Speaker. But what I can assure is we will 
ensure stability and a no-surprises . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the 
member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the member 
from Melfort, Tisdale. I’m going to ask him the question around 
home ownership. Seventy-three, 74 per cent of the people of 
Saskatchewan enjoy the opportunity to own their own home. 
Yes, it’s two mortgages and obviously they have to pay down 
that mortgage. With the northern people that possibility is even 
harder to achieve for them. 
 
Recent changes made by the Ministry of Housing that is 
actually kicking out working families that work at some of 
these uranium mines. Many of these working families that work 
at these uranium mines are now forced to pay rent for the rest of 
their lives with the option of home ownership being taken away 
by the Sask Party government’s change of policy around home 
ownership. 
 
To the member from Melfort: do you think that working people 
in northern Saskatchewan should have the opportunity to own 
their own home in northern Saskatchewan like they do all 
throughout the province with the rate as high as 74 per cent? Do 
you believe that they have a right to own their own home in . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Time has expired for the question. I’d 
like to remind members to put their questions through the Chair. 
I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, in answer to the 
question, yes, I believe that. And in most cases in northern 
Saskatchewan, people have the opportunity. Now to understand 
this directly is that there are places where they don’t have the 
opportunity to own their own houses because they will be 
on-reserve property and reserve property is community owned 
or reserve owned, and therefore they cannot own their houses 
there. Now that’s being moved along, but a quick and dirty 
answer to that is yes. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Doke: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, former NDP Premier Lorne 



April 30, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7075 

Calvert shocked the international uranium world when he 
flippantly called nuclear power “the dirtiest form of energy.” 
Yet the current NDP leader said on March 13th, 2013 that “I 
support uranium mining and exporting is obviously part of 
mining.” It seems pretty confusing to me, Mr. Speaker, that one 
minute the NDP can insult the whole uranium industry and the 
next minute the member opposite is putting his whole support 
behind them. Mr. Speaker, will the member from Athabasca say 
once and for all if the NDP supports or does not support the 
mining and exporting of uranium? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, every single NDP premier has 
supported uranium development in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Every single NDP premier will 
continue to support uranium mining in northern Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what’s really apparent, Mr. Speaker, is obviously that 
when this whole deal was announced, Mr. Speaker, when this 
whole deal was announced in Ottawa, guess who was not 
quoted but was waving his arms up and down frantically trying 
to gain attention. In all the press releases from the federal 
government, our own Premier was not quoted in any of the 
press releases that were announced, but he was there waving his 
hands to make sure that he was part of the parade. So, Mr. 
Speaker, the bottom line is that every premier in the province of 
Saskatchewan with NDP roots has and will continue supporting 
development of Saskatchewan’s North. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we hear regularly about 
the grain in bins that can’t get to market of producers across 
Saskatchewan. We know of the broken transportation system 
that this government’s presiding over, and we recognize their 
failure to take this serious and show some leadership. This is 
critically important to an export-driven province and the future 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
My question to the member from Melfort: what is he proposing 
by way of leadership to fix the broken transportation system in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We kind of 
jumped from the uranium sector to the farming sector. And I 
always think when the opposition brings up farming and 
farmers, knowing that those people will sleep so much better 
tonight knowing that the NDP are on their side. 
 
But you know, you’re looking at different options. You’re 
looking at federally regulated, but putting pressure on the 
systems, looking at further systems that may add to the south, 
taking some of the pressure off by using oil or pipelines that are 
actually being opposed in most cases by the federal NDP. So 
yes. 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As we all 
know, the members opposite have a very close relationship with 
the Council of Canadians. In fact, recently they met with their 
national chairperson, Maude Barlow. Last week the Council of 
Canadians came out with a news release to show their support 
for the Declaration of the World Uranium Symposium which, 
and I quote, “calls on all nations to put an end to the mining and 
use of uranium.” 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, being that most of the jobs in this sector, 
in the uranium mining sector are from the North, does the 
member from Athabasca actually support the views of the 
Council of Canadians? And in their recent meeting with Maude 
Barlow, did he stand up for Saskatchewan and the development 
of uranium, Mr. Deputy Speaker? That’s a yes or no. Yes or no? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca, but unfortunately time has expired. 
 
[12:15] 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 609 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Ms. Chartier that Bill No. 609 — The 
Residents-in-Care Bill of Rights Act be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a pleasure to rise in this House today and enter into the 
debate on this very important bill, Bill No. 609, An Act 
respecting the Rights of Residents in Special Care Facilities 
and Personal Care Homes. And I truly wish and I hope that at 
some point we can have a vote on this. 
 
This is something that when you think about seniors and how 
much they’ve contributed to this province, and the fact that it’s 
wholly unfortunate that the situation we find now in terms of 
long-term care . . . And it is a good thing that the Ombudsman 
is doing her investigation into long-term care because you know 
for sure it’s something that we need to understand more fully. 
 
But a good first step, a very good first step would be to pass Bill 
609. It would be a signal, a powerful signal to the people of this 
province that we value our seniors and those who are living in 
personal care homes and special care facilities, that they are 
valued and they have respect and they have dignity. And by us 
not passing this, the message is murky at best. 
 
And obviously, especially when this government on their side, 
and they get their spin doctors working and we know that, we 



7076 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2015 

see this continually day after day in the House where they can 
really make a . . . It’s amazing what they can say is . . . 
[inaudible] . . . I guess the word is, the phrase is often silk out of 
a sow’s ear, you know. And I really am worried why these folks 
cannot get behind this. You know, we have had opportunities 
where it just is common sense for us to work together, and 
we’ve seen good rules, good laws made when we both 
understand fully and completely that this is the right thing to do. 
This is the right thing to do. 
 
But these folks are digging their heels in, digging a hole, saying 
that everything’s okay, that the situations that have come 
forward are just one-offs. And truly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
doesn’t seem to be the case at all. And so this Act really makes 
a lot of sense, and I want to congratulate my colleague from 
Saskatoon Riversdale for bringing this forward because I think 
it’s one that we should fully consider and get into committee 
and get it back here and pass it before the end of session. We 
just have a couple of weeks to go. So I am very happy to rise in 
the House to speak. 
 
But you know, we have a government that has put its blinders 
on, put its blinders on and they’re ramming through situations 
where they know . . . And they know. They’ve had their 
information. They’ve had their special reports about the 
situation in personal care homes and special care facilities, and 
they should be, they should be more reflective of what they’re 
hearing, of what they’re hearing, what people are telling them 
about the concerns that are happening. And while we get the 
numbers trotted out . . . And this government is really famous 
for the numbers. They just keep popping them out. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, the reality is that they are the 
government. They have a responsibility, and they have to accept 
that. And they have to understand that it’s just not the reality of 
what’s happening on their front lines, what’s happening in our 
special care facilities and our personal care homes. That is not 
the reality. They may comfort themselves by saying so much 
that they’ve done this and they’ve done that, but the reality is 
it’s not showing up in our homes for too many people. 
 
I want to just take a moment here to reflect on the preamble 
because it’s a very important way to set the tone for the debate. 
And I think that again the first preamble clause is “WHEREAS 
residents in care have the right to dignity, respect and safety,” 
and that’s so true. That’s so true. But we hear time after time 
after time where the fact the people, the residents do not have, 
have not been treated with dignity or in a dignified way. And 
that’s really tragic because in situations that we all would hope 
we don’t find ourselves in, but here they are. And they’re, you 
know, still with us, and we really want to make sure that their 
lives have value, that in fact . . . They are not being treated with 
dignity, and that’s a real problem . . . and respect. 
 
And respect is an important concept because, you know, if 
people are treated with respect . . . And we often use that word 
fairly loosely. And to me, you know, as a teacher, we would 
often talk about that in the classroom. Respect is around the 
basis that people have value. They have worth. And every 
resident in our long-term care facilities, special care facilities, 
or personal care homes have value. They are with us, and we 
value that they are, and it’s important. That’s why we must treat 
them with respect. 

And of course safety is . . . It goes without saying really 
because it’s so important, that we can look across the world and 
we have certain safety standards. And I think about the situation 
just a few short years ago with a fire in a long-term care home, 
that they were not up to standards. And we have to make sure 
we have the best standards, the best standards that we can 
possibly have in our facilities, our special care facilities and our 
personal care homes, and so that’s really, truly the case. 
 
The next clause talks about, “WHEREAS residents in care 
deserve basic guarantees of the quality of care they ought to 
receive.” That really speaks to the minimum standards that they 
will have, certain levels of care, and they can expect that. Their 
family members can expect that. And it’s not something that’s 
general and that has no real meaning, but that really is a 
guarantee. 
 
You know, we often think about guarantees that we have, 
particularly when we might buy a new house, might be a 
guarantee on the quality of the home we’ve bought, might be a 
guarantee on our car, vehicles. The guarantee really has to have 
meaning. Sometimes we get guarantees where we go, what does 
that really mean? Is that really a guarantee, or are we being not 
told the complete picture here? And so this is why they deserve 
basic guarantees of the quality that they ought to receive, and 
that’s so, so true. So Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that’s a really 
important clause to have in the preamble. 
 
The next preamble talks about, “WHEREAS residents in care 
have the right to individualized care that meets or exceeds 
minimum . . . care standards.” And of course this is also very, 
very important because everyone who is in a personal care 
home or a special care facility has unique situations, unique 
challenges. And it’s really important that those unique 
challenges and circumstances are reflected in their care and that 
individualized care and how it’s prescribed has to at least meet 
or exceed the minimum quality of care standards so we all 
know what the benchmark is for good care in special care 
facilities and for personal care homes. We all know what those 
minimum standards are. But the key word there is that it’s a 
minimum. The expectation is that in fact, actually, people 
would be receiving more than that but depending on their own 
unique set of circumstances. And so that’s a very, very 
important clause to have in. 
 
Then it goes on to talk about, “WHEREAS it is the 
responsibility of the provincial government to ensure consistent 
standards of care in facilities throughout Saskatchewan.” This is 
the best or most important part of it all because you could have 
all the whereases and the best wishes you want but, if nobody’s 
tagged with the responsibility, then it really doesn’t matter 
much. And this is where the provincial government has to take 
ownership of it and has to say, you know, that they will ensure 
that there are consistent standards of care in facilities right 
throughout the province, and that it doesn’t matter whether 
you’re in Moose Jaw or Saskatoon or in North Battleford, 
Meadow Lake, Estevan, wherever. You will have the consistent 
standard of care, and it was the same throughout, and that there 
will be the inspections and the work done to ensure that that is 
the case at hand. 
 
If it’s not the case, then the whole point is, why are we doing 
this? Well we’re doing this because we want to make sure the 



April 30, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7077 

residents in the special care facilities, personal care homes, have 
a basic level of care but also that basic level embraces their 
unique circumstances, and in fact it will be the best care 
possible. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve seen record revenues 
over the last eight years in this province. It’s been a 
phenomenal eight years of financial growth when it comes to 
the province of Saskatchewan. The question is: where did the 
money go, and what are the priorities of this government? 
Clearly this helps set those priorities, and this is an important 
aspect of it. It’s important. It’s really critically important, and 
when we look across Canada, we should be the very best. 
 
We’ve had an opportunity, that unfortunately this government 
has chosen not to take advantage of, to really invest in our 
facilities and in our standards for those patients in special care 
facilities and personal care homes. They decided not to do that. 
They’ve largely ignored the circumstances. They put some 
money in, but not nearly enough, and particularly after the 
minister had a chance to really make some breakthrough 
opportunities a year or so ago when he had a report done but 
instead chose to fund a very small part of that. And so this is an 
important bill. 
 
I want to take a minute here to read into the record the letter that 
our Health critic talked about, in terms of the residents in care 
bill of rights, that said the NDP tabled . . . Now she was 
referring to the previous bill, Bill 606: 
 

The Residents in care Bill of Rights Act, if passed, will 
require the government to establish minimum quality of 
care standards that apply to seniors’ care homes 
throughout the province that guarantees respect, dignity, 
and safety for seniors. 

 
I’ve reflected on that and how important that is, how important 
that truly is, those key three cornerstones: respect, dignity, and 
safety for seniors and residents in our special care homes. 
 
Saskatchewan has a seniors’ care crisis. I’m quoting here: 
 

Saskatchewan has a seniors’ care crisis, and a significant 
part of the problem is the government’s elimination of 
minimum standards that has led to understaffing, 
underfunding, and absolutely unacceptable treatment of 
people. 

 
And we’ve seen the impact of that, when they got rid of the 
minimum standards and they have a general statement that 
really doesn’t really mean very much at all but has led to 
understaffing, underfunding, and absolutely unacceptable 
treatment of people. And she wraps up by saying: 
 

The bill is a clear way to address the problems with 
seniors’ care in Saskatchewan, and it would be common 
sense for this government to pass it because what they are 
doing now isn’t working. 

 
Truly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we see that. We see the evidence of 
this government failing the seniors and the residents of special 
care homes and long-term facilities, and it’s really tragic 
because these folks really deserve so much more, deserve so 

much more with that. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to now move 
adjournment of Bill 609, An Act respecting the Rights of 
Residents in Special Care Facilities and Personal Care Homes. 
I do so adjourn. Thanks. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 
debate on Bill. No. 609. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of 
Advanced Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 
order to facilitate the work of committees this afternoon, I move 
that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has moved to adjourn, 
that this House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:29.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Deputy Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................... 7055 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7055 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7055 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7055 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7055 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7055 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7055 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7056 
  Ross ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7056, 7071 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7056 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7071 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7056 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7056 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7057 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7057 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 May Day Significant for Workers’ Rights 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7057 
 Bronze for Pat Canadians at Telus Cup 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7057 
 Hockey Championships for First Nations Youth 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7058 
 Know Your Rights Conference 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7058 
 Regina Women of Distinction Awards Gala 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7058 
 Habitat for Humanity Day 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7059 
 Correspondence Regarding Member’s Comments 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7059 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Release of Information Concerning Worker 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7059 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7059 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7061 
 Hyperbaric Chamber in Moose Jaw and Provision of Hyperbaric Services 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7061 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7061 
 Protection for Children in Care 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7063 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7063 
 Child Care Spaces 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7063 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7063 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 7064 
POINT OF ORDER 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7064 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7064 
  The Deputy Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................... 7064 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Uranium Energy Agreement 
  Jurgens ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7065, 7074 
  Nilson ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7067, 7074 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7068 
  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 7069, 7074 
  Phillips  .......................................................................................................................................................................... 7071, 7074 



 

  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 7072, 7074 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7074 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7074 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7075 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 609 — The Residents-in-Care Bill of Rights Act 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7075 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


