






















































Hansard: March 31, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 43A  TUESDAY, MARCH 31, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6825 
 March 31, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Legislative Assembly, Colin and Ashley Chorneyko, the owners 
of Munro Homes Ltd. They are sitting in the Speaker’s gallery. 
 
I will be highlighting their award-winning home building in a 
few minutes, Mr. Speaker, but I’d like to ask all members of 
this Assembly to give them a good welcome to their Assembly. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members, I’d like to introduce a few individuals who 
are seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. And as you know, Mr. 
Speaker, later on today we’ll have an opportunity to recognize 
former members of the legislature who have passed away over 
this past year. And today we’re joined by some of the family 
members of two members that we’ll be paying tribute to later 
on today. 
 
With us is Ruth Smishek, widow of Walter Smishek, along with 
her son and daughter. Also with us today is Darlene Ware, 
widow of Serge Kujawa, Mr. Speaker. I’d ask all members to 
join me in welcoming these individuals to the Assembly here 
today. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, I wish 
to introduce some guests visiting the proceedings today. These 
individuals are part of a program called INVOLVE, integrating 
newcomers with volunteer opportunities to add leadership value 
through education. I had the great opportunity to spend this past 
Saturday with them. 
 
The Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan, Regina Open Door 
Society, and Sask Culture have partnered to launch this pilot 
project. The INVOLVE program encompasses and prepares 
newcomers to connect to the community in various leadership 
capacities through a four-day training program. Participants 
gain experience, improve their English language skills, and 
build a personal network, and organizations get new volunteers 
who bring fresh ideas and energy. 
 
Joining us in the west gallery this afternoon — and if you could 
give a wave when I read your name — is Rhonda Rosenberg 
who is executive director of the Multicultural Council of 
Saskatchewan; Nohora Ardila who is the Regina Open Door 

Society settlement caseworker; Bonnie Sorensen, volunteer 
coordinator, Regina Open Door Society; Zainabu Mwangangi 
who is a participant and Regina Open Door Society youth 
worker; Israel Canon, a participant; Erika Canon, participant; 
Anita Mukendi, participant; Hughes Kandele, participant; 
Roberto Misterio who is a participant; and Nenita Anonas who 
is a participant. 
 
Congratulations to all of you on your successful completion of 
this great program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, supporting multiculturalism provides an 
opportunity to celebrate the advantages of being a welcoming 
multicultural province and to envision future opportunities 
related to the changing multicultural face of Saskatchewan. The 
INVOLVE program provides a winning formula for both 
newcomers and community organizations. And I wish the 
organizers luck with its continuation. I ask, Mr. Speaker, that all 
members please join me in congratulating and welcoming these 
guests to their legislature. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join in with the minister in welcoming these folks and just 
congratulating them on the completion of a four-day workshop 
over the month of March. This is really something pretty special 
when you have newcomers come to our province — and we are 
all newcomers in so many ways — but what’s so special is we 
know what makes Saskatchewan great is the volunteerism, how 
we connect with people and make Saskatchewan the wonderful 
place it is. 
 
So thank you so much for doing that work, completing the 
workshop. I understand it was a gruelling, good four days in 
March. Thank you for doing that and we look forward to 
hearing great things about INVOLVE over the next while, and 
we really do wish you all the best. And thank you, 
multicultural, MCOS [Multicultural Council of Saskatchewan] 
and open door society for putting this together. I think you’re a 
model for the rest of the province. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce to you and to all the members a group of grade 12 
students from F.W. Johnson Collegiate here in Regina. There’s 
16 of them. They’re in a socials 30 class and they are 
accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Scott McKillop, and there’s 
two interns with them today as well, Leanne Varley and 
Brooklyn Orban. I look forward to meeting with them after 
routine proceedings. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce a 
constituent of mine that needs no introduction to this House, a 
former Member of Parliament, also a former member of this 
House, also a constituent of mine and a very good friend. To 
you and through you I would like to introduce Mr. Allan 
Kerpan. He’s been very busy with his sons running an extensive 



6826 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2015 

farming operation in his retirement from the House. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to extend a welcome to all of our guests here today, and 
specifically to two who are here. I’d like to introduce to you and 
through you to members of the House two gentlemen that are 
important to the Saskatchewan Party caucus for reasons that 
will become evident in a moment. Seated in the west gallery is 
Tom Wildeman. Tom will just give us a wave. Tom is the 
boyfriend of the Minister of . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Fiancé, correct, of the Minister of Social Services, Mr. Speaker. 
And we certainly want to welcome him to the House as we have 
welcomed him to this extended family, and appreciate what he 
and the minister have together. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to introduce to you, in your gallery, Al 
Brigden. Al is the significant-other partner of the current 
member for Estevan. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that he 
has often been here to the House, but I’ve never had a chance to 
welcome him. He’s also now a part of the extended family of 
the Saskatchewan Party caucus, and we want to welcome him 
here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to inform members of the House that the 
member for Kindersley and I were very worried about both of 
these gentlemen as to whether or not they met the standard of 
these excellent women that are part of the caucus, but they have 
successfully gone through a bit of a vetting process and the 
caucus has therefore approved things going forward from this 
standpoint. 
 
I’d also point out that Al’s son Preston yesterday took delivery 
of the province’s only 2015 Hellcat Hemi Challenger. There 
will only be nine of them in Canada. I saw a picture of it. It’s 
sublime, is the name of the Mopar colour. It’s a great modern 
muscle car and, Mr. Speaker, so I’m sure Al’s a very proud 
grandfather today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
privilege today to introduce guests that are seated in your 
gallery, people that are here who will be meeting with MLAs 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] later today, from Merit 
Contractors. They are Shaun Howdle who is the general 
manager, industrial, Western Canada and Vice-Chair of Merit 
Contractors Association of Saskatchewan. Shaun is originally 
from Unity but now hails from Humboldt. He has been with 
Concept for three years as the company worked on the Key 
Lake mine, Cigar Lake mine, and the BHP Jansen site, and are 
now getting mobilized out to the K+S Legacy potash mine as 
well. 
 
Also seated with him is Sean Hamelin, district manager, PCL 
Construction who is an adviser to the Merit Saskatchewan 
board of directors. Sean is from Regina, and everyone here will 
be familiar with PCL’s two current projects in the city: the new 
stadium and the renovation currently under way here at the 
legislature. Most people will be aware of it because it has 
converted this building into what looks like a giant inland grain 
terminal, but I’m sure it will look wonderful when it’s 

completed. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to ask all members to 
welcome them to the legislature today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
join with the minister opposite in welcoming these two 
representatives and leaders within our economy here on behalf 
of Merit. Thank you for being here and thank you for 
connecting with us here today. 
 
And while on my feet, Mr. Speaker, it’s also my pleasure to 
welcome someone that’s no stranger to this Assembly and may 
cause me to make sure I’m on my best behaviour today. It’s a 
pleasure to have my mother here today, Faye Wotherspoon, and 
she’s joined today by her good friend, Ms. Elaine Bennett Fox 
who was a lifelong educator, a teacher-librarian. And her son, 
Doyle Fox, is working as a communications officer in our 
caucus office doing a fine job, a heck of a guy, great hockey 
player. He was also our Movember fundraising team captain. So 
it’s a pleasure to welcome folks from Merit, my mom, and 
Elaine Bennett Fox to her Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you to all members of the Assembly, I’m 
pleased to welcome and would ask members to help me in 
welcoming, seated in the west gallery, Alan Stephen. Alan is 
the CEO [chief executive officer] of Eden Care Communities 
here, largely based in the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker. Eden 
Care Communities does a terrific job in supporting the seniors 
that reside in their home, Mr. Speaker, in a number of locations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just on Saturday, Eden Care Communities 
received a Saskatchewan Healthcare Excellence Award for the 
work that they are doing with seniors. And I’ve had an 
opportunity to meet with Alan and members of his team in the 
past, and I’ll have an opportunity to meet with him later this 
afternoon. And so I’d ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming Alan to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m please to join 
the minister in welcoming Mr. Stephen to his legislature here 
today. The work that Eden Care Communities does was 
recognized this weekend in receiving a Saskatchewan 
Healthcare Excellence Award, and that is definitely well 
deserved. So I would like to ask my colleagues to join me as 
well in welcoming Mr. Stephen to his legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like join in 
welcoming Mr. Stephen from Eden Care Communities to the 
legislature. My parents live at Broadway Terrace, which is part 
of the organization. And I know my father likes to visit with 
Mr. Stephen, and I have as well. And I know that he is 
somebody who has built on a long tradition of the Regina 



March 31, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6827 

Lutheran Home, which is now the Eden Care Communities in 
the city of Regina. And we all congratulate that organization 
and all the people who are part of it for the good work that they 
do for southern Saskatchewan. So thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to take this opportunity to 
welcome anyone who was missed in the introductions. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition calling for greater support for education here in 
Saskatchewan. And we know that education is one of the most 
vital services this government provides to its citizens but yet 
this government has failed to deliver a long-term plan and 
vision and the necessary resources to prioritize delivery of 
educational excellence. And we know that this government has 
failed to develop a real plan to close the Aboriginal education 
gap, support English as an additional language students, support 
community schools and their communities and students. I’d like 
to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately prioritize education by laying out a 
long-term vision and a plan with the necessary resources 
that provides the best quality of education for 
Saskatchewan, that reflects Saskatchewan’s demographic 
and population changes, that is based on proven 
educational best practices, that is developed through 
consultation with the education sector, and that builds 
strong educational infrastructure to serve students and 
communities long into the future. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
Air Ronge, Regina, Saskatoon, and Estevan. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 
again today to present petitions on behalf of residents as it 
relates to the unsafe conditions created by that government on 
Dewdney Avenue with their failure to safely and properly plan 
the traffic flow of heavy-haul truck traffic, Mr. Speaker, and 
their failure to recognize this critical safety issue, Mr. Speaker. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina, communities, and residents. 
 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions today are signed by residents of Saskatchewan 
once again. I so submit. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again to present a petition in support of safe staffing levels in 
long-term care. The petitioners point out that many aspects of 
long-term care are deteriorating under this government. They 
talk about how the government has removed the regulations 
requiring a minimum standard of care for seniors, which results 
in neglect; and that chronic understaffing in long-term care 
facilities results in unacceptable conditions, including 
unanswered calls for help, infrequent bathing, and a rise in 
physical violence amongst residents. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the government to 
commit to the creation of safe staffing levels for all valued 
members of the health care team and to reintroduce actual 
numbers of staff to match the level of care needs and the 
number of residents under their care in long-term care 
facilities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by folks around 
Saskatchewan. Today we have folks from Martensville, Prince 
Albert, Rosetown, Air Ronge, Saskatoon, and Langham signing 
this petition. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition in 
support of retaining Yarrow Youth Farm. Saskatoon has 
Yarrow Youth Farm, a facility for low-risk teens who benefit 
from an open custody home with a caring, supportive 
environment with programs to help residents live more 
productive lives. Saskatoon also has Kilburn Hall, a secure 
custody unit for youth considered greater risk. 
 
Now the government is planning to close Yarrow Youth Farm 
and create an open-custody wing in Kilburn Hall. The 
provincial Advocate for Children and Youth has declared he 
cannot endorse such rationalization, as low-risk teens could be 
influenced and pressured by close proximity to high-risk youth. 
Kilburn Hall has a more institutional environment and that 
could intimidate and alienate teens that have committed minor 
offences. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 
government to keep Yarrow Youth Farm open to ensure a 
caring home environment for youth who have committed 
minor offences and to provide support to help these young 
people redirect their lives by setting more positive goals. 



6828 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2015 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by individuals from Saskatoon. I so 
submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

International Transgender Day of Visibility and Trans 
Awareness Week 

 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, today is indeed a historic day as the trans flag is flying 
proudly here at the Saskatchewan legislature as part of the 
International Transgender Day of Visibility and Trans 
Awareness Week. This is a first for Saskatchewan and actually 
a first for any provincial legislature in Canada. Well done. 
 
Many speakers at today’s event commented positively on our 
new amendment to The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code that 
we passed last December. We can now say protection as a 
gender identity is now included — again, well done. And while 
many were calling for greater protection for including both 
terms, gender identity and gender expression, we will continue 
to monitor whether gender expression should be part of our 
Human Rights Code as well. 
 
But we know that for the trans community much more work 
remains including, for example, we need to explicitly ensure 
that there are strong provisions in our schools for students who 
request supports like GSAs [gay-straight alliance]. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we also know that we need much more improved 
health care services and mental health supports and a revision 
of The Vital Statistics Act to reflect current best practices here 
in Canada. 
 
I would like to, Mr. Speaker, recognize the important work of 
TransSask Support Services in helping to provide services to 
meet the needs of trans identified and gender diverse people 
within Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I call on all members to 
recognize and celebrate Trans Awareness Week and TransSask 
and to pledge continued support to the goal of helping 
transgendered people feel safe and supported in our 
communities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 

World War II Veteran Awarded 
France’s Highest Honour 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Barry Needham is a 
94-year-old World War II veteran from Wynyard. The French 
government recently awarded Barry with France’s highest 
honour for his efforts in helping to liberate France during the 
Second World War. Barry received the rank of Knight in the 
National Order of the Legion of Honour. On February 27th, 
Barry was presented with the medal on behalf of the French 
government at a ceremony at the Wynyard Legion Hall. A 
statement from France’s ambassador to Canada was read at the 
ceremony, stating that the medal is a testament to Needham’s 
“courage and devotion to the ideals of liberty and peace.” 

Mr. Speaker, Barry first enlisted with the Canadian Armed 
Forces in 1940. He served in Europe as a flight lieutenant with 
the Royal Canadian Air Force 412 Squadron. Needham flew 
four sorties over the beaches of Normandy on D-Day. A month 
later, on July 7th, 1944, his Spitfire plane was shot down in 
France. He was taken prisoner of war. He spent nearly a month 
in a prisoner of war camp until it was liberated in early August 
and he returned to Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking Barry 
Needham for his courageous service and sacrifice during World 
War II, and congratulating him on receiving this prestigious 
honour from the French government. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon-Riversdale. 
 

National Nutrition Month 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in 
recognition of Nutrition Month. Although today is the last day 
of Nutrition Month, it is important to keep nutrition and the 
work that Saskatchewan’s professional dietitians do fresh in our 
minds all year long. Dietitians serve an important role in our 
province and work in many different sectors including health 
care, community-based organizations, seniors’ care, and in 
public policy among others. They work across the lifespan, 
beginning with prenatal nutrition and breastfeeding support, 
right up to ensuring those at the end of their lives have the 
nutrition they need for quality of life, and at every stage and age 
in between. 
 
For many people, it’s a lot more complicated that just more 
fruits and vegetables. Registered dietitians have the specialized 
knowledge and training to help ensure people with complex 
conditions affecting their health — like diabetes, celiac disease, 
and kidney disorders — get all the vitamins and nutrients they 
need. Registered dietitians also have important knowledge to 
share with people who have specialized diets for religious or 
moral reasons. When someone gets sick, a registered dietitian’s 
medical know-how and cultural understanding helps ensure 
people following vegetarian, halal, or kosher diets recover as 
soon as possible. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in 
recognizing National Nutrition Month and in thanking all of our 
province’s registered dietitians for the work that they do to help 
build a healthier Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Corrections and 
Policing. 
 

Local Firm Wins Housing Excellence Award 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
profile some award-winning construction that is happening right 
here in Regina. On March 6, the Canadian Home Builders’ 
Association’s National SAM [Sales and Marketing] Awards 
Recognizing Canadian Housing Excellence were held in 
Halifax, Nova Scotia. 
 
At the SAM Awards, Canada’s leading home builders, 
renovators, and developers were honoured. In the category of 



March 31, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6829 

single detached homes over 2,200 square feet, the winning 
home was built right here in Regina by Munro Homes Limited. 
Located in The Creeks, Munro Homes’ 2,658-square-foot Oslo 
production home beat out finalists from Ontario, Alberta, 
Newfoundland and Labrador, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With roughly 180,000 homes built in this country, over a 
thousand entries in all categories, roughly 100 entries in the 
2,200-square-foot category, and the top 5 being nominated for 
the award, it is no wonder than Colin Chorneyko, the president, 
said that it was “. . . just an honour to be nominated for this 
prestigious award.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, this isn’t the first time they have been nominated. 
This is the fourth time in the last five years that Munro Homes 
has been honoured with being nominated and the second time 
they have won a SAM Award. In 2010 Munro Homes was 
nominated and won, making a Saskatchewan first. I also 
understand that this is the third home to be nominated in The 
Creeks. One of them was built by Homes by Dream. 
 
I would like all members in this House today to congratulate 
Colin and Ashley Chorneyko on the award-winning work being 
done right here by Munro Homes. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 
 

Safe Digging Month 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
announce April as Safe Digging Month in Saskatchewan, which 
draws attention to the importance of safe digging practices both 
on job sites and at home. Safe digging is everyone’s 
responsibility. It starts with contacting Sask 1st Call to have 
underground utility lines located, following safe excavation 
practices, and ends with everyone going home safe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to say that in 2014, SaskEnergy, 
SaskTel, and SaskPower saw a combined reduction in third 
party line hits of more than 30 per cent. In 2014 the safety 
patrol pilot project was launched, the first of its kind in Canada, 
saw safety patrollers meeting directly on job sites with 
contractors and homeowners. They ensure line locates had been 
done and that a safe digging plan was in place. A new tool that 
will help make safe digging easier than ever before, the Sask 1st 
Call app, a new smartphone app makes requesting a line locate 
simpler and more efficient. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as our province continues to grow, safety is a top 
priority for our government. The Sask 1st Call app and the 
safety patrols are innovative ways to reduce accidental line hits, 
and dangers that come with them. Our government would like 
to thank Sask 1st Call and the Saskatchewan Common Ground 
Alliance for their continued dedication to promote safe digging 
practises year round. I hope everyone digs safe. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 

Pharmacist Awareness Month 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to recognize March as Pharmacist Awareness Month. 
 

Mr. Speaker, pharmacists are highly skilled, dedicated 
professionals who play a vital role in bringing about the 
transformation that we’re seeing today in our health care 
system. 
 
They are the health professionals with specialized expertise and 
knowledge about prescription drugs and their effects. You’ll 
find them working in Saskatchewan’s hospitals and community 
pharmacies, both big and small. And due to their accessibility, 
pharmacists are frequently the first point of contact that patients 
have with the health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in recent years, we have collaborated with 
pharmacists on many significant initiatives and programs to 
improve patient care. For example, this government introduced 
legislation last fall that will expand the scope of practice for 
Saskatchewan pharmacists. This extended scope will benefit 
patients through more accessible health care services. 
Amendments to The Pharmacy Act will allow pharmacists to 
administer vaccines and drugs such as flu shots. Mr. Speaker, 
pharmacists are valued health care professionals. We support 
them working to their full scope of practice. 
 
On behalf of my colleagues and Saskatchewan citizens, I would 
like to thank the 1,400 pharmacists of this province for the 
excellent work they do every day. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 

Anniversary of Canadian Flag 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On February 
15th, 1965, Canada became the proud owner of its own national 
flag. Some may remember the fierce debate and strong feelings 
about the introduction of this symbol. It was feared that 
adopting a new flag would tear the country apart. Those 
sentiments could not have been more inaccurate. Our flag 
stands as an international recognized symbol of Canada and the 
values we promote and live. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year Canadians celebrate the 50th anniversary 
of our flag. On February 13th, 2015, the Lieutenant Governor’s 
office and the Government House partnered to launch an exhibit 
called, Celebrate the Flag. The Deputy Premier brought 
greetings on behalf of the government and cut the ribbon to 
open the exhibit. 
 
The exhibit chronicles the history of the debate over the flag 
and showcases the three final renderings. There is an interactive 
booth for guests to provide a personal testimony about what our 
flag means to them. The Premier has recorded his tribute, and 
many other leaders in our community have as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I encourage all members and their families and 
friends to visit the exhibit at Government House and to join the 
Celebrate the Flag Lieutenant Governor’s Garden Party on July 
1st. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 



6830 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2015 

Housing of Young Offenders 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, will the Premier finally do the 
right thing today and finally admit that it is a mistake to shut 
down the Yarrow Youth Farm? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. There 
has been a considerable process that’s been undertaken to come 
to this decision. Mr. Speaker, we know that there have been 
concerns expressed with respect to the changes that are 
occurring, and we certainly respect those concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have to do a couple of things. We have to 
make sure there is optimal programming for those who need 
that programming, Mr. Speaker. We also have to ensure the 
safety of those who neighbour any facility. Mr. Speaker, we’re 
going to achieve those things. We also have to deliver things as 
efficiently as possible on behalf of the taxpayers. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the government’s satisfied that those objectives have 
been met in this regard. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this is a bad policy and this is a 
bad decision that this government is making. 
 
Yesterday the Minister of Corrections couldn’t answer even the 
most basic questions about the closure of Yarrow and couldn’t 
answer questions about why there’s a new gate being put in at 
Kilburn Hall when community members were promised that 
there wouldn’t be. At every step of the way, Mr. Speaker, that 
Corrections minister has shown an extremely limited 
understanding of her portfolio. In fact the only way that she’s 
lived up to the title of Minister of Corrections, Mr. Speaker, is 
that she’s had to make correction after correction after 
correction when it comes to her file. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the plan should not go ahead. The Saskatoon 
Tribal Council, our province’s Children’s Advocate, Defence 
For Children International oppose this move. They oppose it, 
Mr. Speaker, because it’s a step backwards when it comes to 
our youth justice system here in the province. People in Buena 
Vista neighbourhood are incredibly frustrated because of the 
inaccurate information and the lack of consultation.  
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier. How can he stand 
beside his Corrections minister and plow ahead with this 
reckless and ill-informed plan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, well I just disagree with the 
Leader of the Opposition’s depiction of this particular decision 
and the project that’s under way with respect to the gate issue 
that the member from Nutana raised yesterday in the Assembly. 
Mr. Speaker, the gate is there not because of any requirement or 
decision on the provincial government, which is why the 
minister would have made her answer as she did yesterday. It’s 
a requirement of the federal government with respect to these 

kinds of facilities. 
 
However, the commitment that we’ve made, Mr. Speaker, with 
respect to folks . . . Well if the members want to hear the 
answers . . . ask the questions, they might want to hear the 
answer as well. The movement of those who will be using the 
facility through the front entrance is the main part here that’s 
important to residents of course and important to what the 
minister has provided in terms of answers and the government’s 
position going forward. Mr. Speaker, we think this does achieve 
the balance that I spoke to in my first answer, and so we will be 
going forward with the decision. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Costs and Benefits of the Lean Initiative 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the gate’s going in because 
they’re changing the nature of the facility. And what is clear 
from this minister’s approach and this government’s approach 
is that they have not done their homework, and they have 
communicated inaccurate information to the people of Buena 
Vista and the people of the province. That is very, very clear. 
Mr. Speaker. It’s astonishing that the Premier will still stand 
and defend that minister’s poor responses. 
 
I want to talk about another issue as well, Mr. Speaker. We 
know that most nurses have said that they have seen absolutely 
no improvements to patient safety or the quality of care over the 
last year. And one-third of nurses say that patient safety and 
quality of care has declined over the last year. New numbers 
released today show that three out of four nurses in our 
province say that they’ve seen short-staffing put patients at risk. 
 
Now this government likes to talk about overall numbers but 
doesn’t reflect the reality on the front lines. This government 
used to look at the actual number of people working on the 
front lines for each shift. That has not increased, Mr. Speaker. 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, we see deliberate short-staffing, not 
replacing workers who are sick, and we see massive, massive 
amounts of resources going to lean specialists and 
stopwatch-holders. And nurses say that patient safety is put at 
risk as a result. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier. What does he have 
to say about this very damning indictment, not from me, but 
from our province’s nurses? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
think the Leader of the Opposition will know that we’ve also 
put massive resources into our regional health authorities, over 
50 per cent increase in the budgets of our regional authorities, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was a government, when we were elected in 
2007, where we inherited a deficit in a number of areas on the 
capital side as well as the front-line staff and human resource 
side, Mr. Speaker. We inherited from the members opposite a 
government, an administration that refused to put targets on 
how many nurses we needed in the province even when SUN 
[Saskatchewan Union of Nurses] at the time was saying that we 



March 31, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6831 

needed 800 additional nurses in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We not only committed to that, Mr. Speaker. We exceeded that 
by hundreds, Mr. Speaker. Twenty-six hundred licensed nurses 
of all designations are now in this province, Mr. Speaker: RNs 
[registered nurse], LPNs [licensed practical nurse], RPNs 
[registered psychiatric nurse] practising in this province. And 
that has allowed us, Mr. Speaker, to open up beds that had been 
previously closed under the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we take these issues very seriously. That’s why 
we’re committed to working with our partners like SUN and 
like our other organizations in this province, Mr. Speaker, to 
continue moving forward in health care. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, once again we see this 
government’s dismissive approach saying that those on the 
front lines don’t know what they’re talking about. 
 
Just 1 in 10 nurses say they’ve seen positive changes in health 
care over the last year, just 1 in 10. The majority of nurses say 
they’ve seen no improvements to patient safety and quality of 
care, and a third of nurses say that patient safety and quality of 
care have gotten worse over the last year. And now 75 per cent 
of nurses say short-staffing is putting patient safety at risk. That 
is hugely concerning, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Are these really the results that this government and this 
Premier wanted when they’ve gone down this John Black lean 
approach for our entire health care system? Or will this Premier, 
will the Premier at least admit that he’s disappointed with the 
overall results of John Black lean, especially when it comes to 
patient safety and quality of care? Will he admit that today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
what the survey also indicates is that a strong majority of nurses 
that were surveyed responded that the quality of patient care 
delivered in their workplace is positive, Mr. Speaker, 72 per 
cent, as well as a high . . . Over 60 per cent rate that the safety 
of the service that is being provided to patients is of a positive 
quality, Mr. Speaker. So that’s what the survey had to say. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are a far cry though from the days of the NDP 
[New Democratic Party] when 455 fewer nurses were working 
in this province, when they slashed nurses, when they slashed 
nursing positions, when they closed beds. Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
taken a different position than the position taken by the member 
from Lakeview or from Len Taylor. When he was the Health 
minister, we couldn’t set targets when it came to nursing 
numbers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We not only set a target. We exceeded the target. We ensured 
that we have the training seats in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
We have ensured that we’re providing the training in the right 
places so that we have a nursing regiment in this province that 
is at par in terms of what we need in this province and in fact is 
leading the nation when you look across all of Canada. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s a record that we’re proud of on this side as 
opposed to what the members opposite left this province. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the same time as we have nurses 
saying that health care is going in the wrong direction, 3 out of 
4 saying that they’ve seen patient safety being put at risk 
because of short-staffing, we see this government plowing 
ahead with a misguided and ill-informed lean agenda through 
John Black. 
 
Here’s what a nurse with 35 years experience says about the 
government’s obsession with lean: “Do more faster with less 
resources. Oh and spend millions on a consultant to tell us how 
the automotive industry would do this.” 
 
The nurse goes on: 
 

They (the lean process team) come in for their rapid 
process improvement week in their colour co-ordinated 
shirts, timers and clipboards, with their “metrix” set. They 
know what the problem is and they set out to solve it. 
 

Meanwhile this nurse says she’s regularly faced with 
short-staffing and being stretched thin: 
 

We all try to put our patients first. This week though I also 
did the housekeeping job regularly, portered patients, 
picked supplies for our cases all while educating a new 
staff member. 

 
And we have the member from Indian Head-Milestone 
heckling. This is the guy, Mr. Speaker, who handcuffed us to 
John Black in the first place. You think he would have a bit of a 
better approach, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The reality is that John Black isn’t working. It’s not listening to 
front-line workers. It’s not respecting front-line workers, and 
it’s leaving nurses stretched thinner and thinner. My question to 
the Premier: what does he have to say to this nurse? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that in 
my own health region, in Sun Country Health Region, a lean 
event was able to reduce the time that patients waited 
unnecessarily for the day of surgical procedure by 60 per cent. 
And they reduced the defects. Because of the work of lean, Mr. 
Speaker, and the front-line staff having that knowledge, they 
reduced the defects from 25 per cent of the time to zero. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, here’s what a couple of nurses had to say. 
Here’s Tara. She’s an endoscopy nurse. “I love this. It’s 100 per 
cent better than before. It was chaos before.” Here’s another 
nurse, Kendra, a surgical nurse: “This place was screaming for a 
patient status-at-a-glance board.” Mr. Speaker, these are the 
changes that are under way in this province, Mr. Speaker, in 
health care. 
 
Here’s what the nurses were saying under the NDP. March 
2007, Saskatchewan Union of Nurses first vice-president, 
Marlene Brown, described the 18 new seats to train registered 
nurses as “pathetic and an insult” to the province’s registered 
nurses. “It’s clearly evident there is no recognition of the crisis 
that the workforce is in.” Mr. Speaker, that’s what the NDP left 



6832 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2015 

us. That’s the legacy of the NDP when it comes to nurses and 
health care all across this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this government continues to 
have its head in the sand when it comes to its obsession with the 
John Black lean program. We have 1 out of 10 nurses saying, 
Mr. Speaker, that they haven’t seen . . . only 1 out of 10 saying 
they’ve seen positive changes over the last year. 
 
A majority of nurses say lean hasn’t improved patient safety 
and quality of care. In fact if anything, it’s made it worse. The 
majority of nurses are raising alarm bells about patients being 
put at risk because of short-staffing. Nurses say that lean 
specialists don’t listen to those on the front lines. We’ve heard 
story after story about that. We’ve seen and heard from nurses 
who are stretched more and more every day because of 
deliberate short-staffing. But we see this government continuing 
to put its head in the sand, plugging its ears, and just chanting 
the lean go-team lines over and over again, Mr. Speaker. It 
makes no sense. 
 
We not only need to see the end of the John Black tea party 
farewell, big hug fest that we see from this government. Not 
only do we need to see the end of the big paycheques going to 
John Black, but we need to see the end of the John Black 
approach to lean, and we need to start listening to those on the 
front lines. My question to the Premier: will he commit to that 
today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, if it means going back to a 
time when wait-lists for treatment for mental health patients 
were a week without having a known appointment, going from 
that to now 100 per cent of very severe patients receiving an 
appointment within 24 hours, Mr. Speaker, no we’re not going 
to go back to that. 
 
If it means that children in this province at risk of a viral 
infection, of a respiratory infection — now we can be assured 
that 100 per cent of the time they’re getting the follow-up care 
that they need, Mr. Speaker — or go back to the days where we 
didn’t know, we didn’t track that, we didn’t ensure that that care 
was provided, no we’re not going to go back to that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if it means going back to the days where the union 
of nurses were saying that the plan by the NDP was pathetic 
and wasn’t a recognition of what the crisis of the workforce was 
in . . . Are we going to go back to those days, Mr. Speaker? No, 
we’re not going to go back to those days. We’re not going to go 
back to those days. 
 
We’re not going to go back to those days, Mr. Speaker, where 
we’re closing beds in this province. We’re not going to go back 
to those days where we had the longest wait-lists for surgery in 
this country, Mr. Speaker. No, we’re not going back there. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
 

Grain Transportation 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the federal government has 
decided to remove the pressure from the big rail companies to 
ship our grain, and this Sask Party government told the federal 
government that’s just fine. How can the Agriculture minister 
possibly justify that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
member for her question. We’ve not asked for the minimum 
standards to be continued after the end of this month. However 
we have asked the federal government, and I sent letters to both 
ministers Ritz and Raitt last week to this effect, that the federal 
government continue to monitor grain shipments very closely 
and ensure that the railways continue to deliver grain in a 
fashion that will bring our carry-over down to reasonable levels 
by the end of the crop year. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty clear the only way to 
get the railways to react is to put pressure on them, and this 
government has abandoned that approach. The Ag Transport 
Coalition says: 
 

The number of hopper car orders not filled by CN and CP 
has continued to increase each week since the beginning of 
the crop year; overall, unfulfilled orders have levelled off 
at about 10 per cent of total shipper demand in recent 
weeks, indicating that the railways are not making up 
ground for prior weeks’ shortfalls. 

 
To the minister: how on earth does it make sense to take the 
pressure off of the big rail companies at a time like this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re still 
hearing issues from producers about small shippers, processing 
plants, shortline railways, branch lines not being properly 
served and, Mr. Speaker, this is partly a function of the 
minimum weekly shipments that have been imposed through 
the legislation. We all recognize that in the industry. 
 
The legislation achieved or was supposed to achieve . . . It got 
rid of the backlog. Shipments, if they continue in the way they 
have, the backlog will be quite small by the end of this crop 
year, down below 10 million tonnes, Mr. Speaker, and 
hopefully the railways can then stop picking the low-hanging 
fruit of only taking unit trains off of mainlines and start to serve 
the rest of our shippers as well. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, rather than taking the pressure 
off the railways, doesn’t the minister agree we should be 
actually increasing the pressure? 



March 31, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6833 

It’s not just the Ag Transport Coalition that’s expressing 
concern about the performance of the big rail companies. The 
Western Grain Elevator Association agrees with the Ag 
Transport Coalition. Just a couple of days ago they said, 
“Demand for rail cars is exceeding the supply of rail cars for 
grain.” Yet the Sask Party government sends off a letter to 
Ottawa saying it’s time to start doing the big rail companies 
some favours by taking away the pressure to ship grain. 
 
To the minister: did the CN [Canadian National] and CP 
[Canadian Pacific] lobby the Sask government for that letter? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — No, no. I can honestly say that I haven’t 
had any contact from the two railways for some time now since 
the meeting that we had with Hunter Harrison some months 
ago. 
 
I would say that the legislation is a temporary measure that was 
designed . . . The minimum shipments were designed to end at 
the end of this month, Mr. Speaker. The CTA, the Canada 
Transportation Act, is in the process of being reviewed. That is 
the greatest opportunity that we have to fix this problem, this 
railway problem, permanently, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know that 
we can say it’s the chance of a lifetime, but it’s certainly the 
chance, the best chance we’ll have in a long time to fix it, and 
the railways have been performing. The carry-over will be quite 
low at the end of the crop year, and I think we need to find 
ways to motivate the railways to do this without legislation. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, this government’s approach to 
the big rail companies is appalling. When a new report from 
APAS [Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan] 
and Sask Wheat, Sask pulse, SaskBarley said the big rail 
companies have overcharged grain producers at least $2 billion 
over the last seven years, what did the Sask Party government 
do? They said they’re not really concerned about that. Now we 
have the Sask Party government scheming with Ottawa to take 
the pressure off the big rail companies to ship grain despite the 
fact that CN and CP have not even come close to meeting the 
need. 
 
To the minister: will he admit he made a mistake, and will he 
call on the federal government to extend those minimum 
volume shipping requirements today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Well, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the 
floor, we’re more interested in finding workable solutions to the 
problem than in just simply standing up to grandstand in 
question period. Mr. Speaker, the minimum weekly delivery 
requirements required under the Act only service mainlines 
proper, and it has dispensed with the backlog. That’s all it could 
be expected to do. 
 
It’s impossible to develop legislation that can force railways to 
serve every shipper because it’s just there are just too many 
variables, Mr. Speaker. That can’t be done through legislation. 

We have to develop a proper Canadian transportation Act with 
the right motivations in it to encourage the railways to do this, 
and now is the time to do it. This is the opportunity, not the 
time to grandstand about how we need to clean things up or 
change things or legislate railways to do something that they’re 
not properly motivated to do, Mr. Speaker. It’s time to work 
with the railways and the industry. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Development of White Butte Trails 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, many people in Regina 
and area are concerned about the provincially owned White 
Butte Trails recreation site being turned into a private golf 
course by this government. This is one of Regina’s only 
remaining accessible parcels of unbroken native prairie, and it’s 
used all year-round for education and recreation. Turning this 
rare and important area into a private golf course should simply 
be a non-starter. Why is the Parks minister pursuing this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 
the member for the question. To start with, I did not meet with 
the proponent that is looking to develop a golf course at White 
Butte. We received an unsolicited proposal for this proposed 
development. We have not made any decision on whether this 
type of development should proceed at the site. 
 
We will be proceeding with public consultation very soon, and 
we’ll use that feedback as a key component in our assessment 
of whether the proposal will proceed. This type of consultation 
is part of the regular process of reviewing proposals for 
development on parkland and allows the ministry to obtain 
feedback from interested parties. 
 
White Butte Trails recreation site is an important natural area 
for residents as well as recreational and educational groups 
from Regina and area. We will take that under strong 
consideration when we make a decision on this matter. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, privatizing White Butte 
should be a non-starter for this government, full stop, period. 
And the minister says he hasn’t met, but we understand that 
ministers of this government have met. Maybe he wants to 
clarify who’s been meeting and who’s been giving them the 
thumbs up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
White Butte is used throughout the year by school groups, by 
runners, by hikers, by bikers, by snowshoers, by dog walkers, 
recreation groups, and conservationists. It makes absolutely no 
sense to turn one of the last shreds of native prairie in this 
region, which is enjoyed year-round, into a private golf course 
that’ll be used for a few months. 
 
The golf course proponents can purchase the private land 
adjacent to White Butte if they’re interested. They don’t need to 
take over public Crown land, Mr. Speaker. Why won’t the 



6834 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2015 

Parks minister simply do the right thing and scrap this proposal, 
full stop, period? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Parks, Culture 
and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thanks 
again to the member opposite for the question. I’d like to 
remind the members opposite that they were the government 
that put golf courses into provincial parks, just out of interest. 
 
I’d also like to remind the member opposite, we’ve not made 
any decision on whether this type of development should 
proceed at this time. We will be proceeding with public 
consultation very soon, and we’ll use that feedback as a key 
component in our assessment of whether the . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I’d like to hear the answer as I heard 
the question. I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
actually, on this side of the House we’re actually interested, in 
government we’re interested in listening to people, listening to 
their opinions, and I believe this is an opportunity to listen to 
citizens. We don’t take everything at face value, but that’s 
where we’re at. We’re going to proceed with public 
consultations, and this is exactly what we’re going to do. We’re 
going to proceed with this. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this is a 2-square-mile 
parcel of land, a small parcel of land that’s untouched, native 
prairie that is used year-round, and that government thinks that 
they need to gift that to some private developer. We welcome a 
golf course, but they should be doing it with private land, Mr. 
Speaker. This government is . . . Well it can’t be trusted to have 
a meaningful consultation through this process because we’ve 
already heard that Sask Party cabinet ministers have been 
enjoying their meetings and apparently giving them thumbs-up, 
Mr. Speaker, and saying that they support this plan to turn 
White Butte into a private golf course. 
 
Conservation groups oppose this plan. The Regina Ski Club 
opposes this plan. The Regina Wildlife Federation opposes this 
plan, and many residents of Regina and area oppose this plan. 
To the Parks minister: why on earth is this government willing 
to turn the valuable White Butte Trails recreation site into a 
private golf course? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And again I 
actually reject the premise of the member opposite’s question. I 
reject that premise, and I’ll remind the member opposite — I 
think I’ve only said it three times during these questions — we 
have not made any decision on whether this type of 
development should proceed at the site. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this recreation site again is an important natural 
area for residents as well as recreational and educational groups 
from Regina and area. We will take that under strong 
consideration when we make a decision on that matter. But 
I’ll . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
remind the member opposite again that we’ve made no decision 
on . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Just apologize, stop it, and resign. 
 
The Speaker: — Why don’t you try that? I would like to hear 
the answer, so please stop interrupting. I recognize the Minister 
of Parks, Culture and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I did reject 
the premise of the member opposite’s question. I find it 
ridiculous that he reaches a conclusion based on the fact we 
haven’t met with anybody. Thank you anyway, but no 
decision’s been made, and we will talk to people, unlike the 
members opposite that actually don’t talk to anybody. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 

Evraz Announces New Investment 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
earlier today I had the pleasure of joining the Premier as well as 
members of the legislature from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, 
Regina Dewdney, and Regina Walsh Acres in attending a major 
investment announcement by Evraz. Evraz has announced that 
they will make the single largest investment that they’ve ever 
made, around $200 million, at its facility right here in Regina. 
 
Over the next two years, this investment will include 
installation of a new, two-step, large-diameter line pipe mill 
which will enable the production of larger, thicker walled pipe 
and increase their annual production capacity by over 100,000 
tonnes. Evraz is also making state of the art upgrades in steel 
making. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our budget included a corporate tax rebate to 
encourage investments in primary steel production. This rebate 
is to be triggered by a minimum investment of $100 million in a 
newer, expanded steel production facility. The company would 
have 10 years to claim this rebate. 
 
We are excited to see that Evraz has chosen to take advantage 
of this opportunity. Our recent budget has also provided an 
incentive for new job creation in export manufacturing and 
processing. It is great news to see Evraz respond to these 
incentives with an investment that will create around 40 new 
jobs as well as about 1,100 jobs during the construction phase. 
 
It is investments like this that increase production for the 



March 31, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6835 

company while helping to further diversify our provincial 
economy. Major announcements such as this show the 
confidence that business has in Saskatchewan and proves that 
Saskatchewan really is the best place to live, to work, and to 
raise a family. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to welcome this investment here today and this announcement, 
and to join with the minister in doing so. 
 
Certainly Evraz provides a very important investment into our 
economy, very important employment for many, and this is a 
good project. We’re pleased to see this announcement here 
today, and so we welcome this investment. 
 
I know that in conversation with those in this industry and those 
at Evraz, certainly it’s on their radar as well that we really need 
to be improving the transportation system in this province to 
make sure that as an exporting economy, and that for exporters 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Sorry. The member from 
Northeast would like to shout across the floor. This is a good 
news announcement. I’m not sure why he wants to get loud and 
belligerent during a good news announcement. But this is an 
announcement that we welcome, and a good one. 
 
What government should focus on though as well is fixing that 
transportation system to make sure that we can serve all of 
those incredible exporters in Saskatchewan, including Evraz 
steel mill, to get that product to market, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you very much. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order, both sides of the House. That includes 
the Minister of Crown Investments, the Minister of Advanced 
Education, and the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
[14:30] 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice Committee. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 141, The Archives and 
Public Records Management Act without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Parks, 
Culture and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 
leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 
bill and that the bill be now read the third time. 
 

The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 141, The 
Archives and Public Records Management Act. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to grant leave? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the minister. 

 
THIRD READINGS 

 
Bill No. 141 — The Archives and Public Records 

Management Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Parks, 
Culture and Sport that Bill No. 141, The Archives and Public 
Records Management Act be now read the third time and passed 
under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 

 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice Committee. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
to report Bill No. 142, The Archives and Public Records 
Management Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 — this is a 
bilingual bill — The Archives and Public Records Management 
Act without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 142, The 
Archives and Public Records Management Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2014 and that the bill now be read the third 
time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 
leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 



6836 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2015 

bill and that the bill be now read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 142, The 
Archives and Public Records Management Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2014. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 142 — The Archives and Public Records 
Management Consequential Amendments Act, 2014/Loi de 
2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The 

Archives and Public Records Management Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It’s been moved by the minister that Bill No. 
142, The Archives and Public Records Management 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2014 be now read the third time 
and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, thanks very much. I would 
request leave of the Assembly so that we may present a number 
of condolence motions before the House and members on both 
sides of the Assembly can participate in those condolence 
motions. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave to move 
condolence motions. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 

Edgar Ernest Kaeding 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
appreciate the opportunity to speak on a former MLA from the 
Saltcoats constituency, Edgar Kaeding, who passed away 

Tuesday, January 4th, 2015, at the age of 94. 
 
Edgar Kaeding entered into provincial politics in 1969, 
campaigning as a New Democratic Party candidate for the June 
23rd, 1971 general election. He won that election, defeating 
long-time Liberal MLA James Snedker. Mr. Kaeding went on 
to win the next two general elections in Saltcoats, garnering 
2,887 votes in ’75 and 3,354 in 1978. 
 
Serving under Premier Allan Blakeney, he was appointed 
Minister of Agriculture in 1975 and Minister of Rural Affairs 
from 1978 to 1982. After being defeated in the 1982 general 
election by Progressive Conservative Walter Johnson, Edgar 
stepped back from provincial politics to become administrator 
for the town of Churchbridge, retiring in 1998. 
 
Born on June 16, 1920, on the family farm south of 
Churchbridge, at the age of 22 he enlisted in the Royal 
Canadian Army. Upon being discharged from the army, he and 
his wife, Alva, took over the operation of the Kaeding family 
farm in 1946, raising prize-winning Shorthorn cattle. He was 
very active in the local groups and organizations including 4-H, 
the Churchbridge Co-op, Sask Wheat Pool, Churchbridge 
Credit Union, Ag Society, and the Royal Canadian Legion. 
 
The Kaedings raised four children: sons Jerry and Harold and 
daughters Heather Sveinbjornson and Deb Dedels. 
 
The funeral service was held on Thursday, January 8th in 
Trinity Lutheran Church in Churchbridge with the Reverend 
Jeff Dul officiating. 
 
Mr. Speaker, predeceased by his wife, Edgar leaves his four 
children, his sister Ruth Swanson, 15 grandchildren, 35 
great-grandchildren, and one great-grandchild. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, just from my own experience when Mr. 
Kaeding was Ag minister and actually our MLA over the years, 
I got to appreciate Edgar, because of course our politics were a 
little bit at different ends of the spectrum, but Edgar was a very 
good MLA, and as Ag minister and actually as minister of 
Rural Development on a number of occasions met with us when 
I was reeve of the RM [rural municipality] of Saltcoats. And he 
was very much appreciated for the time he took to deal with us 
as our MLA. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, with that I would like to pass on our 
condolences, Mr. Speaker, from the constituents of the 
Melville-Saltcoats riding and the province of Saskatchewan to 
the Kaeding family, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to move this motion: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Edgar Ernest Kaeding who passed away on January 4th, 
2015 at the age of 94 was a member of this Legislative 
Assembly from 1971 until 1982, representing the 
constituency of Saltcoats for the New Democratic Party. 



March 31, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6837 

He served as minister of Agriculture, minister of 
Municipal Affairs, and minister of Rural Affairs. 
 
Mr. Kaeding was born on June 16th, 1920 on the family 
farm south of Churchbridge. Mr. Kaeding is survived and 
sadly missed by his four children, Jerry, Harold, Heather, 
and Deb, and their families, including 15 grandchildren, 
35 great-grandchildren, and one great-great-grandchild. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats: 
 

That this Assembly record with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 

 
Will you take the rest of it as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 
recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to pay 
tribute to Edgar Kaeding this afternoon. When I learned of 
Edgar’s passing in early January, I took some time to read the 
first speech that he delivered in the Legislative Assembly after 
being elected in 1971. It was in response to the Blakeney’s 
government’s first Throne Speech. Edgar started off by saying: 
 

Mr. Speaker, I had not originally intended to participate in 
the Throne Speech Debate. Being a hard-nosed farmer I 
should like to see things done with dispatch. I had 
anticipated that we could, with a few pertinent 
presentations from each side of the House, have proceeded 
with the business at hand. I guess I was naive to think that 
Government could act so quickly. No doubt I shall learn to 
be patient in the next few years. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Edgar Kaeding didn’t care about pomp and 
circumstance. He just wanted to get things done for 
Saskatchewan people. And it’s no wonder, because of those 
characteristics, that he earned a reputation as someone who was 
full of common sense, intelligent, principled, and incredibly fair 
and honourable. And it’s no wonder why he was so well 
respected across party lines and recognized as someone who 
truly listened. As a self-described hard-nosed farmer, as the 
member of the Legislative Assembly for Saltcoats, as Minister 
of Agriculture, as Minister of Municipal Affairs, and as 
Minister of Rural Affairs, Edgar Kaeding contributed so much 
to our party and to our province. And for that we are 
tremendously grateful. 
 
So today I pay tribute to a life well lived, and I honour Edgar 
Kaeding, a very good politician, a dedicated New Democrat, a 

committed public servant, and a passionate advocate for the 
issues that matter to people. I extend my sympathies to Edgar’s 
children, Jerry, Harold, Heather, and Deb, and to Edgar’s 
grandchildren, great-grandchildren, and his 
great-great-grandchild. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
guess I would just add to the record in the case of all of these 
that we will honour today, former members of the House, that 
each one of them, regardless of where they happened to sit in 
the Legislative Assembly, sacrificed much in the commission of 
their public service and their public duties. 
 
And that was certainly the case with Mr. Kaeding, Mr. Speaker. 
That has been well noted by the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats and the Leader of the Opposition. And today 
we honour individuals, members of this House, who not only 
participated in debate, in the case of the member, former 
member we’re discussing today, not only participated in 
decision making and policy development but, Mr. Speaker, 
individuals who each one served their local constituents and 
served them to the best of their abilities, trying to respond to the 
specific requests they have had from the casework perspective, 
and also the broader issues that they would have brought before 
this Assembly on behalf of their constituents. It’s the bull work 
of our democracy. It’s what makes this place as special as it is. 
Nothing really but the individual members who’ve come into 
this Chamber, and signed the roll and taken up these duties. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I join with the Leader of the Opposition 
and the member from Melville-Saltcoats in passing along our 
deepest condolences and our very best to the family of Mr. 
Kaeding, Mr. Speaker, and posthumously thanking him for his 
great service to his constituents and to the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion before the House, moved by the 
member from Melville-Saltcoats: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Edgar Ernest Kaeding who passed away on January 4, 
2015, at the age of 94, was a member of this Legislative 
Assembly from 1971 until 1982, representing the 
constituency of Saltcoats for the New Democratic Party. 
He served as the minister of Agriculture, minister of 
Municipal Affairs, and minister of Rural Affairs. 

 
Mr. Kaeding was born on June 16th, 1920 at the family 
farm south of Churchbridge. He and his wife, Alva, were 
married in 1943 and in 1946 returned home and took over 
the operation of the Kaeding family farm. He raised 
prize-winning Shorthorn cattle. After the provincial 
election in 1982, Mr. Kaeding served the public as the 
administrator for the town of Churchbridge. 



6838 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2015 

Mr. Kaeding is survived and sadly missed by his four 
children, Jerry, Harold, Heather, and Deb, and their 
families, including 15 grandchildren, 35 
great-grandchildren, and one great-great-grandchild. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 
 

Walter Edmund Smishek 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In a 
few moments I’ll move a condolence motion in respect of Mr. 
Walter Smishek, a former member of this House. Before I do 
that, I’d like to just share a few comments if I may, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I grew up in Swift Current, Saskatchewan, as folks will know, 
and became keenly interested in politics there and provincially 
at, what some would say, a disturbingly young age. Mr. 
Speaker, I can remember coming home to our house and 
noticing that a sign had been installed on the front lawn. And 
somebody, I thought, I believed at the time, named Dennis Ham 
was about to sell our house to someone else, Mr. Speaker. Of 
course that wasn’t the case. This was a lawn sign, a political 
lawn sign, and so it started for me a discussion with my parents 
about politics. 
 
And in a moment, by the way, we’ll honour the memory of an 
individual who served: Mr. Dennis Ham who went on to be the 
MLA for Swift Current, served within this House as well. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, because of this interest that began to grow at 
that period of time in the mid-to-late ’70s, I became very aware 
of ministers in the government of the day and the premier of the 
day in Premier Blakeney’s government. And, Mr. Speaker, then 
and even now I think we can all reflect, regardless of our 
political affiliations, we can reflect on very significant 
achievements in that decade. 
 
First of all, for the most part, it was a decade of some 
significant growth in the province of Saskatchewan. And it was 
also, Mr. Speaker, a time of great import for the country and 
what was happening from a constitutional perspective. And I 
can remember feeling pretty proud of Peter Lougheed’s stand 
on behalf of the West and that constitutional dynamic. But he 
was aided and . . . well, more than aided. His partner in that was 
former Premier Allan Blakeney. 
 
But beyond Premier Blakeney, I remember the names of 
ministers then still, which really speaks to the strength of the 
cabinet of Mr. Blakeney. Of course we remember the names 
like Romanow and Tchorzewski and Eiling Kramer and Bob 
Long. I knew all of these in junior high and high school, and I 
very much knew the name of Walter Smishek. 
 
[14:45] 

And it would make sense that anybody that was following 
politics in Saskatchewan at that time, regardless of their age, 
would know this man, not only by his name and by the fact that 
he would have been in the Swift Current Sun and The Southwest 
Booster and on CJFB-TV and in the news, but also by what he 
did here in this legislature and at home in his constituency, Mr. 
Speaker. He served for 15 years as an MLA, and for those of us 
that have been here for around about that period of time, and 
some for much longer, we know that this is a significant 
commitment that was made by Mr. Smishek to this place and to 
public service and to the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Moreover, during that time, we know of his record in the 
cabinet where he was entrusted by Premier Blakeney with very 
significant duties as minister of Public Health. The name later 
changed but his title stayed the same, the minister of Health. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we understand what the challenges in that 
portfolio are today. It would have been the same, similar; they 
would have been proportionate certainly for the time that Mr. 
Smishek served. Remember also, colleagues and Mr. Speaker, 
that the system of health care we had was obviously, well it 
would have been 25 years, 30 years newer, fresher than it is 
today. And so there would have been still many moving parts 
since its inaugural years when health care was brought into its 
current form in the ’60s in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
He also served as minister of Finance. We just came through a 
budget process and members on both sides of this House will 
understand the amount of work and the amount of stress that 
rests with a Finance minister. Surely that Finance minister has a 
good deputy and a great ministry, and whomever they are and 
whenever they’ve served, that would have been the case. They 
would’ve had a caucus to help them. They would have a 
treasury board, and they would have cabinet colleagues to rest 
on. And they’d have external advisors and those that would be 
forecasting the price of commodities for the purposes of 
budgeting. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Speaker, if Mr. Smishek’s luck with forecasters 
was any different than other Finance ministers’ luck has been. 
But he would have had all of those people assisting him but, at 
the end of the day, the very end of the day, he would have made 
the recommendation for a budget to a very seasoned, in this 
case, very experienced cabinet, and to a premier who was very 
much involved in the financial life of the province with respect 
to, not only the treasury board function of government, but also 
the duties to be the fiscal steward for Saskatchewan. He 
would’ve had a premier that was very engaged. 
 
And so the pressure would’ve fallen to Mr. Smishek, in the 
course of developing of those budgets and then submitting 
them, and then perhaps even more importantly, standing in his 
place in the legislature, delivering the budget on budget day, 
and then going out and communicating to the people of the 
province why the decisions were made by the government. And 
obviously they would’ve been all good decisions. I don’t think 
there’s one Finance minister that’s ever stood in this place and 
delivered a budget and had nothing but good news. There 
would’ve been decisions he would’ve had to communicate with 
stakeholders, with citizens. That would’ve been difficult to do. 
 
He also served as the minister of Municipal Affairs and Urban 
Affairs. And in this province, partly because of the number of 



March 31, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6839 

municipalities we have, and that’s been a subject of some 
debate in this place, but also because of the importance of 
municipalities in Saskatchewan — not only in terms of their 
front-line relationship with all of our constituents but because in 
many respects they are the deliverer of much of what’s 
appropriated by this Assembly for the purposes of budgeting — 
so that function of government, that particular file, is maybe not 
uniquely important in our province, but it certainly has a very 
special space. 
 
Imagine the confidence that Premier Blakeney had in Mr. 
Smishek to give him these files, to give him the minister of 
Health, first public health then health; then as Finance minister; 
then the important file, the municipal affairs and urban affairs 
until 1982 when the government changed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it is a testament to the man, and in the 
company and in the presence of his family, they must be and I 
know they are very proud of his commitment. And rightly so, 
given the obvious confidence placed in him, not just by the 
premier of the time, but by his colleagues and by his 
constituents for 15 years as an MLA. 
 
I will also note for the House, Mr. Speaker, that I’m very much 
aware that the interests of Mr. Smishek did not end in 1982, for 
I read many letters to the editor and saw the engagement of Mr. 
Smishek in the public life of the province through that way. 
Would not have agreed perhaps with the contents of every letter 
to the editor, but I’d probably say that a number of them would 
have given me pause and an important opportunity to kind of 
back up and maybe consider my own position on something, 
because he could certainly put an argument, even in that short 
space that’s allotted by our newspapers, as he could, I’m sure, 
in this House when he was debating. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I in many ways owe my interest in politics, which 
has been an abiding thing, not just to the party that I’m a part of 
and it’s perhaps the parties that were its forebearers, but to all of 
those who were dedicated in politics at that time that I looked in 
on, that I watched and I followed. And Mr. Smishek was one of 
those. 
 
And so I owe him a personal debt of gratitude and, through his 
family, I offer that thanks because he would have maybe the 
part of the protagonist, but he would have played an important 
part in the development of my interest and the interests of, I’m 
sure, many people in the House on both sides. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, I know there are others that will want to say a few 
words. Let me just quickly move this motion: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former Member of the Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency and to the 
province. 

 
Walter Edmund Smishek, who passed away 22 
December, 2014, at the age of 89, was a member of this 
Legislative Assembly from 1964 to 1982, representing the 
constituency of Regina East for the Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation and Regina North East for the 
New Democratic Party from 1967 to 1982. [So, Mr. 
Speaker, I need to correct my remarks. He served much 

longer than those 15 years.] He served as minister of 
Public Health, the minister of Health, minister of Finance, 
the minister of Municipal Affairs and Urban Affairs. 
 
Mr. Smishek was born on 21 July, 1925 in Poland and 
immigrated with his parents in 1930 to a farm near 
Hafford. Prior to being elected, Mr. Smishek was a labour 
leader. He was employed at Western Grocers and became 
their union representative. He was later employed as the 
education director for the Retail, Wholesale and 
Department Store Union, RWDSU, and executive 
secretary for the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. 
 
Mr. Smishek is survived and sadly missed by his wife, 
Ruth; their children Mark, Kelly, and Erica; son-in-law 
Earl; and their grandchildren and great-grandchildren. 

 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of the bereaved family. I so move. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Walter Edmund Smishek, who passed away on 
December 22, 2014, at the age of 89, was a member of this 
Legislative Assembly from 1964 to 1982, representing the 
constituency of Regina East for the Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation and Regina Northeast for the 
New Democratic Party from 1967 until 1982. He served as 
the minister of Public Health, the minister of Health, 
minister of Finance, and the minister of Municipal Affairs 
and Urban Affairs. 

 
Mr. Smishek was born on July 21, 1925 in Poland and 
immigrated with his parents in 1930 to a farm near 
Hafford. Prior to being elected, Mr. Smishek was a labour 
leader. He was employed at Western Grocers and became 
their union representative. He was later employed as the 
education director for the Retail, Wholesale and 
Department Store Union, RWDSU, and executive 
secretary for the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. 
 
Mr. Smishek is survived and sadly missed by his wife, 
Ruth; their children Mark, Kelly, and Erica; son-in-law 
Earl; and grandchildren and great grandchildren. In 
recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, this 
Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 
of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a true honour to 
pay tribute to Walter Smishek this afternoon. And it’s also, Mr. 
Speaker, as I mentioned at the beginning of the proceedings 
today, an honour to welcome his widow, Ruth, here to the 
Assembly to listen to the remarks made about Walter, as well as 



6840 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2015 

some of their children. 
 
And I hope, Mr. Speaker, as they’re here, they told me it’s been 
a good number of years since they’ve been back to the 
Assembly, and certainly a longer number of years since 
watching the proceedings here on the floor. And I hope 
throughout the day that they’ve thought of the warm and the 
fond memories of watching their husband and dad over the 
many years serve here in the Assembly on the floor of this 
Chamber. 
 
Walter, Mr. Speaker, was a giant, perhaps not in physical 
stature, but absolutely a giant in terms of his role within this 
province, his leadership within this province, and the huge 
contributions that he made through public service for the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Walter Smishek was incredibly smart, incredibly caring, and he 
was always, always a gentleman. He always exhibited an aurora 
of calmness, strength, and leadership, measured restraint and 
resolve, and his life was fully committed to the pursuit of social 
and economic justice. 
 
He contributed so much to Saskatchewan, and I already miss his 
wise insights and his helpful advice that he was so willing to 
give to those who would be able to sit down and listen. 
 
I recall Premier Romanow speaking at Walter’s memorial. He 
talked about asking for Walter’s thoughts on the most important 
ideal that one should pursue in both public and private life. 
Premier Romanow says Walter’s response was firm and clear 
— fairness. That’s the underlying ethic that Walter Smishek 
identified as the most important ideal that we should pursue in 
both public and private life. 
 
Walter’s record of service stands as a testament to his pursuit of 
fairness. Walter was passionately committed to advancing the 
causes of working men and women through organized trade 
union activity. He knew that through organized union activity, 
working men and women stood the best chance of meeting the 
needs of their family, getting ahead, and achieving their 
aspirations. 
 
Walter served as a representative for the retail, wholesale, and 
department store workers union. He was the executive director 
of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour. He was a member of 
the political action committee of the Canadian Labour Congress 
and he was labour’s representative on the University of 
Saskatchewan senate for six years. 
 
Walter Smishek never wavered in his commitment to improve 
the lives of working people and their families. For him this was 
fundamentally about fairness. Walter served on the Thompson 
advisory committee, which was established by Premier Douglas 
to set out for the provincial government a framework and the 
principles and details of medicare. Walter was the trade union 
representative on the Thompson committee, and he agreed with 
the majority of the committee that medicare should be 
universal, but he issued a minority report, a dissenting report 
arguing against user fees of any kind. 
 
Walter firmly believed that health care was both an individual 
right and a public responsibility. And Walter played a crucial 

role in the formation of public universal medicare here in 
Saskatchewan and throughout Canada, because for Walter it 
was simply about fairness. 
 
Walter represented Regina East from 1964 to 1967 as a CCF 
[Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] member. He 
represented Regina North East from 1967 to 1982 as a New 
Democrat member. In the lead-up to the 1971 election, Walter 
was the lead author that drafted Allan Blakeney’s platform 
known as the new deal for people. It was an exciting, 
far-sighted, and progressive platform that had, at its root, a 
fundamental belief that government could serve as an 
instrument for the people to advance their rights, to advance 
their opportunities. 
 
A land bank for farmers, resource control for our province, legal 
aid, an independent ombudsman, expanded social services, 
health care reform, a human rights commission, and many other 
progressive and innovative ideas were begun with the new deal 
for people. And Walter Smishek was responsible for its 
formation because Walter cared about fairness. 
 
When the Blakeney government was elected in 1971, Walter 
was appointed as the minister of Health. Under Walter’s 
leadership we saw the most dramatic expansion and innovation 
of public health care programs our province has seen since we 
adopted universal medicare. Walter established the 
Saskatchewan dental plan, the first of its kind in North 
America; a provincial prescription drug plan; the Saskatchewan 
Aids to Independent Living; wellness programs; and the 
beginning of a chiropody program. All of this for Walter was 
about fairness, and then from Health to Finance to Municipal 
Affairs, each with their own record of incredible achievements. 
 
And long after his retirement from public life, Walter remained 
passionate about politics. He remained passionate about 
fairness. I loved visiting with Walter, and I appreciated his 
advice and I appreciated his regular book recommendations as 
well. Mr. Speaker, even on my last visit to Walter and Ruth’s 
home shortly before he died, Walter recommended some books. 
In every way he was a class act, a true gentleman, and an 
incredible politician. I was blessed to know Walter Smishek, 
and we are all fortunate for his service as a member of this 
Chamber, as a cabinet minister, and as a leader in our province. 
 
Today I pay tribute to Walter Smishek, and I thank him for his 
service to Saskatchewan and his service to Canada. And I thank 
his wife, Ruth, and their children Mark, Kelly, and Erica, 
son-in-law Earl and their grandchildren and great-grandchildren 
for sharing Walter for us. We are better for it. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[15:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the constituents of Regina Douglas Park, the MLA for 
Regina Northeast, the Minister of Advanced Education, and all 
of my colleagues on this side of the House, I very much 
appreciate the opportunity to say a few words for Mr. Walter 
Smishek. 



March 31, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6841 

Mr. Speaker, as we’ve heard, we know from the history of this 
great province and from others here today the significant impact 
that Walter Smishek had on the province during his time in 
public life. We thank him for that service, Mr. Speaker, and we 
thank his family for the support they gave him, enabling him to 
serve. 
 
I came to know Walter and Ruth through their daughter Kelly 
and her husband, Earl Kummerfield. Earl and I were on staff 
together at F.W. Johnson when we first met. Earl was an 
English teacher and coached senior girls’ basketball. Kelly, a 
dedicated supporter, rarely missed a game and, Mr. Speaker, 
along with Kelly, always Walter and Ruth. 
 
It was there that I was able to sit beside Walter and Ruth and 
share stories about basketball and students. And I learned the 
appreciation and the support that Walter and Ruth had for their 
daughter Kelly and son-in-law Earl. It was at those events, Mr. 
Speaker, that I came to know Walter as the consummate family 
man: husband, father, grandfather, and community member. 
The Douglas Park neighbourhood where Walter and Ruth reside 
loved him and they reciprocated, Mr. Speaker. And that 
sentiment was sincerely expressed by his neighbours and his 
family at his celebration, a celebration held at the Conexus Arts 
Centre overlooking Wascana Lake and his home in Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know Walter is missed by Ruth, Mark, Erica, 
Kelly, and Earl. We extend our deepest sympathy and say 
thanks for sharing Walter with the people of Saskatchewan. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. These are 
wonderful remarks that we are hearing today, from members of 
both sides of this Assembly, for a remarkable person. And I 
think the Leader of the Opposition described Mr. Walter 
Smishek as a giant, not of physical stature, but of his 
contributions to the province, and there couldn’t be a more 
accurate statement. 
 
Mr. Smishek, Walter, gave so much to the province that he so 
loved. His contributions are enormous in many ways when you 
look at the transformation of our province. He left an 
impressive and a progressive mark on our province, and for all 
of that we can only say thank you. 
 
It’s a pleasure to have family here today, to have Ruth here 
today, his wife; to have Mark and Kelly join here as well. I 
know that in Walter’s service, that it wasn’t just his service. I 
know that it was that of a family. And I know that it was that of 
his wife Ruth as well, someone who was a powerful force in 
bringing together community and working with community and 
working together for progress. 
 
Mr. Smishek was exceptionally intelligent to his very last days. 
He had an incredible vision but a practical and common sense 
approach to getting things done. He was incredibly determined 
and hard working and, quite simply, focused on making the 
lives of Saskatchewan people better, focused on fairness, as was 
referenced by the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

He left an incredible mark on our province and on our party, the 
New Democratic Party, and as well, of course, the CCF. So it’s 
incredibly special to honour Walter here today, someone who 
right to his very last days, as referenced by the Leader of the 
Opposition, was genuinely interested in the affairs of the 
province and the affairs of the party, and was always ready to 
offer insight and to offer ideas and to also offer challenging 
questions and suggestions, and was always a treat to listen and 
to work with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know that their family shared a love of community, shared a 
love of Last Mountain Lake, and worked together with so many 
to make our province a better place. So it’s with humble honour 
that I rise here today to pay tribute to Mr. Walter Smishek and 
to the entire Smishek family and to say to them, thank you so 
very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to also 
rise to pay tribute to Walter Smishek and to Ruth and to the 
family. Walter Smishek was that person who you always knew 
was there and available with very concise, clear advice and also 
a very good memory of what had happened over the decades 
prior to the time that I was elected and in politics. And there 
were a number of times where you would look at all the 
documents, look at all of the information, and realize there’s 
some other piece to this that I don’t understand, and Walter 
would be the kind of person that you could contact and he 
would describe more of what had happened. 
 
In that way, he was very much like Allan Blakeney, and the two 
of them, if you could ever get them the same place, you’d 
actually get a very big picture of how some of the policy 
choices that have been made for Saskatchewan have influenced 
what we do now. 
 
I don’t think there’s any way we can downplay the role that 
Walter Smishek had in the whole medicare development in the 
province, and we need to especially thank him for that. As a 
Health minister who was involved with that later, he always had 
advice — there’s no question about that — but it was always 
suggestions. It wasn’t directions. 
 
Another thing that I want to say about Walter is that he 
basically helped me understand the importance of Wascana 
Centre to the province and to the city of Regina. This was 
something that was very important to him and, you know, 
obviously to all of the MLAs in Regina, but he had a special 
interest in making sure that Wascana Centre would be 
something that would be a jewel or something that we were all 
proud of in the province. 
 
And if there were things that, or decisions that were being made 
that troubled him, you could be assured that he would get hold 
of the Regina MLAs to say to us, hey, you have to watch this 
because this is an important piece of this province. And we 
know that all of the governments since the establishment of 
Wascana Centre have worked hard to make sure that it works 
properly, but Walter was always that person who was keeping 
track of that. 
 
I want to say to Ruth and to the family that we will miss having 



6842 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2015 

Walter around. But I know that for all of us as Regina MLAs, 
we’ll reflect on the fact that Walter’s keeping track of what 
we’re doing. And so I say, Mr. Speaker, that we want to thank 
the family for sharing him with the people of Saskatchewan and 
the people of Canada. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s with a 
great sense of humility, even more than regular for myself, that 
I enter into this debate. And certainly I often think about, as one 
who’s privileged to serve in this place, about that time when we 
as members of the Legislative Assembly get to sign the roll. 
And you think about all the different giants that made the 
debate and the public life in Saskatchewan something that’s 
known throughout the continent, and in some cases throughout 
the world, for its vigour and for its energy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And for me I always thought of, you know, like Tommy 
Douglas and Allan Blakeney, and I thought of people like 
Walter Smishek because of course I grew up in north central 
Regina when Mr. Blakeney was our representative in the 
legislature and premier of the province, and took an early 
interest in the history of the CCF-NDP [Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation-New Democratic Party]. And you 
don’t need to get into that, that in turns proud, in turns 
contentious history very far, Mr. Speaker, before you find out 
about the contribution that was made by Walter Smishek. And 
I’ll always think of him as, you know, as Walter and Ruth and 
certainly Allan and Anne, and it was a tremendous friendship 
that that couple had over many years. And I think of, Mr. 
Speaker, what a sacrifice on the part of a family for the ability 
for Walter to serve, and that again it wasn’t just Walter but it 
was very much a team effort in terms of the Smishek family. 
 
But again, Mr. Speaker, in this day of politics such as they are, 
you think about the battles that someone like Walter Smishek 
was there, not just as some interested observer but in the teeth 
of the fight for medicare as the labour representative to the 
Thompson Commission and, you know, having the sand to put 
out his own minority report in terms of the whole question of 
salary versus fee-for-service for physicians. And again the way 
that that debate raged in the province of Saskatchewan but that 
we came through it to a better place I think, Mr. Speaker, and 
the way that it took the fortitude and the determination of 
people like Walter Smishek to say that, as the Leader of the 
Opposition has referred to, that fairness should be brought to 
bear in matters of health and the provision of health care. 
 
Or you think about the battles around natural resource policy in 
the ’70s and the way that different of those fights carried out, 
not just in the province but certainly in the federal government, 
and again there was Walter right in the thick of it.  
 
And as has been referenced, as the person that marshalled up 
the new deal for people platform for the NDP in the ’71 election 
— and being interested somewhat in, you know, how platforms 
get put together or not, certainly for the CCF-NDP side of 
things; I think it’s a matter of some agreement, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re always very interested in policy — in terms of what 
Walter did for the Saskatchewan CCF-NDP was pretty much, 
make it impossible to top what had been brought forward in the 

’71 election. You know, good luck trying to improve upon the 
effort that was brought to bear there. 
 
In so many different ways the impact, the legacy of Walter 
Smishek lives on. I think about a strong trade unionist and the 
way that those principles held some fealty to for the rest of his, 
for all of his life. I think about being part of a government . . . 
We were just celebrating the 40th anniversary of The 
Multiculturalism Act, and the way that someone like Walter 
Smishek undoubtedly played a part in that. 
 
I think about something as simple, and now as many years gone 
on, as the school-based dental program where kids in places like 
Kitchener School in north central Regina got to get first-rate 
preventative dental health care. And it didn’t matter that their 
parents weren’t rich, or that their parents were working class, 
but that they could have something as fundamental as good 
dental health care. And I think of the role that Walter played in 
that. 
 
He was a gentleman, as has been said. He was always very well 
put together. He was always proper and had that very sort of 
fiery spirit that you could see coming down the street, Mr. 
Speaker. But as much of a gentleman as he was, he was a 
hard-charging guy. And he was very much animated by ideas 
and principles and didn’t take to satisfaction, I think, very 
easily. He was always looking for ways to make things better, 
to improve, and to, as again has been said, to address the 
imperatives of fairness. 
 
Saskatchewan, I believe, Mr. Speaker, is a better place for the 
contribution that has been made by Walter Smishek and the 
Smishek family, and by Ruth, the kids, grandkids, and the 
great-grandkids. And we are a better province for the 
contribution, for the life of Walter Smishek. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[15:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure and honour to as well enter into this. My comments 
will be brief. I just want to relay maybe a story or two about 
Walter because he really was such a really important elder 
statesman in our party. 
 
Just a couple of things: his record is amazing, truly amazing. 
But one thing I just want to add about the new deal for people 
that he pointed out to me was the environment section. As you 
remember, the ’60s were pretty amazing when it came to . . . the 
environment protection Act was passed in Washington by 
Lyndon B. Johnson. As all these things were happening in 
North America, Walter was watching this very closely. He 
pointed out that things like the environment, that we really had 
not touched in Saskatchewan, were coming through with the 
new deal for people. And that was a wonderful thing. 
 
And of course I got to know Walter more when I was part of 
cabinet, through the labour initiatives and stuff that we did, and 
also through the SFL [Saskatchewan Federation of Labour] 
annual Christmas party. And I think he always went to the 
annual Christmas party right up to the last few years, and of 



March 31, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6843 

course party events. 
 
But there is one story I want to tell which is just, really I think 
epitomizes who Walter is. And that was Wes Bolstad. Many 
people will know Wes Bolstad. I didn’t know him really well, 
but Wes Bolstad, I knew more from Meewasin days than from 
what he had done as actually working for cabinet for four 
different premiers. Wes had passed away in December of 2008, 
and I was at his memorial in Saskatoon and so was Walter. 
Walter needed a ride to get back to Regina, and I was going to 
Regina, so this worked out really well. 
 
So as well, many people remember that was the winter that we 
were amending the Saskatchewan Housing Act, 1978. So I 
naively asked Walter if he knew anything about the 
Saskatchewan Housing Act of 1978, not knowing he was the 
minister who brought that forward. And of course we had just 
an amazing, an amazing drive back from Saskatoon those three 
hours on that December evening where he basically taught me 
all about the ’70s. 
 
And I appreciate the Premier’s remarks. You know, we all think 
that we’re aware of the different ministers. And you know, I 
was just starting my career and going to school in education, 
that type of thing, and knew the ministers, but didn’t really 
appreciate what was happening in Saskatchewan in the ’70s. 
What an amazing cabinet and the achievements that were 
happening in the province at that time, but also how we were 
thinking about our cities and what housing meant. And of 
course in very many similar ways, what our province was going 
through in the late ’70s to what they were going through in 
2008, in that time period. 
 
So Walter in his very gracious way taught me a lot of things 
over those three hours, you know, and I really, really value that 
to this day. And I wish that all of us as we grow old and will 
impart advice to future members, that we can do it with grace 
and in a way that we can all hear and learn from. Walter was 
just so good at that. And I just wanted to say thank you to him 
and to his family. He was a really, really pretty special guy. So I 
would just say that, you know, in our party we kind of recall 
Wordsworth’s phrase of a happy warrior, and I would say he 
was one of our best happy warriors. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — On the motion by the Premier, will the 
Assembly take the motion as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 
 

Serge Kujawa 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again in a moment I will be moving the formal condolence 
motion for Serge Kujawa, a former member of this House. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I did not know him personally but certainly 
am very aware of, not only his contribution as a member of this 
House for a term, but the very significant contribution that he 
made in the Ministry of Justice and frankly to, well to law and 
order in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I read the condolence motion, you’ll note 
that he graduated with his law degree in 1957 and almost 
immediately joined the Department of Justice, it would have 
been at the time. I think 1960 was the year that he began, Mr. 
Speaker, rising to, I think what we notionally know today as the 
chief prosecutor for the province. But in the course of his public 
service in that ministry, in the then Department of Justice, he in 
fact presented at the Supreme Court of Canada. He will be well 
known for some very, very infamous cases in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And what can be said in all of his work I think, and I’ve had a 
chance to briefly chat with the Attorney General who’s had a 
chance to revisit things with his ministry, that his reputation is 
stellar amongst his peers and amongst those who are aware in a 
much more detailed way of his service in the now Ministry of 
Justice and some who were able to serve with him. 
 
Imagine this then, Mr. Speaker. After a life of that, after a life 
of that level of public service which would have been very 
stressful and taxing — and, may I say, in the presence of his 
wife; a sacrifice not only on his part frankly, that public service, 
but on the part of those whom he loved — after that public 
service, he ran for office and sought a seat in this House and 
wanted to be a part frankly of a very difficult time in the 
political life of the province of Saskatchewan, wanted to be a 
part of a government at that time that faced huge challenges 
with respect to where the province was from a fiscal standpoint. 
 
Decisions that had to be made — by not just a very small 
cabinet that Premier Romanow put together but indeed, I’m 
sure, by all of caucus — would have been immense, those 
decisions, not only in their implications were they made, but in 
the implications of not making some tough decisions. Those too 
would have been very significant in terms of what might have 
happened, and not in a positive way necessarily, in the province 
had those decisions just been avoided. 
 
And so I just can’t help but salute someone who after a lifetime 
of that kind of public service, as a prosecutor and a minister of 
Justice, that would see fit then to continue to serve the 
constituents, I think, of Regina Albert Park or sometimes it’s 
known as Regina South. And we want to honour this former 
member today as well and pass on our very, very best to his 
wife, and through her to his family and loved ones. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, I will move now that: 

 
This Assembly records with sorrow and regret the passing 
of a former member of this Assembly and expresses its 
grateful appreciation of the contribution he made to his 
community, his constituency, and to the province. 
 
Serge Kujawa, who passed away September 22, 2014 at 
the age of 89, was a member of this Legislative Assembly 
from 1991 until 1995, representing the constituency of 
Regina Albert South for the New Democratic Party. 
 



6844 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2015 

Mr. Kujawa was born in 1924 in Radin, Poland. His 
family immigrated to Canada and settled in St. Walburg. 
Mr. Kujawa went to the University of Saskatchewan and 
completed a law degree in 1957. He moved to Regina and 
articled at a private law firm. In 1960 he joined the Justice 
department as a public prosecutor where he served until 
his retirement in 1989. As the chief Crown prosecutor, he 
took many cases to the Supreme Court of Canada. He also 
served on many committees and boards and taught courses 
for lawyers in Halifax and Calgary, as well as for the 
RCMP and the Regina City Police. 
 
Mr. Kujawa is survived and sadly missed by his wife, 
Darlene; his brother Nick; his children Ivy, Judy, Kim, 
Mandi, Melodi, and Melissa, and stepson Scott. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly, and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Serge Kujawa, who passed away on September 22nd, 
2014 at the age of 89, was a member of this Legislative 
Assembly from 1991 until 1995, representing the 
constituency of Regina Albert South for the New 
Democratic Party. 
 
Mr. Kujawa was born in 1924 in Radin, Poland. His 
family immigrated to Canada and settled in St. Walburg. 
Mr. Kujawa went to the University of Saskatchewan and 
completed a law degree in 1957. He moved to Regina and 
articled at a private law firm. In 1960, he joined the Justice 
department as a public prosecutor where he served until 
his retirement in 1989. As the chief Crown prosecutor, he 
took many cases to the Supreme Court of Canada. He also 
served on many committees and boards, and taught 
courses for lawyers in Halifax and Calgary, as well as for 
the RCMP and the Regina city police. 
 
Mr. Kujawa is survived and sadly missed by his wife, 
Darlene; his brother Nick; his children Ivy, Judy, Kim, 
Mandi, Melodi, and Melissa, and stepson, Scott. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 
of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a true honour this 
afternoon to pay tribute to Serge Kujawa. And I again would 
like to welcome his widow, Darlene, here to the Assembly. I 
didn’t know Serge personally, Mr. Speaker, but I didn’t need to 

in order to know the remarkable life that he indeed lived, and 
the remarkable contributions that he has made to Saskatchewan. 
 
Like some of the other members, I took a look at the maiden 
speech that he gave in this legislature on December 5th, 1991. 
He said, “I suggest for your consideration that probably the best 
test for civilization is to assess how considerate are these people 
one to another.” And he went on, Mr. Speaker, and he 
concluded with a story I think that points to a few things: a 
sense of humour, but more importantly, paints a bit of a picture 
as to what was his motivation for serving in the different roles 
that he had. This is what he said: 
 

I was once surrounded by a whole lot of these social 
scientists in a conference in Toronto, and that night we 
were having a banquet and a great speaker from the United 
States of America. And I figured . . . I have to tolerate all 
of this just to get some free booze and . . . a real good 
meal. And the answer is, yes I’ll tolerate it! 
 
I went in, and I listened to a guy by the name of John 
Graecen address us. At the end of the address, I walked up 
to him and I told him I thought it was a great performance. 
He was a great deal of help to me. I talked with him a bit 
and I asked him, didn’t you know that talking to this sort 
of an audience, what you had to say would be unpopular. 
And this guy says, yes I knew that. And I said, well 
doesn’t it bother you? He says, it used to bother me a great 
deal but not so much any more because I have slowly 
learned that it is not my job to change the world. My job is 
to try. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Serge Kujawa’s maiden speech does speak 
volumes to me, emphasizing the importance of being 
considerate, being fair, and being kind. I think it also paints a 
picture of a good balance, a mix of idealism and pragmatism. 
He knew that it wasn’t his job to change the world, but he was 
determined to try, and we’ve seen that through the remarkable 
career and the various forms of public service that he provided. 
 
Before becoming an MLA, Serge had a distinguished law career 
handling many high-profile cases, including convicting Colin 
Thatcher of murder and taking many cases to the Supreme 
Court of Canada. I didn’t, as I said, have the pleasure of 
knowing Serge Kujawa, but I wish that I did. I’ve heard about 
his quick wit, his intelligence, his honesty and his integrity. And 
I’ve heard about how considerate and down to earth he was. 
 
[15:30] 
 
I’ve also heard, Mr. Speaker, about his incredible athleticism, 
able to do one-handed push-ups in his 60s, tearing phone books 
in half, and regularly winning arm wrestles with much younger 
people, often using only one finger, right into his late 80s, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Serge Kujawa’s life was full and productive, and he contributed 
so much to Saskatchewan. So we thank him and we express our 
sincerest sympathies to his family: his wife, Darlene, brother 
Nick, children Ivy, Judy, Kim, Mandi, Melodi, and Melissa, 
stepson Scott, and his grandchildren. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 



March 31, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6845 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would 
like to join in the motion to add my condolences to former 
member Serge Kujawa. I would also, Mr. Speaker, like to 
recognize and thank his wife, Darlene, for being here today. I 
think it’s of some significance when family members choose to 
attend these events, and I think it’s important that members 
show appropriate respect for them, and we’re pleased that 
they’re here. 
 
As the Premier mentioned, Mr. Kujawa was born in Radin, 
Poland. The family would leave when Serge was three years 
old. They arrived in Canada at the Halifax Pier 21 in 1928. 
They travelled by train to the settlement of St. Walburg to 
homestead. 
 
After school, he had a number of jobs. They included teaching, 
joining the army, panning for gold, and playing poker. His book 
that he wrote indicated that playing poker was a career option, 
so I won’t ask any questions about how you make money 
playing poker. He certainly was more skilful at it than I’ve ever 
been. 
 
A farm accident would change the course of his career. No 
longer able to work on the farm, he attended the University of 
Saskatchewan and obtained a law degree. After graduation he 
moved to Regina, worked for a short period of time in private 
practice, and then joined the Justice department. He eventually 
became chief Crown prosecutor and he worked during his 
career on a number of high-profile cases, including the Thatcher 
and Milgaard cases. Many of the cases ended up in the Supreme 
Court, and he was a tireless and a strong litigator at all levels of 
court. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I first met Mr. Kujawa as a very young defence 
lawyer. You can imagine my terror going to court, not knowing 
who the prosecutor might be, and the living legend himself 
walked in. My client was quite properly convicted, and in spite 
of the fear and trepidation that I had, Mr. Kujawa was a 
gentlemen. He took me aside, explained things to me, and it 
was a great learning experience for me. 
 
I can also advise that later on, during my time at Legal Aid, we 
had a senior prosecutor that worked with us, Harold Pick, who 
was close friends with Mr. Kujawa and obtained regular advice 
and they were frequent visitors back and forth and provided 
no-cost or low-cost counsel to young Legal Aid lawyers. So on 
behalf of the Legal Aid Commission, we thank him for his 
contribution, albeit second hand. 
 
I can advise as well he was an incredibly fierce competitor, a 
great athlete, and had a softer side. He liked to fight for the little 
guy. He wrote in his book, and I quote: 
 

From a young age I had been painfully aware of the price 
of injustice and was tired of having to defend my right to 
occupy a spot on this earth. I looked to the law as a way to 
right those kind of wrongs. 

 
After retiring, he served a term in the Legislative Assembly as 
MLA for Albert South from ’91 to ’95. Mr. Speaker, he will be 
remembered for his enormous contribution to Saskatchewan’s 
legal history over his storied career. 
 

He came from humble immigrant roots, and his life was 
embodied in Saskatchewan’s motto, Multis e gentibus vires, 
“from many peoples, strength.” He made this place a better 
place for having been here. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to add my 
voice of praise for Serge Kujawa’s life and add a whole number 
of things that I learned. I’m very pleased that Darlene is here 
because Darlene asked me to preside at Serge Kujawa’s funeral. 
And I had known Serge over many decades, but in that day and 
in that time I was able to learn many things about Serge that 
really cemented for me why he was so well loved by his family, 
by the public, and by his colleagues here in the legislature. 
 
I think I’ll start with the theme song for his funeral. It was “You 
Are My Sunshine.” That was his favourite song, and it was one 
that Darlene and Serge got to sing many places around the 
world because people would know it in lots of languages and 
they could join in with that. 
 
And so what we have here is this man who was very much the 
symbol of justice in Saskatchewan, who took some of the 
toughest cases and dealt with them in a very fair, even-handed 
way, taught the young counsel as we just heard from a member 
opposite, and taught many of the people that he was working 
with about what it means to be fair, what it means to provide 
clear counsel. 
 
Mr. Kujawa was a learner I think his whole life. He was a 
teacher. One of the stories that was shared with me by Darlene 
was a reunion where Serge as teacher was invited back to 
Timberlost school. Timberlost school is near Big River, and I 
think probably there’s not much of it left, but there’s a 
community there. And those people welcomed him back into 
his old role long before he was a lawyer and reminded him how 
he had been an inspiration for all of them in their lives. I think 
that’s what happened in many different situations. 
 
I ended up knowing Serge through the bar in Regina, through 
the lawyers. But my parents moved to North Battleford and they 
ended up living across the back fence from Serge’s sister, Dr. 
Barbara McPhail. And it was clear that Howdy McPhail and 
Barbara McPhail and Serge and his family were very much a 
part of that whole history of northeast Saskatchewan even 
though he lived most of his life down here in Regina. 
 
I know that Darlene spent many, many years with Serge as he 
finished his legal career and then went into his legislative 
career, and then after that they had a chance to travel to many 
parts of the world. 
 
But I know that many of the most important parts of Serge’s life 
involved his role as a lawyer. It’s very interesting that one of 
the other members that we’re going to honour a few minutes 
later today is Mr. Collver, because Mr. Collver played an 
important part in Serge’s life in the Thatcher case, in that Mr. 
Collver became a witness for Serge as prosecutor in that case. 
And we all kind of know that history back in the recesses of our 
memory, but it’s interesting how that made a difference there as 
well. 
 



6846 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2015 

I remember Serge from around the courthouse and around 
different places, but more importantly, after Serge retired he 
would be very much one who wanted to continue to exercise, 
continue to basically show how physically strong he was. And 
he loved the sun, and so often you’d see him start on a trip or a 
walk somewhere and then he’d take his shirt off and you would 
say, well who is this? Well that was a time for us as lawyers, 
especially us younger lawyers, to stop and visit with him and he 
would stop and give advice in that situation as well. 
 
I had the honour to represent an area that he had represented 
when he was member for Regina South. Between 1991 and 
1995 there was a re-districting and so about a third of Regina 
Lakeview was the old Regina South riding. And he came into 
that riding as somebody that everybody knew and respected, 
and he got elected and served in those years. When I then ran, I 
would hear about Serge as our MLA, somebody that we were 
proud of. So I had a great sort of reputation to follow, and I 
have to say that I really much appreciated that. Also Serge was 
very good about giving advice even after he’d left this place 
about how it works here, over and against my role at that point 
as minister of Justice. Because he had many more years 
working in the Ministry of Justice than he had in the legislature, 
I always listened to him carefully because he could understand 
both sides of that role. 
 
I know that he was very proud of his children and his 
grandchildren, and many of those people have and continue to 
serve the province of Saskatchewan. I know a number of them 
are very good athletes, and I know he was especially proud of 
that, but he was also proud of everything that they do. I know 
that Darlene, his wife, was an absolute, I guess, queen in his life 
and it was their years together as he got older that I think were 
probably the most important part of his life. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that all of us in 
Saskatchewan need to thank Serge Kujawa for his service, and 
we very much appreciate that Darlene and the rest of the family 
have allowed him to be part of our community. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
the Attorney General, I felt it important that I should stand and 
pay tribute to a formidable and honourable gentleman, Mr. 
Serge Kujawa, Q.C. [Queen’s Counsel]. Members of this 
Assembly have heard of his career as an MLA. This was a 
natural outgrowth of his commitment to the principles of justice 
and public service. Yet before his career as an elected official, 
he lived out his allegiance to these principles as a lawyer in the 
Ministry of Justice for nearly three decades. 
 
In his memoir, Serge wrote that “the call to the study of law 
came to him like a prophecy asking to be fulfilled.” Serge 
began working with the department of the Attorney General as 
a prosecutor in February 1961, his first office facing the lake on 
the second floor of this very building. He would eventually rise 
to become the director of public prosecutions, serving in that 
role until August 1974 when he became the director of the 
newly created policy and planning branch. 
 
In May 1978 Serge was appointed to be the associate deputy 

minister and general counsel for the department, a position for 
which he continued to serve the people of Saskatchewan until 
his retirement on November 25, 1989. 
 
Serge prosecuted several high-profile cases during his time at 
Justice, although he was particularly proud of one case in which 
he prosecuted a hotelier in Montmartre for making Aboriginal 
customers sit in a different location from other people. His 
strong sense of justice was reflected in his work and made 
Saskatchewan a safer and a fairer place to live. 
 
At the same time he also made our province a fairer place to 
live. His commitment to the unbiased exercise of law 
contributed to the state of the legal system as we now know it. 
He was highly critical of allowing politics or the media to 
interfere with the rule of law. As he reflected: 
 

Call it the Bermuda Triangle effect or the perfect storm, 
but when you bring these three groups together, it can only 
result in disaster. When these three forces choose to tango, 
costs go up and precedent-setting legal decisions are made 
based on faulty information and for the wrong reasons. It’s 
just bad law. 

 
He was committed to this principle even to the point of 
endangering his own career. In his memoirs he tells the story 
about how he once stood against a former attorney general who 
asked him not to prosecute a particular case because his 
constituents didn’t like what they were reading in the news. 
Once presented with the facts, the attorney general changed his 
mind but not before Serge had reinforced the convention of 
prosecutorial independence which is a hallmark of today’s 
judicial system. 
 
His colleagues describe Serge as a consummate professional 
with an analytical mind. He felt the position was a high calling 
and performed his duties with ferocity and integrity. I thank his 
family for empowering him to serve the people of the province 
with such dedication, and relay, on behalf of his co-workers in 
Justice past and present, our condolences. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[15:45] 
 
The Speaker: — On the motion by the Premier, will the 
Assembly take the motion as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 
 

Richard Lee Collver 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In a 
moment I’ll be moving a motion of condolence in respect of 
former member Richard Lee Collver, or Dick Collver as he was 
known inside and out of politics during his life here in 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I’ll read the motion. It includes 



March 31, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6847 

some biographical comments about Mr. Collver. I never had a 
chance to meet him either, but I’m certainly aware of his 
accomplishments and contributions to the province’s political 
life. Mr. Speaker, they are significant indeed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s noted in a book called Singing the Blues: The 
Conservatives in Saskatchewan, a book by Dick Spencer, that 
Mr. Collver’s career began or his political aspirations were first 
manifest in civic politics in Saskatoon. Though he had come 
here from another province, he had quickly involved himself as 
a young man in the political life of Saskatchewan, seeking to be 
the mayor of Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, he was unsuccessful in 
that endeavour, but he gained some recognition and turned 
some heads perhaps amongst those who, as Mr. Spencer points 
out in his book, maybe were concerned about whether or not the 
government of the day, the Blakeney government whom we 
have feted and honoured here today, but concerned about 
whether the Blakeney government in fact was business friendly 
enough. They were concerned about economic issues, this 
group of business people and those interested in politics, and 
they were seeking some vehicle perhaps, some conveyance of 
change in the province. 
 
And of course at the time we had in opposition when this would 
have been happening, the Liberal Party which of course formed 
a government for two terms in the ’60s under Mr. Thatcher, and 
by any reasonable measure would be considered I think a 
business-friendly or certainly centre right on the spectrum, but 
were finding it difficult in making any headway against the 
formidable political abilities of the Blakeney government of the 
day. So here we have a group of people in Saskatchewan, 
mostly in Saskatoon but then the group grew, looking at 
options, I would say, on the centre right of the spectrum, 
wondering if in fact the Liberals, with the loss of Mr. Thatcher, 
could in fact again form government in Saskatchewan. 
 
And of course the Liberal brand itself had been altered 
significantly, not here in the province and not by Messrs. 
Malone and Steuart and prior to that Thatcher, but rather by 
their federal counterparts, by folks like Trudeau and Lalonde 
and MacEachern who I think had taken the party to a different 
place, the Liberal Party to a different place certainly than what I 
think most provincial Liberals at the time were comfortable 
with. And so there was this atrophying in Saskatchewan of that 
base for the provincial Liberal Party, and those who wanted an 
alternative to the New Democratic Party on the left were 
wondering where would that option come from, not just in the 
short term but very much I think their concern was about the 
long term. 
 
So enter Mr. Collver and the attention that he received from 
those in Saskatoon. And if you read what he had to write about 
the time or the book that I’ve referenced by Mr. Spencer, his 
personal approach to politics, even as he became involved 
provincially, was mercurial I think to put it perhaps in an 
understated way. I think, for example, it’s well noted than on 
the night when he stepped down, stepped away from politics, I 
think it’s pretty well proven that he was shooting a .357 
Magnum handgun from his window or somewhere thereabouts. 
So mercurial might in fact be a bit of an understatement about 
Mr. Collver’s own personal disposition, but there ought to be no 
doubt about his willingness to work hard. His father had taught 
him that. 

His father had taught him the importance, in the case of his 
family’s business, of sales, the importance of perseverance, the 
importance of hard work, the importance of really never giving 
up on a sale or some potential gain in business. And of course 
he took this with him to politics. The easy transition from that 
part of the business world of sales to politics for Mr. Collver 
was no doubt rooted in what his father had shared with him and 
what he had learned from his family. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, though he took over a party that, upon his 
selection as leader of the Progressive Conservative Party, had 
about 300 members, 293 I think, notwithstanding that number, 
just a few short years later at the end of the 1975 election where 
the Blakeney government had, I would say, from a popular vote 
standpoint, a near-death experience, he had taken his party from 
300 to 10,000 members and had gone across the province and 
sold. He had sold his vision for one alternative, his alternative, 
to the governing New Democrats. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he did so, not always with the support of the 
establishment. The former prime minister, the only prime 
minister from Saskatchewan, Mr. Diefenbaker, thought him to 
be a bit of a tourist when it came to Saskatchewan politics, and 
there was not a great deal of support from Mr. Diefenbaker for 
Mr. Collver. Certainly I don’t think he went out of his way to 
make public comments that were problematic, but neither were 
there gestures or offers of support from “the Chief” for Mr. 
Collver. 
 
Still he built up a group of people that wanted, that were willing 
to follow him. He campaigned quite purposely. He would tell 
those who would write about this time later, he would tell those 
folks that he campaigned quite purposely in sort of a more 
vague platform — not a lot of specifics in that ’75 platform, not 
a lot of specifics in the ’78 one either. And I think he regretted 
it, and more on that in a moment. Because when you leave a bit 
of a vacuum in your campaign platform, I think we all 
understand in this House, your opponents may be happy to fill 
that vacuum and finish the sentence that you didn’t quite 
complete. 
 
In ’75 though, the campaign by any measure from a partisan 
standpoint, was very, very successful; 390 members in ’73, 
10,000 at the end of that night, that fateful night, June 11th. The 
New Democratic Party went from 55 per cent of the popular 
support in ’71 to 40 per cent. So they won far less than the 
majority government at that time in terms . . . I’m sorry, a 
majority popular support, but had enough to win, as we all 
know, a majority government because the Liberals held at 15 
seats, and out of nowhere I think the number turned out to be 19 
seats for Mr. Collver and his party — including that gentleman 
I was referencing earlier on, this Mr. Dennis Ham who I’d 
mistaken for a realtor and was worried my parents were selling 
the house and found out that no, he was a candidate for election 
and was successful on that Collver team. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the 1978 election . . . And I know other 
members will perhaps want to talk about his constituency work 
for the people of Nipawin and area, though he had roots in 
Saskatoon. But I want to focus on his contribution, his 
leadership in terms of trying to build and provide an alternative 
to the government. Because whatever we think in this House 
and however we debate economics and social policy and health 



6848 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2015 

care, I think we do agree that it’s healthy to have an effective 
opposition, and it’s healthy to have a government that’s held 
accountable and is aware that there is another option the people 
could consider and choose at an interval of, you know, of every 
four years when the election’s called. And so I think therefore 
his contribution to politics in Saskatchewan in the ’70s was 
important, because he built that conveyance for an alternative to 
the New Democrats. And the full fruit of that wasn’t born until 
1982, but certainly he laid a lot of the groundwork in the 1970s. 
 
In ’78 he I think took a similar approach to his campaign. He 
also took a similar approach to candidate recruitment. I think a 
young doctor, I think, a young economist at the University at 
Saskatchewan first ran in that election in the constituency of 
Saskatoon Nutana. If you look at the candidate, that was Grant 
Devine. If you look at the candidates that Mr. Collver recruited, 
it’s a significant and substantial list of people that he was able 
to attract to the party to try to build this alternative. 
 
And also there was membership sales, and the machinery of the 
party was there. I think that would be fair to say, and I think the 
party had a real discipline and an understanding of the 
importance of membership and door knocking and canvassing. 
And so all of that part was right. 
 
But we also understand that in an election campaign you need 
to provide your plan, maybe your vision, but some specifics as 
well to the people of the province that you’re asking to consider 
you as the government perhaps, and in this case as premier. 
 
And I remember a story being told to me I think by Mr. Taylor 
— Graham Taylor, who had this story told to him by others, but 
I’ve heard it since — that in that ’78 election the Progressive 
Conservatives sort of left far too vague the area of health care 
policy. And as I mentioned earlier on, the risk in politics today 
is if you leave something too vague in your platform, your 
opposition may be happy to fill in the planks. And Mr. 
Blakeney who was pretty good at the practice of the political art 
was happy to fill in the blanks for Mr. Collver with respect to 
health care. 
 
For example, I think there was more than a suggestion that were 
the province to finally move from a New Democratic 
government to this Progressive Conservative government under 
Mr. Collver, that health care would be in jeopardy. There might 
have been enough of some commentary in the health care 
platform the PCs [Progressive Conservative] did to make this 
have a bit of a grain of truth to it to the voters. Because as the 
story has been told to me, he would literally be going into 
meetings of the Progressive Conservative Party on the 
campaign trail, talking to people about health care who were 
worried about the loss of health care because they’d heard the 
governing New Democrats say, if you vote for this fellow, this 
is what’s going to happen to your health care. 
 
And it got to the point where he was writing out individual 
notes, is my understanding, to voters, a promise from Dick 
Collver that he was very concerned about it. Now this may now 
be the stuff of legend, but I’ve heard it from more than one and 
so it underscores (a) how important it is to have that platform 
ready to present, not just a great team as he had assembled, not 
just a great political machine but it also points out how hard he 
worked in the ’75 election, in the ’78 election, how earnestly he 

tried to seek the support of Saskatchewan people. 
 
And we all know that from a political perspective, although I 
don’t know if he had very many regrets personally, it didn’t end 
all that well politically here. We know that Mr. Collver made 
some decisions, along with a former MLA for Swift Current, to 
form another party whose aspirations were that the province of 
Saskatchewan would join with the United States. And of course 
that didn’t last long and the rest, as they say, is history. Mr. 
Collver then went on about his business. He had been an 
entrepreneur before politics. He returned to that, to his ranch in 
Arizona, and continued to be involved in business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we ought to mark well today in our remarks I 
think and in our thoughts, the commitment that he had to the 
province of Saskatchewan. He believed strongly in what the 
province of Saskatchewan needed from an economic policy 
standpoint. He believed in his heart that those policies were not 
forthcoming from the government of the day, that that 
government of the day needed first and foremost to have a 
strong opponent, what he would probably call a free enterprise 
alternative, and that he would hope one day of course that the 
government would be replaced. That was what he was seeking. 
 
And notwithstanding all the other stories around Mr. Collver 
that we’re aware about, that we’re aware of today, today’s an 
opportunity, this afternoon’s an opportunity to mark his intent, 
to mark well what he wanted and desired, the big picture that he 
saw for the province, this alternative he desired and the success 
of Saskatchewan that he wanted very much, again, Mr. Speaker, 
facing problems sometimes within his own party, from stalwarts 
in his own party sometimes, and of course the political 
opponents across the way that he faced on a daily basis in this 
particular place. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I do want to move this official motion now, if 
I may, for members to give way for their comments as well: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Richard Lee “Dick” Collver, who passed away on 
August 7, 2014 at the age of 78, was a member of this 
Legislative Assembly from 1975 until 1982, representing 
the constituency of Nipawin for the Progressive 
Conservative Party and Unionest Party. Mr. Collver 
became the leader of the Progressive Conservative Party in 
1973 and led the party to official opposition status in 1978. 
 
Mr. Collver was born on February 13, 1936 in Toronto. He 
graduated from the University of Alberta. He then moved 
to Saskatoon in 1965 where he founded Management 
Associates Limited, a company offering management 
services. After his political career in Saskatchewan, he 
spent much of his time in Arizona and later in Thailand. 
 
Mr. Collver is survived and sadly missed by his wife, 
Nuan; and children Lee Anne, Paula, Mark, and Jet; as 
well as his many grandchildren. 
 



March 31, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6849 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
I so move. 
 
[16:00] 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 

 
Richard Lee “Dick” Collver, who passed away on 
August 7, 2014 at the age of 78, was a member of this 
Legislative Assembly from 1975 until 1982, representing 
the constituency of Nipawin for the Progressive 
Conservative Party and Unionest Party. Mr. Collver 
became the leader of the Progressive Conservative Party in 
1973 and led the party to official opposition status in 1978. 
 
Mr. Collver was born on February 13, 1936 in Toronto. He 
graduated from the University of Alberta. He then moved 
to Saskatoon in 1965 where he founded Management 
Associates Limited, a company offering management 
services. After his political career in Saskatchewan, he 
spent much of his time in Arizona and later in Thailand. 
 
Mr. Collver is survived and sadly missed by his wife, 
Nuan; and children Lee Anne, Paula, Mark, and Jet; as 
well as many grandchildren. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too today 
rise in this Assembly to send my condolences to the family and 
friends of Mr. Richard Lee Collver who passed away on August 
the 7th. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dick Collver, as we all called him, represented 
Nipawin which is now in the constituency of Carrot River, or 
which is now the constituency of Carrot River Valley, and was 
quite the person. He was once described as a bit of a renegade, 
and he once staged a 38-hour filibuster in this House which, Mr. 
Speaker, has to really be something to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as has been said by the Premier, he took over the 
PC Party in ’73 and then eventually turned around in 1978, took 
it up to 17 seats and made it the official opposition in this 
Chamber. To quote Dale Eisler, the former Leader-Post 
political columnist, and I quote: “He, more than anybody else, 

revived the Progressive Conservative Party . . . which had been 
moribund for generations.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, he was quite the character, and I have to tell you a 
little bit of a story. In 1978, I put up a sign on the end of my one 
quarter, which was right along the highway, with the Dick 
Collver sign, one of the 4-by-8 signs. And at that time they 
were pretty expensive signs. It was a actually a nice sheet of 
plywood and I put it up on the end of my quarter. Now at that 
particular time we were renting land from the Meachem family. 
 
Now the Meachem family, unbeknownst to me, were on the 
other side of the fence, so to speak. of what I was getting at. 
And they weren’t very happy about it, so they called my father. 
We were renting land from them and they called my father and 
said that this wasn’t a very good idea. So, Mr. Speaker, my dad 
called me up and he said, you know Fred, he said, we better do 
something about that. So I moved the sign down to the other 
end of the quarter so the Meachems, who we were renting land 
from, wouldn’t be so disappointed. 
 
But I offer my sincere condolences to the family and wish them 
all the best. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to join 
with the Premier to pay tribute to Dick Collver who served in 
this Assembly from 1975 to 1982, Mr. Speaker, and occupied 
and served in a number of roles here in the constituency, 
starting out, Mr. Speaker, with just 7 members in a caucus, and 
then growing to 17 members in 1978. 
 
In his maiden speech, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Collver said some 
interesting remarks, I think, that portray a picture of his 
commitment to the legislature and his desire for the province. 
And he was speaking about the important work that is 
conducted here in the Assembly. He said, “We believe that 
times are serious, Mr. Speaker, and require a serious tone to the 
debate.” 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, he talked about a number of complaints that 
he saw occurring at that time, about: 
 

Interrupting during the speech with cat calls; disrespectful 
comments, snide remarks, talking out loud while another 
speaker is in the middle of his address; slouching in the 
chairs; personal references to other Members’ private 
business in a sarcastic fashion; conducting electioneering 
in the Assembly by expounding at great lengths about the 
virtue of one’s own constituency. [He goes on to say] We 
are all citizens of the province of Saskatchewan. Boasting 
and bragging about how well a particular party may have 
conducted a government yesterday or in fact today. 
Playing to the press gallery by obviously changing the 
tone and tenor of the House between radio time and other 
time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are concerned about these practices. We 
are concerned that there will be continued disrespect for 
this Assembly and therefore a disrespect for the 
Legislature of our province. 

 



6850 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2015 

Mr. Speaker, so in these comments, to me, I hear a real 
commitment to ensure that we as members of the Assembly 
conduct ourselves with honour and with the seriousness that the 
issues that we talk about deserve. Dick Collver was passionate 
about the importance of the Legislative Assembly in conducting 
the serious business of our province. 
 
While our political views differed, I respect Dick Collver’s 
emphasis on the importance of this place, the importance of 
taking it seriously, the importance of holding government to 
account, and the importance of giving voice to the concerns and 
the ideas of Saskatchewan people. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition, I express gratitude to Dick 
Collver for his service to our province, and our sympathies to 
Dick Collver’s family. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly an honour to be able to 
stand in this Assembly and just provide a few thoughts 
regarding Richard Lee “Dick” Collver. I first met Mr. Collver 
early in the ’70s. Mr. Collver had just been elected leader of the 
Progressive Conservative Party of Saskatchewan, and when I 
met Mr. Collver, I myself was just kind of getting involved in 
the political sphere. What I remember of the election of Dick 
Collver as leader of the PC Party in 1973 was the excitement 
and anticipation within the Conservative ranks that they might 
have finally elected a leader who could lead the Progressive 
Conservative Party out of the political wilderness. 
 
I first met Mr. Collver when he came to our area of the province 
following his leadership win, and what I noted was that here 
was a young man with a lot of drive, ambition, and energy. He 
was not afraid of being continuously on the road promoting the 
PC [Progressive Conservative] Party of Saskatchewan. It also 
didn’t bother him to speak to any group, small or large. He was 
determined that he would speak to anyone who would listen and 
share with them his views and vision for the province of 
Saskatchewan and why they should buy a PC Party membership 
and vote for the Progressive Conservative Party. 
 
Mr. Collver, as I remember, was a heavy smoker, and as a result 
had quite a raspy voice. This however didn’t deter him from 
becoming an excellent speaker and motivator. While I didn’t 
have the opportunity to observe Mr. Collver speak on this 
legislative floor, I’m told that he could hold everyone’s 
attention through his articulate, cutting, and emotionally driven 
speeches. 
 
As a result of his drive, hard work, and dedication and ability to 
find well-thought-of individuals who would put their name on 
the ballot as a Conservative candidate, the people of 
Saskatchewan elected Mr. Collver, along with six more 
Conservative candidates, to sit as members of the Legislative 
Assembly in the general election of 1975. This certainly was a 
tremendous achievement. 
 
The Progressive Conservative Party then went on to become 
official opposition after winning two by-elections and 
convincing two Liberal members, Gary Lane and Colin 
Thatcher, to join them. In the 1978 election, the PCs received 
38 per cent of the vote, electing 17 members to this Legislative 

Chamber. Mr. Collver stepped aside as PC leader in 1975. 
 
One commentary I read said, “Collver, the nice guy, called for 
new civility in public debate, more amity in public life, advising 
his candidates that ‘Mud thrown is ground lost.’” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to extend my sympathies and thoughts to 
Dick’s wife and family at this time in their lives. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too knew Dick 
Collver from my days in the law firm in Regina when he was a 
member of the legislature. I started working at MacPherson 
Leslie & Tyerman in 1978, and he was a frequent visitor to the 
law firm, both for politics but also because of various court 
cases that he was involved in over the years. 
 
He always struck me as someone who knew where he was 
going, what he wanted to do, and was not afraid to work hard to 
get there, a very friendly person who basically was interested in 
all the people who were around him. 
 
I know in the election of 1978, that was my first election in 
Regina after graduating from law school. I was involved with 
the New Democrat campaign. And one of my other lawyers in 
the firm was the campaign manager for the Progressive 
Conservative candidate, who was Ian MacPherson in Lakeview, 
and he was running against Doug McArthur. 
 
And the intensity of the campaigning in that ’78 election, which 
I know that the member from Moosomin identified, was quite 
intoxicating in the sense of, boy this is something that you want 
to get involved with. And at that point I had no idea that I’d 
ever run in an election, but I have to say that reflecting back on 
Dick Collver running and attracting some very capable 
candidates, as the Premier said, actually was a factor in my 
eventual entry into political life. 
 
And so over the years Dick was not in Saskatchewan as much, 
but he was always somebody who we would hear what kinds of 
things he was doing. He was a successful businessman because 
he really, when he decided to do something, he did it, and he 
worked hard to make sure that it was successful. So I appreciate 
his contribution to the life of Saskatchewan, and I express my 
condolences to his family. Thanks. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion before the House by the Premier, 
will the Assembly take the motion as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 
 

Lindy Marian Kasperski 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
will be for me the most surreal participation of this afternoon. 



March 31, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6851 

It’s always an interesting and introspective day, this day when 
we salute members who have passed. Mr. Speaker, it’s I think 
much more difficult when we have served with those members 
and when their passing seems just very untimely. 
 
We’re going to reflect for a moment, if we can, on the life and 
the public life of Lindy Kasperski, Mr. Speaker, and I’ll move a 
motion of condolence here in a moment. But he was obviously 
in this House when I was first elected on the 16th of September 
in 1999. You know, in those days I was just, I think most of us 
new members were first trying to get to know each other 
because we hadn’t served in anything like this, a caucus, and 
really didn’t know each other very well, but we were also trying 
to get to know as best we could members who sat on the 
government side. 
 
I would offer to the House that it’s probably easier to make a 
connection with private members on the government side of the 
House. They had a greater opportunity to just be in the 
legislature through evening sittings and more of an opportunity 
perhaps to get to know through some visiting and some 
good-natured joking between us and those private members on 
the government side. And Lindy was one of those, although I 
think from the very beginning, he was serving as the Deputy 
Speaker or perhaps a Chair of a committee. There was a role 
that Premier Romanow had identified for him and then later 
Premier Calvert. 
 
[16:15] 
 
But I did get to know Lindy quite well and found him to be 
someone who was just very sincere, obviously very interested 
in this place, interested in politics, interested not just on the 
public policy side but in the dynamic between the two parties, 
in that case really a brand new party that had contested its first 
general election in 1999. I think that intrigued Lindy. I think he 
was interested in how that might have happened, from the party 
really not existing prior to August of ’97 to it winning the 
popular vote in ’99 and coming very close to forming a 
government. 
 
I remember talking to him about that. He wanted to maybe 
canvass the history of our party and talk a little bit about what 
we thought were the reasons for a relatively rapid rise to the 
state that the party had achieved. And it was a good discussion 
exercise for us to go through because I don’t think we had all of 
the answers to those questions either. 
 
I always appreciated the chance to visit with Lindy on those 
occasions, and we had some private time just to discuss not just 
politics but I know public policy matters as well as family and 
just the things that you talk about when maybe you’re sitting in 
these chambers at 9 o’clock at night, maybe a bit behind the 
bar, trying to avoid eye contact with the Speaker and having a 
chat about maybe not exactly what was being debated on the 
floor of the House but also important things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will always remember Lindy’s good sense of 
humour. He would be the first one — and often it was 
self-deprecating — he’d be the first one to enjoy maybe a 
good-natured heckle across the way, and he had a easy laugh 
about him. And that is all too rare a thing in this place and all 
too precious a thing in this place, someone who didn’t 

necessarily take himself too seriously and who had an easy 
laugh. I will certainly miss that of Lindy because we did have a 
chance to meet and continue to know each other after politics, 
after he was done serving here in the legislature post the 2003 
election campaign. 
 
My memory of Lindy in the House will always be as well of the 
many languages he seemed to know when he would introduce 
maybe guests or there would be an occasion for a delegation 
here. I’m not sure what the number was or how many he 
actually knew in depth, but he knew enough of a lot of 
languages to introduce many, many delegations, and you’d 
watch them in the gallery to make sure that Lindy was actually 
speaking words they understood. They were generally nodding 
in agreement that he had succeeded. 
 
Lindy was one of those individuals, and we’ve had a few on this 
side of the House over the years who, when he spoke English, 
did so very, very quickly, even when he was on his feet, even 
on occasions when he was in your chair, Mr. Speaker, even in 
private conversations where, because he knew a lot of 
languages, I found myself doubting at times that he was actually 
speaking English to me when I knew that in the end that he was. 
He just was one of those individuals who could laugh quickly 
but spoke very quickly as well and always seemed to be in a bit 
of a hurry. 
 
Many of us continued a friendship and a relationship with 
Lindy in his other business ventures after his time in politics 
was concluded. And, Mr. Speaker, I think we all would say, we 
all would hope that when we’re done our service here, no matter 
the length, no matter the term of that service, that we could 
credibly say we had friends. We made friends easily on either 
side of the House, with all parties. 
 
At that time there were three parties present: the Liberals and 
the Saskatchewan Party and the governing New Democratic 
Party. And I think it’s reasonable and fair for us to say that 
Lindy had friends in every camp, and that’s a testament I think 
to his character. That’s a testament to the fact that he reached 
out frankly because you don’t gain friends in other places 
unless you go over and make them, and sometimes that’s not 
always the easiest thing to do either. So he left us a good 
example in this regard for how we might treat each other in this 
Assembly and how we might conduct ourselves and what we 
might be aspirants to in terms of the final legacy we leave on an 
interpersonal basis with our colleagues in this Assembly. 
 
We think of his family as we think of him today and say a few 
words. We’re grateful that they shared Lindy with the province 
of Saskatchewan, with the legislature, with the Government of 
Saskatchewan as well. We were grateful that they shared him as 
well in terms of his interest in matters of local economic 
development. This was another area that we shared of common 
interest, an awareness of those mechanisms in the province that 
we had for local economic development and groups like the 
Saskatchewan economic developers association, and I was a 
member of that. Even as a member of this House, he was a 
patron; he was there. He was supportive of that particular 
organization. All along we know that his family was sacrificing 
as well, and so we acknowledge and thank them as well today 
with the following motion: 
 



6852 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2015 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former Member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Lindy Marian Kasperski who passed away on April 18, 
2014, at the age of 63, was a Member of this Legislative 
Assembly from 1995 until 2003, representing the 
constituency of Regina Sherwood for the New Democratic 
Party and as an independent member. Mr. Kasperski was a 
member of the Crown Corporations Committee for four 
years and served as the Deputy Speaker from 2001-2003. 
 
Mr. Kasperski was born on October 29, 1950 in Regina. 
He received his Bachelor of Arts degree in history from 
the University of Regina. Mr. Kasperski owned Kontakt 
Consulting, a website development and new media service 
provider. He was committed to many organizations 
including the Saskatchewan Genealogical Society, Regina 
Northwest Sports Association, and the St. Anthony’s 
Polish Community. He canvassed on behalf of the Cancer 
Society, Lung Association, CNIB, and Heart and Stroke 
Foundation. 
 
Mr. Kasperski is survived and sadly missed by his sons 
Dan and Jay, daughter-in-law Sharon, grandson Oliver, as 
well as his parents and three sisters. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has moved: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 

 
Lindy Marian Kasperski who passed away on April 18, 
2014, at the age of 63, was a Member of this Legislative 
Assembly from 1995 until 2003, representing the 
constituency of Regina Sherwood for the New Democratic 
Party and as an independent member. Mr. Kasperski was a 
member of the Crown Corporations Committee for four 
years and served as the Deputy Speaker from 2001-2003. 
 
Mr. Kasperski was born on October 29, 1950 in Regina. 
He received his Bachelor of Arts degree in history from 
the University of Regina. Mr. Kasperski owned Kontakt 
Consulting, a website development and new media service 
provider. He was committed to many organizations 
including the Saskatchewan Genealogical Society, Regina 
Northwest Sports Association, and St. Anthony’s Polish 
Community. He canvassed on behalf of the Cancer 
Society, Lung Association, CNIB, and the Heart and 
Stroke Foundation. 

 
Mr. Kasperski is survived and sadly missed by his sons 

Dan and Jay, daughter-in-law Sharon, grandson Oliver, as 
well as his parents and three sisters. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 
of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to pay 
tribute to Lindy Kasperski and to honour his service to our 
province. 
 
Theodore Roosevelt said, after his retirement from politics, that 
a person who engages in political service is one who “. . . 
knows in the end the triumph of high achievement, and who at 
the worst, if he fails, at least fails while daring greatly, so that 
his place shall never be with those cold and timid souls who 
neither know victory nor defeat.” Mr. Speaker, Lindy took that 
risk. He put his name on a ballot and on election signs in 
consecutive elections, and he earned the trust of his fellow 
citizens in the 1995 and 1999 elections, representing the 
constituency of Regina Sherwood for eight years. 
 
Outside of his political involvement, Lindy was heavily 
involved in the community and St. Anthony’s Polish church, the 
Saskatchewan Genealogical Society, the Regina Northwest 
Sports Association, the Cancer Society, the Lung Association, 
CNIB, and the Heart and Stroke Foundation. Clearly Lindy 
cared a great deal about his community and our province, and 
he made many important contributions. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition, I express gratitude to Lindy 
for his service to our province, and I extend sincere condolences 
to his sons Dan and Jay, daughter-in-law Sharon, grandson 
Oliver, as well as his parents and sisters. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
in and share some thoughts about Lindy Kasperski along with 
the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Lindy Kasperski was the president of the Regina Walsh Acres 
constituency association when we, my wife and I, first started 
running in politics. One of the first meetings we had when 
talking about possibly running in Regina Walsh Acres was with 
Mr. Kasperski. He was gracious to sit down and talk. Obviously 
we were quite young, and the decision to run, we still hadn’t 
fully made it yet. 
 
Talking with Lindy and all he did in the community . . . He 
worked for the Regina northwest soccer association. He 
volunteered on so many different committees. One thing that 
hasn’t been mentioned is his love for history. He knew his past 
splendidly. In talking with the Finance minister from 
Canora-Pelly, he said he knew Ukrainian history, Polish history, 
and he thought he might know Ukrainian history even a bit 
better than the member from Canora-Pelly, which says a lot 
coming from his mouth, Mr. Speaker. 



March 31, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6853 

So sitting down to talk with Lindy before we decided to run and 
just knowing how much influence he had in the community and 
how much he’d worked in the community and getting his 
insights was valuable for us when we made our decision to put 
our name in the hat for Regina Walsh Acres. He was very 
helpful in telling us some of the difficulties of becoming an 
MLA, some of the sacrifices you have to make with your 
family. Your family has to be totally behind you when you’re 
an MLA, and Lindy was sure that he made us aware of those 
decisions before we threw our hat in the ring. 
 
Also I got to work with Lindy a little bit when I was a member 
of the caucus staff. He ran a lot of websites through Kontakt 
Consulting, and we had some good conversations about what 
should or should not go on a website. He always had a great 
political lens to put on things, on issues when you’re talking 
from an MLA point of view, and that was valuable for us as 
well. 
 
I think one of the things that also I was mentioning is Lindy was 
a huge Regina Pats fan. He had season tickets forever. In 
talking with some of the members on this side, Lindy, after he 
was not elected anymore, he invited people out. If he had an 
extra ticket, you’d be able to go and watch the game with Lindy 
and have a good conversation. 
 
I think the Premier said it well, is that when you can look back 
on your career as a politician and have friends on all sides of the 
House, it speaks to your character and to your likeability as a 
person and how genuine you are as a person. You treat 
everyone with respect, and you take the time to listen when 
they’re talking with you, and I think that’s some of the best 
words that can be said about Lindy. 
 
My thoughts go out to his family. We gave a member’s 
statement when we were here after he passed away on April 
18th, 2014. And I know Dan and Jay. I got to know them well. 
They were members of the constituency association. It was a 
family affair for Lindy, and he placed a high priority on his 
family, as we all do, and that could be seen when he interacted 
with his grandchild Oliver. And I know his family will miss 
him greatly, so our thoughts and prayers are with his family. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Lindy and I were 
elected in the same election, 1995, and we were new members 
that were New Democrats. And it was a quite a small group of 
us because the people who had been elected in 1991 formed 
probably 80, 90 per cent of our caucus. And so quite quickly 
Lindy and I became really good friends and we often travelled 
together to caucus meetings or other events, or we worked on 
various projects. 
 
I had the opportunity to speak at Lindy’s memorial service at 
the Polish hall at St. Anthony’s and it was a very interesting 
group of people, very much like the Premier said and other 
members have said about how Lindy made friends in many 
different communities. 
 
One of the I think strong connections that Lindy and I had was 
that we both had bachelor’s and partial master’s degrees in the 

study of history, and we both were avid local Saskatchewan 
historians of an amateur nature. And so when we would go on 
trips, he would phone me and say, well let’s go this way 
because there’s four cemeteries that we can go to on the way 
that will provide us with information about the Polish 
community or the Jewish community or the Norwegian 
community. And those of you who have been around for a 
while would remember that Lindy was always included in my 
17th of May syttende mai speech because he had a Norwegian 
grandmother from down Weyburn way and so that he actually, 
in addition to the incredible knowledge of the Ukrainian and 
Polish and sort of Austro-Hungarian Empire roots, also knew a 
lot about Norway, Sweden, and Denmark and Germany. 
 
[16:30] 
 
And so it was very much . . . A good part of our political life 
was to have these long car rides with very interesting trips. We 
went up to Edenbridge together, for example, to see the 
synagogue, and Lindy knew a lot about that. 
 
Right after he graduated from the University of Regina with his 
history degree, he started working for the provincial 
government. And one of his legacies that people don’t 
necessarily know is that he was the main organizer of Mosaic, 
the whole multicultural program in Regina that’s now had I 
think probably 40 years of history. He was the guy who did the 
legwork and got everybody together so that the first Mosaic was 
held in Regina. And that stood him in good stead when he went 
into politics as well because many of the people that he had 
known in that time were people who would come and support 
him politically. He also was very involved with his sons and 
their athletic careers in northwest Regina. And that was also a 
place where he had many, many friends and many supporters. 
 
When Lindy was part of our caucus, he ended up I think at 
various points being deputy caucus Chair and other leadership 
roles. He always had that ability, as the Premier mentioned, to 
laugh at himself and to get people to start thinking together. 
And I think that was an important gift that he brought to his 
constituency as well. I know that he was very, very proud of his 
family, and ended up finding a lot of support from them. 
 
He also was a great lover of cats. And he always had cats at 
home, and as he got a little older, he spent a lot of time actually 
helping out in Regina dealing with cats that were on the street. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to express my special condolences to Dan 
and Jay and Sharon and grandson Oliver; and also Dan and 
Jay’s mother, Barb; Lindy’s parents, Mike and Sheila; his 
sisters, Diane, Janet, Susan and their families; as well as a big 
array of family that he had right across Saskatchewan. He was 
proud of all those people and they were very proud of him. 
 
He had a strong sense of railroading and the importance of the 
railroads in the province because of his family members who 
had been involved with railroading. When you added that into 
his interest in the communities of the province, there were very 
few people that could match him in explaining how your roots 
fit into Saskatchewan, and then he’d take that leap and get you 
back over to Norway or Poland or Ukraine. 
 
The last number of years one of the things he enjoyed the most 



6854 Saskatchewan Hansard March 31, 2015 

was Mosaic and being a resource on genealogy for people who 
came to the Polish pavilion. And you would go down there and 
say hi, but if somebody came in with a genealogy question, well 
you had to wait your long turn as he explained in great detail 
the history of some young person who was trying to figure out 
where they’d come from. 
 
I know that he was an early adopter of much of the 
computerized electioneering and I know that he worked for 
members in all parties, federally, provincially, and municipally, 
and he used his skills in organizing to help many, many people. 
 
We’re all going to miss him and I especially miss the fact that 
we would still say, okay, where are you going next, John? Can I 
come along? And which graveyards, which churches can we 
visit? And I know that his sons have learned a lot from him, but 
they have many years of study to catch up to their father. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I say thank you very much to his 
family for allowing Lindy to be part of this legislature. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to get 
up and say a few words about Lindy. This Premier was right. 
When I first came in the House in ’99, he was very friendly, 
very open. If you had any questions about the House, he was, 
you know, one of the first guys that approached us as new 
members. 
 
And even heckling, I can’t even remember him. I don’t ever . . . 
being mean spirited, heckle across the floor. He liked a good 
jibe back and forth, and laugh. If you made a good one, that 
laugh, he always had that distinctive laugh, but I don’t think he 
had a mean-spirited bone in his body. 
 
I know when he was Deputy Speaker, he was very fair and 
would . . . And I think we as members on the opposition 
probably even pushed him a little bit when we came to being a 
loudness in the House, but he always took it in good nature and 
I always respected him in the Chair when he was there, because 
even though we did maybe try to push the limits with him a bit, 
he was still . . . You knew that he could get tough if he had to. I 
always admired him at that end of it. 
 
As the other members have spoke about the history, myself 
being Croatian, once he found that out he always wanted to 
come over and talk about Croatia, the history of that country 
and the turmoil it went through. Unfortunately I’m third 
generation so most of my experiences would have just come 
from my grandparents, not even my parents, of the history. But 
he was quite willing to fill in some gaps, the stuff that I didn’t 
know about, the history of Europe. He took that very to heart. 
With the languages he, as the Premier had mentioned and the 
Leader of the Opposition, I don’t think there was . . . He was 
very versed, a very intelligent man. 
 
I also worked with him a bit. He helped us with our website. 
When it comes to computers, hey, I am pretty lacking in 
knowledge when it comes to that. Thank God for my CA 
[constituency assistant] and Lindy. He did a very good job of 

walking us through, helping us set up websites. When I first got 
elected, that wasn’t even part of our, I wouldn’t even think part 
of my plan. I was just a door knocker, but realized that the 
world of politics is changing and it’s more reaching out at the 
electronic end. So we worked very well with him. He helped us, 
helped myself understand that you need other ways to reach out 
to constituents, that the old days of just picking up the phone is 
starting to change. It’s emails, websites, along them lines. 
 
I greatly respect him for the work we did together and for the 
work he did in the House. Members spoke of his commitment 
to the community and also to the many charities he worked for. 
He was like I’d say all members of both sides of the House. 
When you become an MLA, you’re doing it to try to make the 
province better. And that was Lindy’s always goal. 
 
So my condolences go out to the family, and I know that they 
will miss him, and I miss him also as the business we worked 
with and also here as an MLA. I tried to learn some things from 
him. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to move a motion that notwithstanding . . . 
 
The Speaker: — On the motion before the House by the 
Premier, will the House take the motion as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like 
to move a motion: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 8(2) of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 
transmit an audio/video record of the tributes, together 
with the verbatim record and the Votes and Proceedings, 
to the bereaved families in memory of the deceased 
members. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 8(2) of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 
transmit an audio/video record of the tributes, together 
with the verbatim record and the Votes and Proceedings, 
to the bereaved families in memory of the deceased 
members. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 



March 31, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6855 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. 
tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:41.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6825 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6825 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6825 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6825 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 6825 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6825 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6826 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6826 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6826 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6826 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6826 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6826 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6827 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6827 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6827 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6827 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 International Transgender Day of Visibility and Trans Awareness Week 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6828 
 World War II Veteran Awarded France’s Highest Honour  
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6828 
 National Nutrition Month 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6828 
 Local Firm Wins Housing Excellence Award 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6828 
 Safe Digging Month 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6829 
 Pharmacist Awareness Month 
  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6829 
 Anniversary of Canadian Flag 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6829 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Housing of Young Offenders 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6830 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6830 
 Costs and Benefits of the Lean Initiative 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6830 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6830 
 Grain Transportation 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6832 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6832 
 Development of White Butte Trails 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6833 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6833 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Evraz Announces New Investment 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6834 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6835 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6835 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 141 — The Archives and Public Records Management Act 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6835 
 Bill No. 142 — The Archives and Public Records Management Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Archives and Public Records Management Act 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6836 
CONDOLENCES 
 Edgar Ernest Kaeding 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6836 



 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6837 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6837 
 Walter Edmund Smishek 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6838 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6839 
  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6840 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6841 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6841 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6842 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6842 
 Serge Kujawa 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6843 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6844 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6845 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6845 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6846 
 Richard Lee Collver 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6846 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6849 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6849 
  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6850 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6850 
 Lindy Marian Kasperski 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6850 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6852 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6852 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6853 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6854 
  Cheveldayoff (Transmittal Motion) ...................................................................................................................................... 6854 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


