
























































Hansard: March 23, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 38A  MONDAY, MARCH 23, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6629 
 March 23, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — I request leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my pleasure to introduce to you and through you, the students 
and instructors from Saskatchewan Polytechnic that are here in 
the very first community safety officer program from 
Saskatchewan. The students will be graduating in April and will 
become special constables. 
 
From the RM [rural municipality] of Kindersley, Pam Wake. 
Wave, Pam? From the city of North Battleford, Barry Adams 
and Ross MacAngus. From the RM of Edenwold, Roderick Ash 
and Ronald Roteluik. From the city of Prince Albert, Suzanne 
Stubbs and Keleen Wolfe. From Onion Lake First Nation, Greg 
Chief, Tia Trottier, Jessica Whitstone, Patrick Wolfe, William 
Diduck, Tineil Pahtayken. 
 
We also have instructors James Pratt and Marlene Dormuth — 
you want to stand up, Marlene? Thanks — and Brendan 
Tuchscherer. Brendan is from the Global Transportation Hub, 
and we want to thank the Global Transportation Hub for the 
partnership and collaboration for making Brendan available to 
deliver defence and tactics training. Thank you. And last but not 
least, the program head, community safety program, 
Saskatchewan Polytechnic, is Dawn Fleming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are seated in your gallery, as you can see, and 
I would ask you and all members of the Assembly to show a 
warm welcome to these students and the instructors. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Just like 
to respond to the minister’s introduction on behalf of the 
official opposition and say a great word of welcome and 
congratulations to these learners who’ve come to their 
Legislative Assembly. The community safety officer program, 
building on some of the good work that has been done 
previously at Saskatchewan Polytechnic, but also with . . . So 
congratulations to Marlene and certainly Jim Pratt if you give 
him our best, and to the instructor from Sask Polytechnic as 
well. 
 
But I want to give a special shout-out to one Rod Ash who’s no 

stranger to security matters, having served with distinction with 
the Regina Police Service for I believe upwards of three 
decades. And once upon a time Rod Ash was a cool high school 
student at Scott Collegiate, a couple years ahead of my older 
brother, and certainly came back and did a tremendous amount 
of great work representing the Regina Police Service but also 
helping the community in North Central. So if we ever get it 
together to have a hall of fame in North Central, Mr. Speaker, 
I’m sure Rod Ash is going to be right in there in spades. 
 
So anyway, congratulations to all the learners. Good work. 
Carry this forward. And with that I’d ask all members to join 
me in welcoming these individuals to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 
to all members of this legislature, I would like to introduce a 
group of people from The Battlefords. Just give us a wave. I’m 
going to introduce, from the Battlefords Trade and Education 
Centre, board members Julian Stelmaschuk, board Chair; 
Tammey Heinemann; and Terry Tait. And from My 
Community Cares, the fundraising committee members, Rob 
Rongve and Mac Driscoll; and the mayor of North Battleford, 
Ian Hamilton. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are a great group of community-minded 
citizens who are dedicated to building our new facility in The 
Battlefords for the Battlefords Trade and Education Centre, and 
I would ask everyone to please welcome them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the member opposite in welcoming this delegation from The 
Battlefords constituency and thank them for the good work that 
they’re doing, Mr. Speaker. And of course a particular mention 
to Mayor Hamilton for his work as His Worship in the 
community; and Mr. Rob Rongve as well, familiar to people all 
throughout the province for the early morning reports on the 
radio as well, Mr. Speaker. So I’d like to welcome all of these 
guests to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 
Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with the 
member from The Battlefords and welcome the group from The 
Battlefords here to talk about the new BTEC [Battlefords Trade 
and Education Centre] facility. But in the group is a constituent 
of mine, Terry Tait. He’s a former councillor for the village of 
Meota and also past mayor of the village of Meota. A strong 
community volunteer, Terry has a daughter named Megan that 
is a client of the BTEC facility. And I would ask that all 
members welcome Terry to his legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 



6630 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2015 

through you to all the members of the Assembly, it gives me a 
great deal of pleasure to introduce 29 students from the Regina 
Christian School accompanied by their teacher, Mr. Geoff 
Glasspell. This is Geoff’s annual visit to the legislature, and I 
look forward to visiting with he and his students following 
question period this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d also like to just mention that this is a particularly good time 
of year for Mr. Glasspell. He was an outstanding college 
basketball player at the University of Regina, and March 
Madness is on and Hoopla of course. His students will be in 
there. So members, if you don’t mind, please welcome Geoff 
and his class to our Assembly. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, I too would like to join in 
welcoming the special constable class here and in particular 
Marlene and Rod Ash. I had the great pleasure of working with 
both of these constables when they were with the Regina Police 
at Scott Collegiate. Their work in the inner city of Regina is 
absolutely outstanding and pioneers in the resource officer 
program. And so, hats off to you and welcome to your 
Legislative Assembly. Good to see you here. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition calling for greater support for 
education here in Saskatchewan. And we know that education is 
one of the most vital services that government provides to 
citizens; and that this government has failed to deliver a 
long-term plan and vision and the necessary resources to 
prioritize the delivery of educational excellence; and that this 
government has failed to deliver a real plan to close the 
Aboriginal education gap and to support English as an 
additional language students, support community schools and 
their communities and students. And I’d like to read the prayer 
now: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately prioritize education by laying out a 
long-term vision and plan with the necessary resources 
that provides the best quality education for Saskatchewan, 
that reflects Saskatchewan’s demographic and population 
changes, that is based on proven educational best 
practices, that is developed through consultation with the 
education sector, and that builds strong educational 
infrastructure to serve students and communities long into 
the future. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 
again today to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents 
as it relates to the unsafe conditions created by that government 
on Dewdney Avenue: that government’s failure to act, their 
failure to listen to plans that have been brought forward to 

them, their failure to recognize the unsafe conditions that 
they’ve created. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on 
Dewdney Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the 
safety and well-being of communities, families, residents, 
and users; and that those actions and plans should include 
rerouting the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial 
funding, and be developed through consultation with the 
city of Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 
Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. Homelessness is a major problem in La Ronge and 
other parts of the North, and it is getting worse. Shelter is a 
basic need for everyone, but under this government it’s getting 
harder and harder for people to find adequate housing, 
especially families, seniors, women and children who face 
abusive situations. The problem is getting worse because of the 
rising level of poverty, skyrocketing home ownership costs. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Saskatchewan government to 
build a homeless shelter in the Lac la Ronge area to meet 
the needs of addressing homelessness in the Lac la Ronge 
area. 

 
It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition in support of safe staffing levels in long-term 
care. The petitioners point out that the Government of 
Saskatchewan needs to recognize that safe staffing levels must 
be able to provide hands-on care to residents; that this 
government is failing to fix the basics in long-term care, 
including rejecting the further urgent requests from long-term 
care facilities for increased and needed staffing levels; that the 
government has removed the regulations requiring a minimum 
standard of care for seniors, resulting in neglect. Mr. Speaker, 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the government to 
commit to the creation of safe staffing levels for all valued 
members of the health care team and to reintroduce actual 
numbers of staff to match the level of care needs and the 



March 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6631 

number of residents under their care in long-term care 
facilities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed from folks in Prelate, 
Leader, Lancer, Regina, Silton, Moose Jaw, Govan, Warman, 
Sceptre, Saskatoon, and Strasbourg. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition for real 
action on climate change. The individuals who have signed this 
wish to bring to the attention of the Legislative Assembly the 
following: that Saskatchewan produces the highest greenhouse 
gas emissions per capita in all of Canada and that our emissions 
continue to grow; that the Saskatchewan government has failed 
to tackle climate change, reduce the emissions to the province’s 
own targets, or put in a real plan to protect the natural 
environment; and that since 2009, climate change funding has 
been decreased by 83 per cent. So the prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan enact a real 
plan and allocate appropriate funding in the provincial 
budget to tackle climate change by reducing greenhouse 
gas emissions, helping families transition to 
energy-efficient homes, and encouraging everyone in the 
province to take real action to protect the environment. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by individuals from Regina, 
Saskatoon, Melville, and Moose Jaw. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 

Spring Free From Racism 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
to rise today to speak about the 16th annual Spring Free From 
Racism family day celebration that took place yesterday at the 
Italian Club in Regina. 
 
Spring Free From Racism is becoming an annual tradition in 
our province. The Minister for Parks, Culture and Sport was 
honoured to bring greetings on behalf of the government and to 
congratulate the committees, the volunteers, and the sponsors 
on another fabulous, successful event. 
 
The first Spring Free From Racism committee formed in 1995 
to address the racial issues of our First Nations people, new 
immigrants, and visual minorities. Since then we have made 
many positive strides. Yesterday hundreds of people came to 
watch many of the dancers, the multicultural entertainers, and 
of course taste some of the fabulous food. This family event 
really brings all members of our community together and allows 
us to appreciate what all the different cultures have to offer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we hear that Canada is a mosaic, but events like 
Spring Free From Racism really show us how diverse our 

community really is. I would like to ask all members to join me 
in congratulating the Spring Free From Racism committee on 
another successful year as well as thank all the sponsors and the 
volunteers who continue to show off the diversity of our 
community. It is because of their commitment and hard work 
that this event has become such a success. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I had the 
pleasure of attending the 16th annual Spring Free From Racism 
event here in Saskatchewan, in Regina, along with my 
honourable friends, the Leader of the Opposition and the 
member from Regina Rosemont, and other such luminaries as 
the member for Regina Coronation Park; the mayor of Regina, 
Michael Fougere; and Member of Parliament Ralph Goodale. 
 
Saskatchewan is continuing to grow by leaps and bounds, and 
more than half of the population growth we have seen in our 
province in recent years comes from international immigration. 
These people bring more than skills and talents to 
Saskatchewan. They bring languages, cultures, and identities, 
and weave their own threads into our province’s rich cultural 
tapestry. 
 
But Spring Free doesn’t just celebrate the cultural heritage of 
those whose roots stretch across the oceans. It is also a time to 
recognize the importance of the indigenous peoples of 
Saskatchewan. The music, food, and dances of First Nations 
and Métis people were on vibrant display at Spring Free. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as our province continues to grow and change, it 
is more and more obvious that we must all do our part to 
combat racism. Saskatchewan will never realize its full 
potential until everyone — First Nations and Métis peoples, 
newcomers, and the children and grandchildren of immigrants 
— are able to work in harmony without prejudice or 
discrimination. 
 
And so I ask all members to join me in thanking everyone who 
helped make this year’s Spring Free a great success and to their 
commitment to ending racism in Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 

Z99 Radiothon 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. March 19th and 
20th was the 20th annual Z99 Radiothon for the Hospitals of 
Regina Foundation, hosted by CC, Lorie, and Buzz at the 
Cornwall Centre in downtown Regina. This 36-hour event helps 
to save babies’ lives by raising money in support for the 
neonatal intensive care unit in the Rawlco centre for mother and 
baby care at the Regina General Hospital. 
 
I should also mention the radio announcers stayed up for the 
entire 36 hours, collecting pledges. Long-time radio host CC 
said there’s no way to prepare for staying awake and 
broadcasting on the airwaves for 36 consecutive hours, but the 



6632 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2015 

energy he gets from people donating keeps him going. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to announce that this year’s total 
raised was a whopping $770,000. The money raised this year 
will go toward purchasing an enteral feeding system, a digital 
X-ray machine, a Giraffe OmniBed, monitor software, 
telehealth equipment for the feeder hospitals in southern 
Saskatchewan, and to assist the Rawlco hostel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank PotashCorp for doing a social 
media challenge to help raise funds for the cause. Every time 
the hashtag #Z99PotashCorpCares was tweeted, the company 
donated $10. Well Regina and surrounding area responded to 
the challenge and PotashCorp donated the full $150,000 to the 
cause. 
 
I’d like to ask all members to join me in congratulating Z99 for 
this very successful radiothon, and I’d like to thank the citizens 
of Regina and surrounding area for their very generous 
donations. Every dollar donated will go towards saving a baby’s 
life. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Breaking the Silence 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, on Saturday I had the pleasure to 
attend the 18th annual Breaking the Silence Conference at the 
University of Saskatchewan. 
 
As always, there were a number of excellent presentations and 
guest speakers, covering a wide variety of queer topics of 
interest to Saskatchewan teachers and students, including a 
group of students who fought successfully to change the 
Vancouver School Board policies regarding queer students, a 
presentation about LGBT [lesbian, gay, bisexual, and 
transgender] rights around the world led by Helen 
Smith-McIntyre and Bill Rafoss from Amnesty International, 
and a workshop about our own recent amendment by this 
Assembly to The Saskatchewan Human Rights Code, protecting 
people from being discriminated against based on their gender 
identity. 
 
I also want to congratulate Pat Atkinson, former MLA [Member 
of the Legislative Assembly] from Saskatoon, on receiving the 
Peter Corren Award for Outstanding Achievement, well 
deserved for her leadership over the years first as a University 
of Saskatchewan student and then when she served so well as a 
minister of Education fighting for rights for queer students in 
our Saskatchewan schools. Pat is an excellent role model for all 
of us who are elected as MLAs to strive to build a better society 
that is inclusive for all people. 
 
When it comes to LGBT rights, Mr. Speaker, I’m glad 
Saskatchewan is making progress. We’ve come a long way but 
there is still much more that needs to be done to make sure 
everyone in our province can live with dignity and safety. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking the 
organizers of this year’s Breaking the Silence Conference. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 

Celebrating the 25th Anniversary of the Borden Museum 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On March 14th I had 
the great opportunity to attend an event celebrating the 25th 
anniversary of the Borden and District Museum. The museum 
first opened in June 1990 and was then comprised of the Turtle 
Lake School, the Munroe Barber Shop, and the Newbold 
Butcher Shop. In the years that followed, a replica of the 
Diefenbaker homestead and the Masonic Lodge were added to 
complete the five-building museum that exists today. 
 
The innovative, persistent community spirit that was necessary 
to build our province in its earliest days is showcased and 
preserved in the Borden Museum. The museum is home to 
many historic artifacts that tell stories of the proud traditions 
and heritage of the Borden area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the evening also provided an opportunity to 
celebrate the volunteers who built and operated the museum. 
Helen Sutherland was recognized for being an active volunteer 
for all 25 years that the museum has been open. 
 
Much like our province, Borden and area was built on 
volunteerism and community spirit. It is these enduring 
qualities that allow for the preservation and promotion of our 
history at the Borden Museum. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members 
to join me in thanking Helen Sutherland and all the other 
volunteers who have worked to preserve our province’s heritage 
in the Borden Museum for the past 25 years. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Community Safety Officers 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
congratulate the first class of special constables from the 
community safety officer program who are with us today in the 
gallery. The city of North Battleford was chosen as the 
proof-of-concept site for this program. 
 
The implementation evaluation for the North Battleford 
program was completed in early December 2014 and exceeded 
all expectations. In collaboration with SARM [Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities], SUMA [Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association], and the RCMP [Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police] and the Saskatchewan Association 
of Chiefs of Police, our government has developed an 
alternative enforcement model to assist in delivering 
high-priority, low-risk community safety programs and 
services. 
 
The following are just some of the duties special constables will 
carry out: municipal bylaw enforcement, serving court 
documents, community relations, community engagement, 
mediation and problem solving, enforcement of The Traffic 
Safety Act and The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 
enforcement of other provincial statutes as determined by the 
ministry through local consultation, increased uniform presence 
to enhance feelings of safety in the community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, municipalities have indicated that having an 
enhanced uniform presence in their communities is a priority 



March 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6633 

for their residents. This program provides that without reducing 
the presence of RCMP or local police. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these special constables are well trained, with 
mandatory core training approved by the ministry including 
use-of-force training to the standards required by the 
Saskatchewan Police College. 
 
I would like all members of this Assembly to join me in 
congratulating our province’s first class of community safety 
officers. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Education Funding 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, the budget announced last 
week is great news for the students in Saskatchewan. It affirms 
our government’s commitment to education with an average 
increase of 4.5 per cent for operational funding to each of the 
school divisions, and 424 million in capital, the largest budget 
day education capital announcement in the history of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Last week the Leader of the Opposition was claiming we cut 
English as an additional language, EAL funding. Once again, 
Mr. Speaker, we have to correct the record because he was just 
plain wrong. Last year we announced an additional 1 million 
commitment to support EAL — 588,000 of that money went 
out in the ’14-15 budget and 420 went out in last week’s 
budget, totalling 1 million this school year. As usual the NDP 
[New Democratic Party] didn’t know what they were actually 
talking about. 
 
In the last year NDP’s budget priorities, the members opposite 
called for “rerouting of standardized testing money into 
teaching and one-on-one help for students.” Well, Mr. Speaker, 
in the budget we took that money; we put it into supports for 
students. And the NDP still complained about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP leader has made a choice not to take a 
stand on most issues, but he should at least make sure his 
Finance and Education critic does his homework before he 
stands up in this House. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Quality of Patient Care in Hospital 
 
Mr. Broten: — Earl Luhr was 79 years old. Despite being in 
generally good health, Earl was admitted to an acute care unit at 
the Pasqua Hospital because of awful choking episodes. His 
health kept deteriorating, but three weeks later without even 
having a diagnosis, Earl was moved into a converted storage 
room on the transitional care unit to wait for a seniors’ care 
placement. The hospital was chronically over capacity and they 
wanted Earl out. 
 
Just a couple of days after being moved into the converted 
storage room, Earl died tragically. His family is here today, Mr. 

Speaker, because they don’t want another Saskatchewan family 
to have to go through what they have gone through. Will the 
Premier meet with the Luhr family today to hear about Earl’s 
awful experience? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I thank 
the Leader of the Opposition for his question. Our sincerest 
condolences go to the family that is here. And, Mr. Speaker, if 
I’m unable for any reason to meet with them today, the Minister 
of Health or the Minister of Rural and Remote Health would 
certainly meet with them to hear first-hand about their situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we take all of these cases, when they come before 
the House, very seriously. Mr. Speaker, we also want to ensure 
that across the system we are improving health care in the 
province, that we are actually increasing investments in human 
resources but also in the capital facilities, Mr. Speaker, that we 
seek continuous improvement so that these stories are never, 
never happening and certainly not repeated in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that has certainly been evident in our 
government’s decision with respect to health care budgets over 
the last number of years, both from an operating standpoint and 
the capital. Obviously there’s still more work to do, but we’ll 
continue to seek improvement, Mr. Speaker. And as for this 
particular case, someone, certainly myself or the Minister of 
Health, will meet with the family today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know the family 
expressed to me that they’ve had contact with the minister’s 
office already and, if possible, they would greatly appreciate the 
opportunity to sit with the Premier and share their concerns and 
their ideas. 
 
When Earl would have a choking incident and press the nurse 
call button, his family says it would sometimes take 30 minutes 
or longer for a nurse to respond. Now we’ve heard of this 
regularly happening in seniors’ care facilities, and that’s 
unacceptable and it demands action from this government. But 
when someone is in the hospital because of an undiagnosed 
problem that causes severe choking incidents, the response to a 
call button bell should be immediate. It shouldn’t be 30 minutes 
or even longer. 
 
My question to the Premier: does he agree with that? Will he 
undertake an immediate review to determine how long hospital 
patients are waiting when they push their call bells and the 
reason for those waits? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Certainly we will be following up with the family, as the 
Premier has offered to do. I will meet with Earl’s family today 
if it’s convenient for them, Mr. Speaker. Obviously in cases like 
these we also want to follow up with the health region to 
determine more information on these types of cases. The Leader 
of the Opposition has stated that the family has been in contact 
with my office. I don’t have the particulars, Mr. Speaker, but I 



6634 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2015 

would be happy to look into their concerns, Mr. Speaker, 
knowing that this doesn’t change what happened to Earl. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can say though that the government, working 
with the health regions, we have certainly increased resources to 
our health regions. We’ve increased the number of acute care 
beds in the two hospitals here in this city as well as others, and 
we’ve added, Mr. Speaker, over 2,600 nursing individuals in 
this province of all designations. But when situations like these 
come forward, we want to learn from them, find out what 
exactly happened to ensure that they never happen again. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Well I know, Mr. Speaker, the family’s had a 
lot of contact with the region, trying to bring proper changes. 
And the question specifically was about long waits when a call 
button is pressed, Mr. Speaker, and I think that’s something that 
needs to be definitely looked at. 
 
The government actually, they actually used to survey patients 
to ask if they received the help they needed when they pushed 
their call bell. But it stopped surveying them, Mr. Speaker, 
because of the John Black lean project. And that is 
unacceptable. 
 
Because of his severe choking incidents, Earl needed to be fed 
through a feeding tube. But the hospital didn’t send up the 
special liquid food on his first night in the converted storage 
closet. Earl’s family was told, believe it or not, that staff 
couldn’t go to any of the other spots, Mr. Speaker, to retrieve 
the appropriate food for his feeding tube because that was part 
of another ward’s supplies, and their budget. 
 
My question to the Premier: how does it make any sense that 
one hospital ward can’t go to another for desperately needed 
supplies like feeding tube food for very hungry patients? Is that 
part of the John Black lean kanban inventory system? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, certainly our health regions, working with the Health 
Quality Council, will survey on a number of different areas, Mr. 
Speaker, throughout a year, throughout a number of years, Mr. 
Speaker. That will change from time to time in areas where we 
want to have more information, Mr. Speaker. It is a large health 
care system, and so the surveys will change over time. 
 
With respect to what the Leader of the Opposition has raised 
today, these are questions that I will be asking of the health 
region, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, what I would expect, what 
we would expect is that people that are in our care are treated 
with the utmost respect and dignity, Mr. Speaker, that supplies, 
that medication would be delivered to them in a timely manner, 
and that call bells, particularly somebody that is having distress, 
will be answered in a timely fashion, Mr. Speaker. So I commit 
to the family, to Earl’s family, that I will be following up 
specifically with the health region to find out exactly what 
happened in this case, Mr. Speaker, and what the region is 
putting in place so that it doesn’t happen again. 
 
[14:00] 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition, 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we know the surveys stopped, as 
the obsession has been with the John Black lean project. And I 
think that’s a real shame. Earl’s family says that he was starving 
to death in the Pasqua Hospital. But instead of figuring out what 
was wrong with him, instead of diagnosing the problem and 
giving him proper treatment, well first he was turned away 
twice, sent away from the ER [emergency room]. Then after 
they finally admitted him, they shuffled him out of acute care 
without a diagnosis, put him in a converted storage room in the 
transitional care unit to just wait for a long-term care placement. 
My question to the Premier: how on earth is this acceptable? Is 
it because Earl was almost 80 years old? Is that why there was 
so little regard for his life? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, certainly I think members 
of this House, members of the public, would expect and should 
expect that all health care providers — physicians, nurses, 
everybody that works in the health care system — have the 
utmost, first and foremost the patient at heart and the patient in 
mind, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition I think is getting into 
issues around clinical decisions. I can’t speak to those, but I will 
certainly endeavour to find out from the health region what 
exactly took place in Earl’s situation, Mr. Speaker.  
 
Mr. Speaker, I would hope that the Leader of the Opposition 
isn’t saying anything about the health care providers that were 
providing care to Earl. But again, my offer is to the family, that 
I will meet with them, and I will follow up to determine as best 
as we can what happened in this place in this situation, Mr. 
Speaker, as well as with the region, what the region is putting in 
place to ensure that this doesn’t happen to any other patient in 
our system. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, these are the concerns that I’m 
raising straight from the family. Last January 6th, the liquid 
food was plunged into Earl’s feeding tube far too quickly, and it 
went into his throat and lungs. Earl immediately sat up. While 
gasping, he wrote “suction” on a piece of paper because he 
knew that he urgently needed that liquid sucked out. 
 
Time was wasted as staff tried to get the suction working. 
Finally they called code blue, but there was no crash cart on the 
ward. The code team that came from another ward was locked 
out of the transitional care unit because the WanderGuard 
system was activated by an Alzheimer’s patient that was at the 
door. By the time the code blue team reached Earl with the 
crash cart and a portable suction machine, they told the family 
that it would cause too much pain to try to save him. 
 
Will the Premier commit to a full review of all transitional care 
units, including the level of staffing and training and emergency 
protocols such as a code blue override for the WanderGuard 
system? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 



March 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6635 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as I’ve said already in the House, I’ll repeat it: certainly I am 
willing to meet with the family. I would appreciate that 
opportunity to learn more about what happened. We will be 
following up though with the health region, Mr. Speaker, to 
determine what exactly took place in this regard, what happened 
to Earl, and his care, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we’ll be 
following up with the region. 
 
We’ll be following up with the facility itself, Mr. Speaker, to 
determine what action has been taken, if it was appropriate, 
whether or not some of these types of concerns have been 
forwarded on to the regulatory bodies that investigate these 
types of things, Mr. Speaker. I can’t speak to that at this point, 
but we will be following up with this matter. This is a serious 
concern, Mr. Speaker, as the Leader of the Opposition has 
outlined, but we are trying to make improvements. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think one improvement in this budget that 
is of note is the fact that we need to add a geriatrician to 
southern Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we’ve added $700,000 in 
funding so that our facilities and our providers will have the 
support of geriatric support here in the city of Regina to serve in 
southern Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we need a full and proper review 
of the transitional care units. We think also of Sylvia Phillips 
and her family who had to hire private care support to go in to 
make sure that their mother’s basic needs were being met. 
 
When Earl was moved into that converted storage closet, his 
family was not told that it was just a holding area for those 
waiting for seniors’ care, and his family was not told that this 
unit provided less care to patients. And that’s unacceptable. 
After having liquid food plunged into his lungs and his throat 
and after waiting too long for the code blue team, Earl was 
wheeled into the ward’s lunchroom for his family to say their 
goodbyes. He died after 8 p.m. last January 6th. Earl may have 
died eventually of what was wrong with him, but the family 
will never know that because our health care system not only 
failed to diagnose Earl, but it caused his premature death. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has spent far too much time and 
money listening to its $40 million American lean consultant and 
the Japanese senseis. The Luhr family is here today, Mr. 
Speaker, with a list of improvements that they want to see. Will 
the Premier commit to finally listen to them and listen to what 
needs to be done so that our health care system can indeed be 
fixed so that the basics can be addressed, and so this family can 
have some answers as to why they were so horribly let down? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
certainly I commit on behalf of the Government of 
Saskatchewan to not only meeting with this family but to 
listening to this family and to taking any advice, any 
recommendations that they have based on their experience, 
based on their loved one’s experience in this particular 
situation, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Again I’ll be following up, my office will be, with the quality of 
care coordinators for both Regina and the province to determine 
what steps may have taken place since this time in the work that 
they would have done to look into this, if they in fact had been 
involved. As well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not at this point aware if it 
was deemed a critical incident. If it was, Mr. Speaker, we would 
obviously take that information very seriously. 
 
We are committed, in this province, Mr. Speaker, this 
government has committed to improving the health care system 
for the people of this province, Mr. Speaker. That is why we 
have invested record dollars into our health regions, hired 
record levels of health providers, and are in fact investing 
record dollars into the infrastructure of health care in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, and looking at different ways and better 
ways to providing services. So I commit that on behalf of the 
government to this family and to all families in this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Housing of Young Offenders 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the Corrections minister 
completely mishandled her plan to move the Regina 
community-training residence into the Normanview 
neighbourhood here in Regina. Time and time again she gave 
wrong information. Even on Thursday in question period, the 
minister said there was only a bit of painting done at Dales 
House. Then she admitted in the rotunda after question period 
that there were also windows replaced, flooring work, and 
electrical work. 
 
So increasingly people in Saskatoon are thinking they can’t 
trust this minister’s plan to shut down the Yarrow Youth Farm 
and move an open custody facility into the Buena Vista 
neighbourhood. After messing up the Regina plan so badly and 
giving so much wrong information, how can the Corrections 
minister expect Saskatoon residents to trust her plan for 
Yarrow? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to correct the record 
here. What I said in the House in question period was in relation 
to what I knew at the time, I stated that absolutely, and that all I 
knew at that time was that there was painting being done, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
When I went out and was interviewed by the media, I then was 
provided more information from Central Services. Mr. Speaker, 
this is not our ministry. Central Services is the one responsible 
for the repairs — you know, electrical work, that type of thing. I 
was provided that particular information, and as such, Mr. 
Speaker, I responded accordingly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, to steal from the words of 
Shakespeare, methinks she doth protest too much. 
 



6636 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2015 

The people in my constituency have absolutely no faith in that 
minister and that government. Nothing about this government’s 
plan makes any sense: shutting down a good facility, mixing 
low-risk youth with high-risk youth, plopping an open-custody 
facility in the middle of Saskatoon with no consultation. None 
of this makes any sense. 
 
And when we look at how that Corrections minister mishandled 
her plans here in Regina, we lose even more faith in this 
government’s plan for Saskatoon. How can we trust that she has 
asked the right questions about the plan to shut down Yarrow 
and move an open-custody facility into the Buena Vista 
neighbourhood? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said before, 
and I’ll say it again, we are closing the underused Yarrow 
facility and consolidating with an empty wing of Kilburn Hall, 
Mr. Speaker. We’re responding. And we should be pleased 
about this: the changing realities in our justice youth numbers, 
Mr. Speaker, they have declined steadily for the past 20 years. 
Our youth institutions currently remain at around 49 per cent 
capacity, Mr. Speaker. At the same time we see an increase in 
our adult correctional facilities, Mr. Speaker. The reason why 
we are consolidating these is because of capacity to deliver 
effective programming to the youth within the city of 
Saskatoon. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, based on her very recent track 
record, we have no idea if that minister will walk out into the 
rotunda and give very different information than she has given 
in question period. So my question is to the Premier. Will he 
instruct that struggling Corrections minister to put the plan to 
shut down Yarrow on hold? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, the Kilburn is an existing 
facility in Saskatoon and has been in that community since 
1926. The closed-custody program has been in existence since 
the 1980s and the facility had previously housed open-custody 
youth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to liken back to what happened during, 
under the NDP. The NDP closed three youth facilities 11 years 
ago, Mr. Speaker, a total of 42 beds: House of Concord run by 
the Salvation Army, Kenosee Lake Youth Camp, and Nisbet 
Lake Youth camp. Mr. Speaker, these were open-custody 
youth. You wouldn’t believe what the NDP, where the NDP put 
these open-custody youths once they closed these particular 
camps, Mr. Speaker. They put them into a closed-custody 
facility, a secure facility called Paul Dojack here in Regina, Mr. 
Speaker. I find it incredible that the member opposite is even 
asking a question about the youth in Kilburn Hall. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Provincial Budget and Financial Management 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A simple 
question for the government: could the Minister of Finance or 
the Premier tell the people of Saskatchewan how much money 
was in the Growth and Financial Security Fund, the rainy day 
fund in 2009? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the Finance critic for 
the question. Mr. Speaker, that information obviously is in all of 
the publicly released government documents that are there.  
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I am happy to update the member opposite 
and members of the House on an announcement just recently 
made this day by Moody’s, Mr. Speaker, Moody’s Investor 
Services who have of course given the province of 
Saskatchewan its first ever AAA credit rating under this 
government. Here’s what they have to say about the budget: 
 

Despite a significant shortfall in oil royalty revenues 
Saskatchewan’s sound fiscal practices [and that would 
include how we manage funds like the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund] combined with increasing potash royalty revenues 
support the province’s balanced budget 2015-16 . . . 
Saskatchewan and British Columbia stand out from the 
other Canadian provinces that will likely post deficits in 
2015-16. 

 
And we achieved this without any tax increases. Compare that 
to what members opposite did when they were in government 
and ran into some challenges in the budget. They increased 
people’s taxes. They shut down infrastructure spending. And 
we certainly never had a credit rating of AAA from anyone in 
the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, pretty simple question 
there to the Premier, and it’s more than disappointing and 
passing strange that the Premier wouldn’t know the answer to a 
question like that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The answer? There was more than $1.4 billion in that account 
in 2009. And despite a booming economy and record revenues 
through that period of time, this government just kept drawing 
down those revenues, those savings, Mr. Speaker, during good 
times . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . May be saved by the 
Finance minister here today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So another simple question to the Premier, maybe the Finance 
minister is ready for this one: could he tell the people of 
Saskatchewan how much will be left in the rainy day fund, that 
had $1.4 billion in it in 2009, by the end of this year? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Deputy Leader and I 
would guess his seatmate, the leader of the party, are again 
asking the question in general terms, where did the money go? 



March 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6637 

He’s referencing about the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. He’s 
referencing about prosperity in the province. So let’s review 
again . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, they don’t want the 
answer. They don’t want the answer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The answer is $3 billion in debt repayment. The answer is 
hundreds of millions of dollars in tax relief. The money went 
back into families’ pockets. The answer, Mr. Speaker, is taking 
the last seven long years of the NDP’s government 
infrastructure investment of three billion and doubling it to $6 
billion. The answer, Mr. Speaker, is a new hospital in Moose 
Jaw. The answer will be a brand new hospital, the Sask 
Hospital, in North Battleford. Bypasses and bridges, Mr. 
Speaker. The answer is investments that have created one of 
the, if not the leading economy in the country, Mr. Speaker. The 
answer is a set of books and a budget so good that three days 
after the budget, Moody’s in New York has more to say than 
the NDP. They call it a balanced budget and sound fiscal 
planning. That’s what they . . . [inaudible]. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, two questions, no answers, 
but certainly an agitated Premier here today, Mr. Speaker. And 
you know, judging by his record I guess we can understand 
why. 
 
The Sask Party government has drained well over $1 billion 
from the rainy day fund during a time of record prosperity. The 
answer to the question that was asked was that there’d be just 
$200 million left in that fund at the end of this year. I guess it’s 
turned more into, I guess, I hope it doesn’t rain fund, Mr. 
Speaker, as opposed to a rainy day fund. All at the same time as 
it’s decimated our savings account, this government is adding a 
whopping $700 million of GRF [General Revenue Fund] debt 
and another $800 million of Crown debt, a total of $1.5 billion 
more debt this year alone. 
 
This government should have saved some money through times 
of prosperity, but it didn’t save a penny. It’s drained the rainy 
day fund, and it’s racking up more and more debt. To the 
Premier: with years and years of record prosperity, how can he 
simply justify that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I understand that the member opposite wants to 
know what was contained in the then referred to as the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund under the NDP . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . I note, Mr. Speaker, the member from Athabasca doesn’t 
want to really hear this number because he’s provided numbers 
in this Assembly that he just makes up, Mr. Speaker. He just 
makes them up. Whatever comes out of his mouth is just 
something that he wants to talk about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well the reality, Mr. Speaker, the reality is in 2006-07, Mr. 
Speaker, the last year of the NDP, the balance in the fund is 
$887.5 million. That’s reality. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Speaking of Moody’s, Mr. Speaker: 

agitated, bellowing, hollering, very few answers from that 
government, Mr. Speaker. And there’s no doubt, I know we 
heard a laundry list from the Premier, there’s no doubt this Sask 
Party spent a lot of money. After all, it’s had record revenues in 
and they’ve spent every last dollar and more as they’ve arrived. 
It’s also somehow managed to drain the rainy day fund and rack 
up more and more debt. 
 
The worst part though is that Saskatchewan families haven’t 
experienced the benefits of this government’s massive 
spending. Classrooms are overcrowded and under-resourced, 
the waits in ERs are unacceptable, and people are crammed into 
hospital hallways and unacceptable spaces. Seniors’ care is a 
mess, and the cost of living for the people of Saskatchewan is 
sky high. 
 
To the Premier: with record revenues, with the savings accounts 
drained, and with lots more debt added, as in billions, shouldn’t 
Saskatchewan people actually be feeling some of the benefits 
from this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity to deliver some 
post-budget speeches here in Regina and Saskatoon. And just 
now in the city of Moose Jaw, had the opportunity to talk to the 
mayor of Moose Jaw who was very pleasantly pleased with the 
fact that the revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker, revenue sharing this 
year with all municipalities across Saskatchewan is $265 
million, Mr. Speaker — record expenditure for municipal 
revenue sharing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to correct one thing because the Leader of 
the Opposition stated a number of times that he would like to 
compare record revenue of $8 billion to 14. Mr. Speaker, the 
member opposite is not quoting apples to apples. Mr. Speaker, 
today’s budget, a summary budget is $14 billion, he 
understands that; but on March 31 of 2008, the summary 
revenue was $11.7 billion. So, Mr. Speaker, the member 
opposite has to use correct facts, correct terminology, and 
discuss the budget accordingly. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Opposition House Leader on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, on a point 
of order. 
 
The Speaker: — You may proceed with your point of order. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
members opposite should well know, and no later than this past 
Thursday, we had the Premier apologize and withdraw for using 
the expression “making stuff up.” 
 
The Minister of Finance and, I believe, Deputy Premier of that 
government just used very much the same language, which he 
ought to well know is unparliamentary, in referring to one of 
the members in this Assembly. Mr. Speaker, if you could please 
rule on that. 



6638 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2015 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I too had listened very closely to the debate that was 
happening during question period. And I would ask that in 
reviewing the specific words that were said that you look at the 
specific context in which the words were said. And in fact, Mr. 
Speaker, I think that you would find that the point of order 
would not be well taken. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I too was listening to the comments from the 
Minister of Finance and he did indeed indicate that one of the 
members had a habit of making things up, which has been 
previously, while I haven’t ruled on it, members have stood and 
apologized after having made those comments. So I would ask 
the Minister of Finance to please rise, apologize, and withdraw 
that remark. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I will withdraw those 
remarks and I will apologize to the member opposite. 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Immigration. 
 

Changes to Saskatchewan Immigrant Nominee Program 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
was pleased today to announce improvements our government 
is making to the Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program’s 
entrepreneur category, improvements that will help grow our 
economy and create jobs here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The SINP [Saskatchewan immigrant nominee program] 
entrepreneur category has been a source of immigration and 
investment to our province since 2007. Over 900 entrepreneurs 
have been nominated by the program since 2007, settling in 
communities all across Saskatchewan and investing over $114 
million. 
 
We redesigned the program based on stakeholder feedback, best 
practice research, and consultation with the federal government. 
The first key change is the consolidation of five category 
streams into two: the entrepreneur stream and the farm 
owner/operator stream. 
 
During consultation, stakeholders identified factors such as 
language ability, entrepreneurial experience, as important 
qualities needed by an immigrant entrepreneur to settle 
successfully. As a result of this feedback, a new objective 
assessment points grid has been developed that awards points to 
applicants that have the skills and proven experience that best 
prepares them to settle in a new community and start up their 
business. 
 
Another program enhancement is the introduction of an 
expression of interest application process. Interested candidates 
will now create and submit a profile that includes basic 
information along with their self-assessed points score. 
Candidates that meet program criteria and score the highest 
using the new assessment will then be priority processed. This 

is expected to greatly improve processing times. 
 
Business succession and increased entrepreneur immigration 
beyond the province’s two largest cities were also identified as 
priorities by stakeholders. Applicants planning on taking 
advantage of the many opportunities in rural Saskatchewan will 
be eligible for additional points and lower investment 
requirements. 
 
Finally, only those approved applicants that have fulfilled the 
terms of their performance agreement will be eligible for 
nomination for permanent residence. That will ensure approved 
applicants fulfill their investment commitments once they’ve 
landed here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Our government’s decision to not raise taxes and continued 
investments in infrastructure announced in this year’s budget 
will continue to make Saskatchewan an attractive destination 
for entrepreneurs. Thanks to the hard work of Saskatchewan 
people, our economy will continue to grow, creating jobs and 
keeping Saskatchewan strong. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll provide a few 
comments from the opposition’s perspective with respect to the 
changes that the minister is announcing in this statement. 
 
When we look at any of the changes to immigration and the 
SINP, we of course need to look very closely, Mr. Speaker. We 
do know this government’s track record when it comes to 
changes to the program. You know, I think back to the changes 
around the family class, for example, how that really was 
disruptive to the lives of many newcomers who have come to 
Saskatchewan. And so I look forward to hearing and listening 
and discussions with the newcomer community in 
Saskatchewan to see how these changes will in fact adjust 
things and what the reality will be on the ground. And so I look 
forward to those discussions to find out from those who are 
most directly affected about what the outcomes of these 
changes may be and as to the opinion of them from those who 
are most affected. 
 
The minister in his remarks also mentioned the issue of 
processing times and I know that’s a common complaint that I 
hear in my constituency office, as do I’m sure many other 
MLAs with respect to some of the times that applicants face. 
And so it’s important to have the right resources in place for the 
processing of applications so that they’re done in a timely way. 
So that’s an important point I think to put on the record as well. 
 
So with that, I will thank the minister for the statement and the 
opportunity to respond. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to order the answers to 
questions 718 to 721. 
 



March 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6639 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered responses 
to questions 718 to 721. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Wotherspoon.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I appreciate 
the opportunity to be able to get up and speak to this budget. 
Mr. Speaker, as I believe the Finance minister has mentioned on 
many occasions, this was a tough budget and took a lot of work 
by a large number of members on this side of the House, many 
hours that they spent putting this budget together, led by our 
Finance minister, the member for Canora-Pelly. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I might mention that it’s his last budget, and we’re 
certainly going to miss him in this House. Well I won’t because 
I won’t be here either. I’ll be gone with him. But there’s many 
members in this House are going to remember the member from 
Canora-Pelly and the dedicated time that he’s put in over the 
last 20 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the theme of this is important, of this 
budget, in a time when oil prices have dropped dramatically, of 
keeping Saskatchewan strong. And I think one of the things that 
we take pride in over our first seven years in government is 
keeping taxes low. And I think a number of the members in a 
number of speeches on a number of occasions replying to 
budgets have talked about the tax cuts we’ve made over those 
seven years, and I think it’s been very beneficial to many 
people in this province, in fact very beneficial to many, many 
people on low incomes. I think it was 114,000 people that we 
took off the provincial tax roll, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure it’s 
appreciated by those people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are continuing to invest in infrastructure. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I noticed . . . It was kind of interesting coming in 
yesterday. I had four different occasions to have to go down to 
60 clicks on my way to Regina. And I know you’re going to 
say, Mr. Speaker, what are you talking about? It’s not summer. 
It’s not construction season. No, well actually, it is. It’s 
construction season under a Sask Party government because we 
go year round. 
 
Mr. Speaker, four different times I had to slow down for 
construction where they’re putting either a new bridge in or 
they’re putting culverts across the roads, those same roads that 
deteriorated under the NDP for 16 years. And finally we’re 
making big improvements to those highways out there, so much 
so that we can’t just do it in the summer. We have to do it all 
winter, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we’re controlling operating spending, I think, to 
the tune of only a 1.2 per cent increase, and I think that’s 
probably a plus in the long run, Mr. Speaker. I think from time 
to time many businesses have to make those decisions to keep 
their businesses viable, and it’s no different when you’re in 
government. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Also helping to create jobs, Mr. Speaker, this budget contains 
new tax incentives for new job creation and continues to 
support increased training opportunities for our young people. 
And a lot of young people are either staying in this province 
that wouldn’t have before or returning to the province, that we 
need so drastically to fill the jobs that are coming available in 
the province, Mr. Speaker. On top of that, as the Finance 
minister talked about today in question period, we’re doing this 
for the balanced budget with a surplus of $107 million, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the highlights in this budget, and I think 
infrastructure is probably one of the most important things that 
we can talk about, but there’s about $1.3 billion for core 
infrastructure in 2015-16. That, Mr. Speaker, is the largest 
infrastructure investment in Saskatchewan history and a 50 per 
cent increase over last year. And that probably feeds into what 
I’ve talked about where we’re having to go year round with 
construction on our road network across the province because 
you cannot get it done in the summer months, Mr. Speaker. And 
we need contractors that are available, and they’re available 
through the months when of course there’s frost and snow and 
things like that, that we have to go year round. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 256 million for health capital, and I know that’s 
important, Mr. Speaker, to many. There were some members in 
the gallery here today that I know are very interested in the 
hospital at North Battleford but also the new children’s hospital 
in Saskatoon. And, Mr. Speaker, the new children’s hospital in 
Saskatoon is important to every member of this legislature, not 
just the people of Saskatoon but to everyone in this province 
that has children or, Mr. Speaker, in many cases such as mine 
where we have grandchildren. Hopefully they don’t ever have 
to utilize that hospital but if they do, it’s there, Mr. Speaker. 
And it certainly is going to be welcomed, I know, by the parents 
and grandparents across this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 842 million to build, operate, and maintain 
transportation infrastructure, which is an increase of 43.4 per 
cent: 211 million to start the Regina bypass, 19 million to start 
construction of twinning of Highway 7 from Saskatoon to 
Delisle. And, Mr. Speaker, from Fort Qu’Appelle to Balgonie, 
we’ve had the opportunity to have passing lanes installed, and 
it’s a vast improvement from where it was before and certainly 
frees up the traffic to move at a better pace, Mr. Speaker. 
 
$74.5 million for municipal infrastructure, which is also 
important to rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and something 
that was a big shortfall at the end of the NDP’s reign where they 
were downloaded on by the previous NDP government. And I 
know from the comments I’ve had from this budget from 
municipal leaders, they’re very pleased. 
 
I had the opportunity the other night, Mr. Speaker, to go to a 



6640 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2015 

function in Melville where they’re welcoming new people into 
Melville in the community. Great function, Mr. Speaker. But 
one of the things I noticed, the municipal leaders that were there 
had to come over and, you know, after a budget they might say, 
well I wish we’d have got this or I wish we’d have got that. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s not what they were saying. They were saying, 
thank you for not cutting revenue sharing. They said, we went 
through many years under the NDP government where we had 
no idea what we were getting for revenue sharing. They said, 
now it’s sustainable, reliable, and, Mr. Speaker, they said thank 
you. And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that every municipal leader 
out there appreciates the revenue sharing that we have provided 
over our first seven years and will into the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, health care, important to all of us, Mr. Speaker, 
$5.5 billion for health care, Mr. Speaker, almost getting close to 
half of the budget of the province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we all know how near and dear health care is to our 
hearts, but I know many members, and including the Rural 
Health minister and the Health minister, will be talking in more 
detail on the health budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also for education, 3.7 billion in total spending for 
education including 53.3 million for child care spaces, an 
increase of 2.2 million over last year and, Mr. Speaker, 4.6 
million for supports for learning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, municipalities — I just talked a bit about them 
here — 265 million for municipalities. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
know from past experience of being a reeve of an RM, it’s nice 
to have that reliable and sustainable funding coming ahead of 
time when you know you’re getting one point of the PST 
[provincial sales tax], 1 per cent of the PST for funding for 
municipalities when you make your budget. Because the way it 
was before, we had no idea when we put our budgets together 
whether we would be cut again or it would be the status quo. In 
fact under the 16 years of the NDP, I don’t ever remember once 
there being an increase. And I could be wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
There may have been one or two out of that 16 where they 
actually increased it, but I certainly know there was a number of 
years where they cut the funding because I was part of a 
municipality and a council out there that had to deal with it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so many areas that I think are so important to the 
province, but I think what’s important to talk about, and in my 
case, being that this is probably my last budget that I’ll get the 
opportunity to speak to, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to make some 
comparisons. And you know, Mr. Speaker, I think we’ve talked 
about the budget. We will be talking about the budget for the 
next week and maybe longer in this House, Mr. Speaker, but I 
think it’s only fair that we start to compare what has happened 
in the first seven years under a Sask Party government and what 
the policies are of the NDP on the opposite side, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let’s compare the policies. We know that keeping taxes low are 
important on this side. Infrastructure spending is important on 
this side. And we compare that to what, Mr. Speaker? Well you 
can’t compare it to a policy that doesn’t exist. The Leader of the 
Opposition and the Finance critic on the far side, Mr. Speaker, 
the Leader of the Opposition gets up and criticizes every day 
and his common theme is just spend more, spend more, spend 
more, and the problem will go away. And I don’t know where 
he was for 16 years when the NDP were in power, but that 

wasn’t the solution to the problems we had in rural 
Saskatchewan. And I don’t believe it was the answer for urban 
Saskatchewan because under the NDP, they did none of the 
above, Mr. Speaker. They cut funding. They chased jobs out of 
this province and chased a lot of health care workers along with 
it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think the only comparison that we can make 
from this side of the House is we compare our record of the first 
seven years under a Sask Party government to the policies of 16 
years of an NDP government, and that would be fair. I think 
most of my colleagues are nodding, yes, that would be fair. 
Because every member on this side of the House certainly 
remembers on a number of occasion they either had a hospital 
closed, a school closed, no roadwork done out in rural 
Saskatchewan, funding . . . Agriculture’s a prime example. The 
member for Thunder Creek knows exactly what I’m talking 
about. The member for Arm River . . . Well there’s a whole 
number of people on this side of the House that actually farm, 
Mr. Speaker, and we first-hand saw the cuts that were made to 
programs across this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And now a brand new school in Langenburg, and they’re very 
thankful for that, Mr. Speaker. And they were very thankful that 
in a tough budget that that wasn’t put on hold, and we thank the 
Finance minister and my colleagues for that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of rural communities across the 
province of Saskatchewan, and I think we represent all of them 
in rural Saskatchewan. But I want to give you, just mention a 
few names here, Mr. Speaker, of important communities: 
Arborfield, Beechy, Bengough, Birch Hills, Borden, Cabri, 
Climax, Coronach, Craik, Cupar, Cut Knife, Dinsmore, 
Dodsland, Eatonia, Elrose, Eston, Fillmore, Gainsborough, 
Goodsoil, Grenfell, Gull Lake — there’s more, Mr. Speaker — 
Imperial, Invermay, Ituna, Kincaid, Lafleche, Lampman, 
Langenburg, Leoville, Loon Lake, Lucky Lake, Macklin, 
Mankota, Milden, Montmartre, Neilburg, Nokomis, Norquay, 
Oxbow, Pangman, Ponteix, Radville, Rockglen, St. Walburg, 
Smeaton, Spalding, Theodore, Vanguard, Watson, White Bear, 
and Whitewood. There’s probably more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But do you know what those communities have in common, 
Mr. Speaker? Those communities across this province had their 
hospital closed, and it wasn’t closed by the members on this 
side of the House, Mr. Speaker. It was closed by members on 
that side. And I know the member for Lakeview knows exactly 
what I’m talking about. For a period of time he was the Health 
minister under the previous government. I believe it was Louise 
Simard — wasn’t it? — that was Health minister when most of 
our hospitals disappeared. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that is a lot of communities that lost their 
health care in this province, but not only did we lose the 
facilities. We lost a lot of doctors. We lost a lot of nurses. We 
lost LPNs [licensed practical nurse]. We lost care aids. Mr. 
Speaker, they wonder, when they actually finished their 16-year 
reign, why were we short 1,000 . . . I think the number was 
1,000 or 800 nurses at that time. Well most of them had been 
driven out of the province by the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can’t believe that the members opposite have the 
nerve to get up now and say, this is how you’re going to solve 



March 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6641 

all the problems in health care, when I just read you that list. 
And I will bet, Mr. Speaker, that there’s not a person that lives 
in any one of these communities across Saskatchewan that will 
ever forget who closed their hospital in their community. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, in their 16 years, their record wasn’t 
great when it comes to health care, but I just picked out one 
little part of their record in health care. Between 2001 and 2006, 
the NDP’s last five full years in office — 2007 actually — the 
province lost 1,160 total health care workers: 455 RNs 
[registered nurse] and RPNs [registered practical nurse], 173 
physicians, 155 pharmacists, and 95 physiotherapists. Mr. 
Speaker, they didn’t bring them into the province. That’s what 
we lost in the province of Saskatchewan under an NDP 
government. 
 
I want to take a minute or two, Mr. Speaker, because it’s so 
important to the economy of this province, and talk about 
agriculture. We don’t hear a whole lot coming from the 
members opposite on agriculture. Number one, their record was 
dismal at best, and that’s putting it kindly, Mr. Speaker. But 
they never valued agriculture to the extent that I think the 
members on this side of the House do. 
 
I know from my colleague from Thunder Creek and some of the 
program improvements that he’s made and some of the things 
that we did earlier on under our new watch on the government, 
and I think that farmers had been asking for for many years, Mr. 
Speaker, whether it’s with crop insurance or even bringing the 
administration of the programs back to Melville . . . And tied in 
with crop insurance, Mr. Speaker, I think the efficiencies that 
were brought to the crop insurance program, and I know the 
Minister of Agriculture brought in some new changes to crop 
insurance this year that I know farmers have asked for and 
needed. And I think that’s going to be appreciated out there. 
 
I want to compare that though, Mr. Speaker, because I know a 
number of my colleagues remember the budgets that this was 
involved in. Does anybody remember the closing of 31 rural 
agriculture offices across this province? Well you know, Mr. 
Speaker, that was a budget, and I wouldn’t be too proud to 
stand on my feet and talk about a budget when we’d just closed 
32 rural services centres. Mr. Speaker, under our watch, I think 
we’ve opened 11 of them back up again. We’ve added people to 
the service centres right across this province, and I think it 
shows our concern and what is going on in agriculture in this 
province. 
 
They cut extension services in many of those budgets, the 
previous budgets. I watched with great interest when they 
brought those budgets forward of how hard we were going to 
get hammered in agriculture this time because their record was 
not all that great. 
 
Remember, Mr. Speaker, and I know we’re going back a long 
way, but when we were in opposition, all of us that were here 
earlier on, they used to talk about Grant Devine and go back 
how many years, and it was all his fault. And now the Leader of 
the Opposition gets up and says, oh we don’t want to go back; 
we don’t want to be thinking back when Mr. Lingenfelter was 
even here. What was that? Four years ago? I saw Link on the 
news the other night. Anybody see Link on the news? It made 
my heart feel good to see Mr. Lingenfelter on the news because 

you know what, Mr. Speaker? He was probably one of the best 
things that ever happened to us. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I kind of find it interesting that the Leader of 
the Opposition gets up again and tells us how things should . . . 
[inaudible] . . . Don’t tell us what policy is, what he would 
have, what he would do. But he tells us, spend more. You 
should put more into health, more into education, more into 
highways, more into roads. And, Mr. Speaker, he would 
because we saw under Mr. Lingenfelter’s leadership . . . But he 
was the right-hand man. The Leader of the Opposition was the 
right-hand man. Didn’t he put together their last policy book? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Tree book. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Three book. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Tree. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, okay, it’s even worse, worse than I 
thought, Mr. Speaker. But wasn’t there like $5 billion more than 
we had available? My gosh, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think the 
people of this province even want to take a chance on that 
Leader of the Opposition ever becoming premier. But as I said 
before, it did my heart good to see Mr. Lingenfelter back on 
TV, and I hope anybody that saw that clip is reminded of where 
we would be had we been so foolish to elect another NDP 
government. 
 
I’m still on ag, Mr. Speaker. I got carried away a little bit here. 
Mr. Speaker, they also — and I know a number of the members 
will remember this on this side of the House — they cut 
spot-loss hail. Remember it was part of the crop insurance 
program and they cut it? But they didn’t only cut it once. They 
cut it twice. They cut it. They reinstated it with a lot of pressure, 
and they couldn’t just hold out. They had to cut it again. The 
member for Arm River knows well what I’m talking about, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They ignored many of the disasters we had in agriculture, 
whether it was drought or flooding, all those things, Mr. 
Speaker. It was like the Southwest was a good example for my 
colleagues that come from that area. And when we come to 
power, the first people at the door — I know when I was Ag 
minister and I know the Premier knows this — they were the 
first people that come and said, we’re in trouble out here and 
we’ve been ignored for the last four years because of drought. 
And they were. We toured out there. And the only thing really 
moving was the gophers. If you had a chance to see it, it was 
amazing, Mr. Speaker. You’d see a field out there and it was 
just crawling. The Environment minister’s got a smile on his 
face. He knows what I’m talking about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they were totally ignored by the NDP through 
those dry years. And, Mr. Speaker, I think it was the second day 
that we were in power and had our cabinet posting, and we 
found our office up there. Tim Highmoor was my chief of staff. 
We had farmers, we had ranchers, we had cattlemen in, and hog 
producers. I remember that well, Mr. Speaker. They weren’t 
there because they wanted to be. They were there because they 
had to be and they were representing other farmers across this 
province. 
 



6642 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2015 

And you know, Mr. Speaker, it was one of the nicest meetings I 
think we’ve ever had, considering the pressure that was on us at 
that time. Mr. Speaker, these were people of Saskatchewan that 
were in trouble, felt ignored, felt neglected, and had nowhere to 
turn, Mr. Speaker, under the previous government. And you 
know, in the end we got along really good with these same 
producers that the NDP felt it was important to ignore across 
the province. These are the same people that are still out there 
farming, still out there ranching. In fact cattle prices improved 
dramatically and some of these same people, if we hadn’t 
helped them a little bit in a time of need, may not still be here 
farming and ranching. But they are, Mr. Speaker, and taking 
advantage of some very good cattle prices and in fact are 
playing such a tremendous part in the economy of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:45] 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, and I remember back under Mr. 
Romanow as premier, and then Mr. Calvert, it just seemed like 
it was kind of a set agenda. But they blamed the feds for 
everything that happened. Anybody remember that on this side 
of the House? Something would go wrong or a program 
wouldn’t turn out as we wanted it, and you know, everyone on 
that side was programmed the same. It’s the feds’ problem, not 
us. We’re the province, we’re a wee province. Remember that? 
We’re the wee province and we’ll be in and out of equalization 
for the rest of our lives. Well that day’s over, thank goodness, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there’s so many things . . . Oh, I know one 
thing I wanted to talk about, Mr. Speaker. The members 
opposite keep saying, where did the money go? Well every 
member on this side of the House is going to touch on where 
the money’s gone: infrastructure, new hospitals, 40 new 
schools. Mr. Speaker, that’s where the money’s going. The 
infrastructure deficit in this province was tremendous when the 
NDP left power. 
 
But you know, maybe we should have asked more often, where 
did the money go when the NDP were in power. Because I can 
remind people of this province because I think we forget very 
quickly when times are better, Mr. Speaker. But does anybody 
remember this? Big Sky Farms, $26 million lost. Where did the 
money go, Mr. Speaker? 90.8 million lost, Navigata 
Communications. Oh that was a fair chunk of change. That’s 
where the money went. Where is the Finance critic, Mr. 
Speaker, when I need him here? Because he’s the number guru 
on that side of the House, and I think these numbers are 
important to him. It’s better than some of the numbers he’s 
come up with, and I’ll be careful, Mr. Speaker, where I go with 
that one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve got a list here, but I think it’s important. 
Because do you know what we could’ve done with these 
dollars, how many highways we could’ve repaved with these 
dollars, how many hospitals we could’ve kept open, how many 
schools we wouldn’t have closed if we’d have had these 
dollars? We actually might’ve considered building a school. 
That didn’t happen for the 16 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 15 million in Channel Lake. That was a big one at 
the time. Remember that? Remember Mr. Lautermilch? Oh I 

remember him well. $2 million, Guyana. There was another 
good one. It’s only 2 million bucks, but it would’ve gone a long 
way . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Exactly. $16 million, NST 
[NST Network Services of Chicago], Chicago. That was 
another one. 9.4 million lost in Persona Inc., a Newfoundland 
cable company. Now there was a venture we needed to get into. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 24.7 million loss, Retx.com. Remember that one? 
I can’t even say it, but it lost 27 million, $24.7 million. Mr. 
Speaker, 6.7 million lost in tappedinto.com, a Nashville 
dot-com company. $3 million lost in Clickabid. We all 
remember that one. 5.6 million lost on Soft Tracks Enterprises 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Exactly. Here we are, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
$10 million lost on Craig Wireless, a Manitoba Internet 
company. Now we really need to be funding Manitoba right 
now, in the socialist haven of Manitoba. I think we’ll just keep 
investing right here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, under a 
Sask Party government. I know you’re getting tired, but there’s 
a long list here. Mr. Speaker, 17.2 million lost in Coachman 
Insurance, an Ontario company. Isn’t it funny that every one of 
these pretty . . . well not Big Sky. We did that right here at 
home. We blew that 26 million. But a lot of these companies 
and investments are nowhere near Saskatchewan and didn’t do 
a thing for Saskatchewan people. 
 
8.9 million lost in Agdealer, a farm equipment Internet site. 8 
million lost in mega bingo. And this is a real pet peeve of mine. 
Mr. Speaker, we are investing in bingo across the province of 
Saskatchewan. In my communities they put bingo on 
voluntarily. They don’t need the NDP investing in it, Mr. 
Speaker, but that’s where the NDP went wrong. They seemed to 
think that father government was a little smarter than the 
average people across this province and put $8 million into a 
bingo project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also they spent another 6.5 on Minds Eye 
Entertainment. Remember that one? $40 million lost in Austar 
Communications, an Australian company. Away down under 
we dumped 40 million bucks. Mr. Speaker, 2.42, Business 
Watch International. 2.2 million lost in Clinicare. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m getting hoarse just listing all the ventures that 
the NDP put across this province and, Mr. Speaker . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . No, I think I . . . Did I not mention 
SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company]? Sure enough, I forgot it. But, Mr. Speaker, you’ve 
got to forgive me, Mr. Speaker, because the list is so long under 
the NDP and I honestly . . . And I think the members on this 
side of the House find it amazing that every member on that 
side of the House has the nerve to get up and, in one of the parts 
of their speech somewhere they say, where did the money go? I 
mean if I had a track record like that, I’d be quiet, I’d sit down, 
and I would not get out of my seat because of the record that we 
had, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to retire here pretty 
quick and I know some of my colleagues are going to be the 
same as me. We’re going to get out there and we’re going to be 
watching TV when question period’s on and, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re going to be watching to see what everybody else is doing 
in here. But I will never forget what happened under the NDP, 



March 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6643 

Mr. Speaker, and I know what’s going to tick me off the most is 
when the members opposite . . . Now I’m not sure how many 
there’s going to be. It could be the same member every time on 
their feet. I don’t know. They’re probably going to be down a 
few on that side. Last time they dropped what, 11? They can’t 
afford to go that far this time. Say there’s two or three or four of 
them. And I don’t mean to be arrogant about this. They may be 
more on that side of the House. We don’t know. Elections are 
funny things. But, Mr. Speaker, I know I’m going to get riled 
up when I hear a member on that side of the House — and 
they’re definitely going to be on that side of the House — get 
up and ask questions about health care, education, 
infrastructure, all of these things, when they know the past 
history of what they’ve had on that side of the House. It’s 
almost hypocritical. It’s not but it’s almost hypocritical, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m really careful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to talk a little bit . . . I think I only 
went through, yes, only went through the hospital closures. But, 
Mr. Speaker, and I won’t put you through this again, Mr. 
Speaker, but ho, do I have a list here of school closures in the 
province. And, Mr. Speaker, I know there’s . . . well everybody 
on this side of the House, even our urban members, probably 
had something happen to some of the schools in their area. But 
I’ll have a little go at it, Mr. Speaker, because there’s 
communities like Neville, Admiral, Piapot, Lang, Earl Grey, 
Kronau, Gray, Wilcox, Francis, Odessa, Glenavon, Moose Jaw, 
Willow Bunch, Briercrest, Crane Valley, Limerick, Macdowell, 
Prince Albert, Smeaton, Sylvania, Melfort, Uranium City, La 
Loche. Mr. Speaker, there’s just too many to go here. I just 
can’t do it. I’m going to lose my voice. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that every community and 
every MLA on this side of the House has had occasion to have 
to come in here and speak on behalf of the people that lost their 
schools out there. And let’s be fair about it, there were schools 
where the population was dropping and the enrolment in those 
schools . . . What were they chasing out, 35,000 students out of 
the province of Saskatchewan? So some of our schools had to 
run out of kids. They honestly did because people were moving 
out of the province in droves. And, Mr. Speaker, that was 
probably one of the main reasons that they were closing some 
of these schools, but it was also solidifying into the bigger 
centres and making those schools viable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, things have changed in this province. Isn’t it 
nice to go home when you can see somebody, in my case from 
the community of Langenburg, and they’ve got a smile on their 
face because that new school is being built? Mr. Speaker, 
there’s so many good things. The member for Martensville, 
good things happening there with schools, the member for 
Wadena and Kelvington. It’s right around the province. I could 
probably name every member on this side of the House, but I 
could also name nine on that side of the House that I believe are 
also, they’re also getting new schools and new facilities across 
the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think what that tells you is politics have nothing to do with 
the new facilities and the infrastructure dollars we’re spending. 
The province of Saskatchewan as a whole is where we put our 
priorities, Mr. Speaker, and we represent the whole province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, I won’t bore you anymore with a bunch of the 
names of places where schools were closed, even though I have 
another five or six pages of names out there, but we will never 
forget in rural Saskatchewan what happened to our 
infrastructure and schools out there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll just remind you, Mr. Speaker, because I’ve 
gone on maybe a bit longer than I should have here, but I’m 
comparing the Sask Party record — which we saw the last 
seven years, and it’s fresh in all our minds, and I believe it’s 
fresh in everybody around this province’s mind — what’s 
happened in the last seven years I think is mostly up here. Do 
you remember under the former government — and I think it 
was Mr. Calvert, and a fine man; I liked Mr. Calvert, got along 
with him good — but do you remember him calling this the wee 
province, and we’d be in and out of equalization for the rest of 
our lives? 
 
Do you know what’s changed the most in my home 
communities? It’s attitude. And do you know what helped that 
attitude is a lot of young people coming back with fresh 
attitudes. And frankly, they don’t care about politics. If 
somebody said to them, who’s your MLA, probably some of 
them, well maybe quite a few of them wouldn’t know who it is. 
But, Mr. Speaker, they’re not interested really in politics. 
They’re interested in raising their families, having a good job. 
And more and more we see that happening. 
 
I’m lucky. The other day, Mr. Speaker, Mosaic announced a 
$1.7 billion expansion on top of the dollars they already had 
invested out in our communities out there, Mr. Speaker. So can 
you imagine what that does to all my communities out there 
again? Population growth, new businesses. It’s just a great place 
to live and be at this time in history, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, you know, there’s another good sign, and I’ve 
mentioned it once or twice, but population. It’s so nice to go out 
. . . I don’t know if there’s a community in this province that 
hasn’t actually grown rather than, you know, the decline we 
saw before. But I thought I’d give you a few quotes here I 
found. It was kind of interesting. Remember when we were in 
opposition and we said we want to grow the province by 
100,000 people? And I can’t remember how long we said over. 
I think it was 10 years. Does that sound right? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — 10 years? Okay. We were really being 
optimistic, weren’t we? 100,000 people in 10 years . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Yeah, said it couldn’t . . . Well 
here’s what they, that’s exactly what they said: “. . . the 
Saskatchewan Party’s plan to increase our population by 
100,000 [people] in 10 years is more wishful thinking than 
statistically attainable.” You know who said that? Doreen 
Hamilton. That was only one member on the other side. 
 
Also it said, another quote I have is it said, “. . . they propose to 
increase the population of Saskatchewan by 100,000 people 
over . . . I forget what number of years, Mr. Speaker. Well it is 
so over the top, it is . . . farcical, Mr. Speaker, that it flies in the 
face of reality.” Harry Van Mulligen  
 
Does anybody remember Harry Van Mulligen? Wasn’t he the 



6644 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2015 

guy who was Finance minister, and we went through a whole 
election and they didn’t talk about raising taxes? We got in 
here, and Harry couldn’t even get out of his seat quick enough 
to raise the PST? That was our beloved NDP under that finance 
. . . but he was also the guy that made that quote, “We’ll never 
grow this province.” 
 
Also one more quote I’ll give you. And I won’t continue too 
long on this, Mr. Speaker, but the quote says: 
 

Of course he says that he wants to increase the population 
of the province by 100,000 people. Well who would 
disagree with that? That’s fine, but the question is, do you 
have a plan to achieve it, Mr. Speaker? And I say they do 
not have a plan or at least they do not have a plan that 
makes any sense. 

 
Eric Cline. Now there was another Finance minister. Wasn’t he 
Finance? . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, Attorney General 
for a while. So it just shows you that it was right across. They 
not only didn’t think we could grow this province by 100,000 
people, they thought it was ridiculous. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s why they’re on that side and we’re on 
this side. And thank goodness, Mr. Speaker, for the 
communities in this province. You know, a lot of the growth 
that we’ve had, Mr. Speaker, in this province has nothing to do 
with the government of the day other than the fact that we get 
out of the road, let them run their businesses. And where there’s 
places we can facilitate that growth, we do that, Mr. Speaker, 
whether it’s red tape removal, any of the programming that we 
do that’s necessary we’ll do for businesses, but other than that 
we stay out of their way. And I think that goes back to what I 
talked about before is why the attitude in this province has 
changed. 
 
You know most of the businesses in my area say our biggest 
handicap is we need more people. And I think a lot of our 
communities are in that situation, Mr. Speaker. We need more 
immigration. We need more families moving back to our 
communities, whether it’s A&W, McDonald’s, Tim Hortons, it 
doesn’t matter what the small business is in our area, we need 
more people. The communities need more people. So really, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s changed so dramatically since we were in 
power. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, just a little review of where I’ve been here. 
And I realize I’ve been all over the map, but I want to review it 
anyway, Mr. Speaker. But compare our record to the NDP 
record: new hospital in Moose Jaw; new hospital, children’s 
hospital in Saskatoon; new hospital in North Battleford; 2,600 
more nurses; 400-plus doctors since the NDP left power and we 
came to power. 
 
And I believe there’s 7 to 800 more people working in the 
long-term care facilities across the province. And I know the 
members opposite have brought some valid concerns up, Mr. 
Speaker. But can anyone imagine what it would be like in those 
long-term care homes with 7, pretty near 800 less staff in them 
than there is today? And the Leader of the Opposition has the 
nerve to get up and say, this will solve the problem; just go hire 
more people. 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s maybe areas that we do need more 
people. But we certainly took a stab at it, Mr. Speaker: from 
where we were seven years ago, dramatic improvement in 
where we are today. And that record, Mr. Speaker, that I talked 
about in health care is dramatically . . . flips over to the other 
side, where they closed 52 hospitals, 53 with the Plains. 
 
I’d be remiss . . . I talked to a surgeon. My wife had the 
misfortune to have some surgery here not long ago, Mr. 
Speaker. And it was kind of surprising because the surgeon did 
not know that I was an MLA because I usually tell everybody, 
but I forgot. I didn’t tell her. I made sure I didn’t tell her. I 
didn’t want anybody to take it out on my family. 
 
But anyway that surgeon was talking, and she said, one of the 
worst things that’s ever happened in this province was the 
closure of the Plains hospital. That’s not me talking politically 
or any member of this House talking politically. That’s a 
surgeon that had the opportunity to work in the Plains hospital 
and saw how well it worked, how good it could work out here 
because all those expansions could have taken place, acres out 
there, that they could have expanded the Plains. And you know 
what? They actually could have parked more than 10 cars there. 
That would even be a plus, Mr. Speaker. I can vouch for that 
with the ticket I got, parked in a fire lane to pick my wife up, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, closing the Plains hospital was a political 
decision. I remember it well. And for those of us that were in 
this House at that time, there was no reality to why their 
justification for closing it was. It was inner city politics at the 
time. That’s why the Plains doesn’t exist out there as a hospital. 
 
Remember it was supposed to be asbestos in the walls? That 
was the reason we closed it . . . They closed it. We didn’t close 
it; they closed it. Well it’s funny. Isn’t SIAST [Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology] out there right 
now in that same building? And you know, there was doctors at 
the time said, close the whole floor. If there’s asbestos in here, 
take it out. We’ll function without it and go from there. No, 
couldn’t do it. Had to close the Plains. 
 
Mr. Speaker, education. I talked a little bit about that before. 
Let’s contrast the Sask Party record to the NDP record. Our 
record right now, and I think one of the main things is 40 brand 
new schools, either in the process of being built or going to be 
built, Mr. Speaker. That’s a pretty good record. And I don’t 
mean to stand here and brag about it, Mr. Speaker, but I don’t 
care what the government of the day is. If they can get up and 
say we’re in the process of building 40 new schools, it’s 
important to every person in this province. 
 
Now contrast that to a 16-year record — that 40 new schools 
happened over the last seven years — contrast that to the 
16-year record of the NDP where they closed 176 schools, Mr. 
Speaker. I’ll take our record any day, Mr. Speaker, when it 
comes to education. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know about the rest of you, but it’s 
really hard to get up and give a speech here and say, this is what 
we’re doing. We think we’re heading in the right direction. 



March 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6645 

Have we made some mistakes? Probably have from time to 
time. We admit it when we do. 
 
But the members opposite, whether it’s the Leader of the 
Opposition or the Finance critic, don’t we think it’s time to 
actually come out and say, if we get to be government a year 
from now — they only have a year left to go — we should 
know what they stand for. I think the people of Saskatchewan 
deserve to know what they stand for, Mr. Speaker, because, you 
know, they might have some good ideas, who knows? They 
haven’t used any of them yet. Didn’t use them for 16 years, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I won’t go on and bore you anymore or bore 
my colleagues anymore. But, Mr. Speaker, I personally think 
it’s time, when the Leader of the Opposition has his chance to 
get up and reply . . . And he’s going to be critical of the budget. 
I know he is because he’s going to talk about lean, lean, lean, 
lean. That’ll be his big pet peeve, Mr. Speaker. He doesn’t 
believe in bringing efficiencies to any department, whether it’s 
Health or Education or Highways, whatever it is. He doesn’t 
believe in trying to bring efficiencies. But I think he has an 
obligation to the people of Saskatchewan to start telling them 
what he would do. 
 
Mr. Lingenfelter told us what he would do. We saw it front and 
centre. I mean, give the guy credit. It was crazy, some of the 
stuff he was going to do. He was going to twin every highway 
in the province. Remember that? He couldn’t find enough 
highways there that one day when he was making 
announcements, and part of those announcements where the 
Leader of the Opposition was writing them for him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we all agree, and I think the public, 
anybody that’s watching today would agree with me, that the 
Leader of the Opposition, it’s time he put some policy on the 
table. When he gets up to reply to the budget, I hope he says, 
you’re doing it wrong over there — well he will say that — but 
then tell us what he would do because I think he has that 
obligation as Leader of the Opposition in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I certainly will be supporting this budget. This 
was a tough budget, I know, from my colleagues that had 
worked many hours on it and for the caucus that also had input 
into this, Mr. Speaker. And I will be supporting this budget, and 
I really, Mr. Speaker, am going to miss these meetings we have, 
you and I together, where I get the opportunity to get up and 
speak. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Arm 
River-Watrous. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always a privilege 
to follow the member from Saltcoats. He uses all my points. I 
could just say, ditto, and sit down. But I’ve always admired the 
member, the speeches he’s given, and this is one of his better 
ones. And he’ll be missed in the House as we move on. 
 
Also another member will be the Finance minister. I’ve worked 
with him on treasury board, and worked with him a number of 
years. And he did an excellent job with the past budgets and this 
one. And knowing his commitment and his passion for the work 

he’s did there has been excellent. I’ve always been . . . admired, 
admired the Minister of Finance. 
 
As we move on in this budget, we also want to acknowledge 
two other people that work very hard for me: my two 
constituency assistants, Lavonne Lyke and Donna Petit. They’re 
probably the only two right now that are actually watching this 
on TV. But they did a lot of work, they hold the fort down 
while we’re up here, taking the calls. And I just want to 
acknowledge for the work that they did and going to be doing in 
the future. 
 
As we move forward in this budget debate, you know, we’re 
going to be hearing a lot of different opinions varying, a lot of 
different accusations, and a lot of different things. But one of 
the things before I move actually into the budget I’d like to 
mention is, in parts of the world that for people don’t have that 
right, they’re dying for what we’re doing here, in the speaking 
back and forth. And I think that’s something that we have to 
always ensure that happens as we move forward. 
 
I know that, you know, you can say the word terrorist, but to me 
they’re not. They’re just low-life scumbags that’s happening in 
the rest of the world. And what’s been happening there, and 
trying to take away the democratic rights, if anybody that 
actually has a varying opinion from them, you know, when you 
start killing women and children and people for that reason, I 
just hope that all members here — and I know on this side, and 
I hope the other side too — will support what’s going to . . . as a 
war on terrorism continues on. And I know that I support our 
troops and support all the politicians federally that know that 
what has to be done as we move forward. 
 
Getting to the budget, Mr. Speaker, you know, this was a tough 
budget, but they’re all tough. There’s always people that are 
going to come to you wanting more money spent. I’ve been 
here since we formed government, even when we were in 
opposition. But even when we were in opposition, when we 
asked for things, we always asked things reasonably. 
 
Both our leaders — Elwin and our Premier right now — they 
knew that what they had to ask was for the betterment of the 
people, but also make sense money wise and could be 
sustained. Those are things we put out even when we were in 
opposition. We put out a book of policy of what we would do, 
what would we do if we would form government, and we’ve 
stuck to that. 
 
Now that’s something that the opposition parties haven’t. 
They’ve yet to put out anything on what they would do. It’s 
pretty easy to ask and ask and ask. Right now, you know, the 
member before me that spoke about Lingenfelter, I mean he had 
overspent $5 billion. Well that’s not even close to being 
sustainable on a budget. The members opposite right now, what 
they put over I think is over $1 billion in debt. And that’s just 
some of the asks that have come forward with no actual plan 
how to actually increase . . . How are they actually going to 
increase the revenue to cover that shortfall? 
 
It’s easy to just say yes to spend, to spend, but there’s also a 
responsibility of developing a budget and making this province 
sustainable because that was one of the problems that wasn’t 
. . . When we were in opposition I mean this province was 



6646 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2015 

losing businesses. It was losing people. It was losing ground 
because it didn’t have a plan. It was going backwards, and the 
budgets that were being presented were unsustainable. 
 
I can go down the list, but I’m not going to say what the 
member from Saltcoats said. But I mean we can go down that 
list, when you were spending and losing like $20 million on 
SPUDCO and 15 million on Channel Lake instead of building 
hospitals and long-term care facilities. Well that’s the difference 
between our government and the opposition is we’re building 
and putting that money into infrastructure: 13 long-term care 
facilities, one of them in my constituency in Watrous. They had 
their funding set aside since about ’93, and every year would 
always ask for the government’s share. And when we formed 
government, we put it in, along with the other 13 that we’re 
working on. 
 
Those are the things that we’re addressing. Those are the things 
we’re spending money on, not going out and losing money in 
Guyana and Australia and all of them other things. You’ve got 
to have your priorities, and so far from the opposition side I 
haven’t heard where their priorities are. I’ve got a lot of 
constituents. Even if the slightest, slightest chance they ever 
form government, would they go back to that? Would they go 
back to where government has to own businesses, where it’s up 
to the government to drive the investment? 
 
Well we believe that that’s not right, Mr. Speaker. And I think 
it’s proven in how this province has grown in our population 
and the optimism that’s happening throughout this province, 
never mind my constituency. As you go to each and every town, 
I mean the optimism is there, not just with the farmers and the 
ranchers and the businessmen but with the working people, that 
this province is now sustainable. It’s never going to be a 
have-not province again. We’re actually proud to be from 
Saskatchewan and proud that this province is growing, that it’s 
well known across the world, well known across the country as 
a place that you can do business, a place you can bring your 
families, a place you can raise your families, that there is a job 
here, that there is adequate health care, that there is adequate 
highways, that the government is working to provide the 
services to make that possible. 
 
As we talk about health care, I mean that’s always a tough 
budget as we move forward. We’re spending I think over 5.5 
billion on it this year, with more demands on it, and that’s 
always a growing concern. And that is why we have to make 
sure that every health dollar spent is spent wisely because we 
don’t have the option of spending not wisely. I think we have to 
look at every department, and that’s what we’re doing with lean 
and different initiatives all through departments, of saving 
money where we can and making sure that each dollar is well 
spent as we move forward. 
 
I know that talking to constituents, they said, always look inside 
the government first to try to save money before you raise 
taxes. Taxes should always be your last resort. And I’m not 
saying that, you know, forever taxes will always stay the same. 
They understand that, but they know that that money coming 
from them needs to be well used. I know that we had a lot of 
calls and a lot comments that yet even with this tough budget, 
we looked inside, still trying to make some savings rather than a 
chance of raising taxes and a chance of actually slowing the 

economy down, costing more jobs. 
 
As we talk about the oil industry, I mean back home there’s 
guys that still aren’t going to work yet. They’re waiting till after 
breakup, and they may not go because they didn’t work from 
when they came home at Christmastime to breakup because of 
the slowdown in the oil industry and now they may not be 
called back yet for a while. So I mean those are things you have 
to take into consideration, that they’re struggling to make their 
ends meet. 
 
As a government that’s what they’re asking us. Before raising 
their taxes, look inside and see where you can save and make 
sure that every dollar is being well spent. And I think it is when 
it comes to health care. You know, never mind the long-term 
care facilities, the children’s hospital. What we’ve had . . . The 
North Battleford hospital is what we’re doing. 
 
The member opposite, the member before me from Saltcoats 
mentioned the Plains hospital. And you’re right. That was a 
huge mistake on their part, huge mistake closing that. And it’s 
cost them, cost them their political, any credibility they ever 
had over on the other side when they closed that.  
 
You know, as we move forward also on the municipal end, 
we’ve kept the rink affordability grant going because we know 
and understand that towns are struggling to provide recreational 
services. Those are things, programs that we still know had to 
keep going forward as we developed this budget. 
 
You know, it’d been so easy to do like the previous 
government. All they ever did was just, if they ran into any kind 
of trouble, they just raised taxes, raised taxes. And yes, that 
brings in some income, brings in the income but also then drove 
this province to what it was, where it lost the people, lost the 
businesses, and then it just keeps moving down as you lose 
businesses and then you lose the workers. The workers have got 
to leave. You work less and you get less tax money. You know, 
that system doesn’t work. 
 
We’ve turned that around. I won’t say just our government, but 
we provided the facility for the businesses to move forward or 
the atmosphere as we go. And the optimism is there now, that 
we’re not going to get in your faces. We’re not going to, if you 
start actually making some money, we’re not going to start 
taxing you or possibly nationalize you or just causing you more 
trouble, more red-tape trouble, more things along the line that’s 
going to cost you money at the business end. 
 
Highways are always a major issue. You know, I have 15 
Highway. We’re going to keep working on that. There’s a 
four-year plan. I believe in this budget again, they’re going to 
be doing some paving because that tendering’s going to be 
going out. And we’ve already did a chunk of it, and we know 
that we have to keep moving forward. Never mind the big 
demands around the Warmans and the Martensvilles where they 
have to do the interchanges and the going around the city, the 
bypass here as this city grows hugely. 
 
You know, those are demands that we have to meet, but we’ve 
decided to keep going with that because we know that you can’t 
put them programs on hold, whether it be the school in 
Langenburg. I mean it would have been easy to just say no, you 



March 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6647 

know. Let’s just pause it for a year. But no, you can’t. Once you 
start it, you’ve got to . . . We’ve decided as a government, we’re 
going to keep this going and keep what we’re building. Whether 
it be hospitals, whether it be schools, whether it be highways, 
we have to keep that momentum going. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Blackstrap is another in my constituency, a park where we’re 
spending money on. There is a huge potential for that, being 
close to Saskatoon. So we’re increasing, you know, funding to 
go to that. There’s been the electrified campsites. There’s been 
different things we did throughout the parks, knowing that we 
still have to keep spending money on the recreation. 
 
You know, education is always important. We’ve increased that 
budget I think by over 2 per cent. In Kenaston we have the 
long-distance learning centre has opened there, you know, and 
it’s helped immensely for the students that it’s reached with the 
smaller communities that had schools that may have had to 
close, or that student would have to go to a bigger centre. I give 
kudos to the Sun West Division for bringing that forward in 
Kenaston. They’ve increased teachers there by I think there’s 
been three educators put on now. That gives them 30 full-time 
educators there right now. 
 
When I was in opposition, I can remember that a lot of my 
schools were wondering if they were actually going to stay 
open. I can remember when that program first came in and they 
were struggling with it but, you know, the school board had the 
foresight with us coming into government saying, you know I 
think this is going to start growing. These towns are going to 
start growing, and it has. You look at our students, the 
population that’s grown. They had the foresight to look 
forward, and so does the health districts in providing the 
funding for the long-term care facilities, in growing them 
because the optimism is out there. 
 
Now the towns, you know, that’s one of the reasons most of us 
got into roles as politicians. This province was basically being 
run in the ground. I mean every town I met with just said, how 
are we going to deal with the people that are leaving? We have 
empty houses. Our schools are looking at possibly going to be 
closing. There was basically no plan for the province. You 
know, we came in with the schools. We actually put limits on to 
where a school division could actually then look at possibly 
doing a closure. Before that, it was up to the division to do 
however they wanted, and we had lost this . . . The government 
of the day, the NDP, were projecting 3,000 less students. 
 
So I mean as a school division, you’re going to be thinking, 
well if the government’s projecting this every year, why would 
we be spending money on schools? Like, why would we? So 
they weren’t. They weren’t spending any money on them 
because they were listening to the government of the day, which 
was the NDP, which was just always doom and gloom, always 
don’t plan for success. The NDP were always negative, and so 
what happened was a lot of these divisions didn’t spend money 
on infrastructure. 
 
Now we’ve got schools that are busting at the seams. How 
many more students have we got? Even the small towns, the 
students are coming back. The towns are growing, you know. 

But for 16 years when you get that from a government, the NDP 
government that just keeps saying over and over again that 
we’re going to expect less . . . We’re going to be a wee 
province, in and out of equalization. You know, if you keep 
telling people enough of that, it starts to register even though 
deep down they knew it wasn’t true. So one of the things when 
we became government I mean is making this place, this 
province open for business and saying, business friendly. And 
you’ve got to have some optimism. 
 
I mean and look what’s happened with the potash, with the 
potash industry, the growth in it. Investments have been huge. 
The oil and gas investments, the uranium, you know the 
potential in this province is huge. It’s always been there, but 
under the previous government they always seemed to like to 
hold it back and say, no, don’t grow. We’re always going to be 
this wee province. Don’t expect much. 
 
Revenue sharing, there wasn’t any. I mean at budget time, 
towns . . . I was town councillor before ’99. You never knew 
what you were going to get from the government, from the 
NDP. I mean nothing. You know, a lot of years it was less from 
what it was the previous year. And they said, you know, we’ve 
got to have some . . . Does this government, the NDP, have a 
plan? No. So we came in. We knew we had to do revenue 
sharing, something where you can do some long-range 
planning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it comes down to this budget. That’s the 
difference between us and even the present-day NDP that are 
sitting across. I’ve yet to see a long-range plan from them, any 
policy, anything that would say, yes, we’re going to keep this 
province growing. We’re going to keep balanced budgets. 
We’re going to keep doing investments. I have yet to hear one 
word over there. 
 
And you know, when I talk to constituents — I’ve actually door 
knocked a bit in Saskatoon — that’s what we hear on the 
doorstep too. They say, yes, we haven’t heard anything from 
them. I mean at least you guys are laying out a plan. We look at 
your last years when we were in government. You look at their 
previous record of seven years. When you compare the two, it’s 
pretty pitiful when you look at their side, on the NDP, you 
know. 
 
That’s what the people are looking for. They want good 
governance, and they want a long-range plan as we move 
forward, you know. And that’s what we offer instead of just 
getting up every day in question period and just saying, well 
either spend some money here or spend some more there or 
spend this, but we don’t have a plan on health care. We’re not, 
you know, we’re not going to look at any efficiencies in 
education or health care. Just possibly maybe throw some more 
money there and leave it alone. And how about long-range 
planning for infrastructure? Any on tax increases? Nothing. 
You’ve never heard a word from them on that. 
 
And I think when it comes to election time, you’re going to 
struggle to hear anything from them too. They’re just going to 
be negative. But you know what? As an MLA, I’m proud to run 
on a record of the past seven years when I take it around. And 
as we go into election next year, I’m proud to take this budget 
and this record, and I’ll talk to anybody on the doorstep. I know 



6648 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2015 

when I go around, I mean it’s been very positive from door to 
door to door. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to wrap up my speech. With that I 
will be supporting this budget and definitely not supporting the 
amendment brought forth by the members opposite. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s an 
honour to be able to stand in this Assembly again and speak to 
the current budget that was presented just four or five days ago 
here in this Legislative Assembly. 
 
First of all I need to extend a few thank yous. Mr. Speaker, each 
and every member in this Chamber, past and present and even 
those in the future, will acknowledge that the challenges of life, 
living life as an MLA, are significant but certainly can be 
enhanced with the support of family members and staff in our 
constituency offices. 
 
I first of all want to extend a special thank you to my wife, Lois, 
and our three children. Our son Byron was eight and Graham 
was six and Stephanie was two when I entered this Chamber, 
and now we have the two boys married and we have six 
grandchildren which we thoroughly enjoy and love. And our 
daughter Stephanie is, in fact, our daughter Stephanie is looking 
forward to being married this summer so Dad’s got to dig a 
little deeper in his pocket to provide for a wedding. But we’re 
excited to have another member added to our family. So 
families are important. 
 
And I think you’ve heard over the years, members have talked 
about their families and how important it is and that support 
mechanism out there. And then I’m sure all members also have 
very close friends that have supported them through the years 
and continue to offer support. Because of the challenges in this 
Chamber, sometimes it can become a little discouraging and a 
little depressing, but then to have that support factor out there is 
truly important. 
 
I also want to extend a special thank you to my current CA 
[constituency assistant], Jeff Cole, and also Audrey McEwen 
who continues to serve in the office. As members, we 
acknowledge that those individuals in many cases provide the 
buffer. They’re the first persons that receive the calls that come 
into the offices, and many times calls that come to the offices 
aren’t necessarily coming from people who want to say thank 
you. They are calling from people who have run into challenges 
in their lives, whether it’s personal or whether it’s issues of a 
larger nature, and our CAs are the individuals who take the calls 
and then pass on the information. And at the end of the day as 
we go through the files and as we communicate with the 
ministerial offices, Mr. Speaker, in many cases we’re able to 
resolve or at least bring a bit of a resolve to the situation and 
help people in their time of stress. So thanks, Jeff, and thanks, 
Audrey. A special thank you to Tina Durbin who served as my 
CA for a number of years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is all about keeping Saskatchewan 
strong and keeping Saskatchewan growing. As the minister 
pointed out the other day, it’s about keeping taxes low. No tax 
reductions, also no increased taxes in this budget, Mr. Speaker, 

trying to maintain a tax regime that allows the people of 
Saskatchewan to continue to invest and believe in this province. 
It continues to invest in infrastructure even while the revenues 
to the provincial government are being challenged at this time. 
We also recognize that there is an infrastructure deficit out 
there, and if we just put that on hold as the NDP did in the past, 
we’ll just find ourselves in a deeper hole. So this budget 
continues to invest in infrastructure while at the same time 
controlling spending. 
 
This budget is all about helping create jobs so we can build and 
plan for the future and the growth of this province, and helping 
educate the young men and women who will become the 
entrepreneurs and fill the specific jobs that we have that are 
continuing to grow in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
When I think of jobs and job creation, and I think of the 
investment opportunities and the way we’ve structured the 
business tax and the capital tax, I can’t help but think of the 
Seed Hawk manufacturing, or Vaderstad now owns the plant at 
Langbank, and that plant is expanded again this year. And the 
last I understood they were looking to get to a workforce of 
some 400 people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that wouldn’t be taking place if it wasn’t for the 
fact that this government has created an investment climate that 
is open to business in the province of Saskatchewan. And this 
budget not only is spending money on infrastructure needed and 
keeping taxes low and investing in people, but it’s also . . . 
We’re also operating on a balanced budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have over the past number of years and 
certainly months . . . and the member from Athabasca has been 
very, it’s noted, has been always raising or calling out from his 
seat and asking, well where did the money go? Well, Mr. 
Speaker, let me say this. The money, for the benefit of the 
member from Athabasca, the money went to reduce debt. And 
as a result of reduced debt of almost $3 billion over the last 
seven years, the first seven years of this government, it has 
meant a savings of $1 billion in interest costs which this 
government has then been able to put back into the people of 
Saskatchewan. It has gone to reducing the tax burden that the 
people of Saskatchewan have had over the years, over many 
years of NDP government. 
 
And one of the most important reductions was the reliance on 
the property tax to fund education. And, Mr. Speaker, no matter 
where you go in rural Saskatchewan, you will continue to hear 
people, property owners in rural Saskatchewan so grateful that 
that reliance on the property owner to fund education was 
finally dealt with, contrary to a former premier of this province 
who said the status quo is not on when he was asked about 
property taxes, and yet once he left the SARM meeting and 
SUMA and told them the status quo wasn’t on, did absolutely 
nothing. 2007, a change in government, and we addressed that 
issue and people across all of Saskatchewan are truly grateful 
for that. 
 
This budget is all about infrastructure and more money into 
building highways and municipal roads and schools and 
hospitals and heavy-care centres across this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I talk about where the money went, I just 



March 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6649 

want a short, brief history lesson because I don’t have to 
respond to a question for . . . and just take a minute. Let me 
remind the member from Athabasca what his colleagues did 
prior to the 1980s. The NDP government of the day had a 
moratorium on heavy-care home construction, a moratorium on 
heavy . . . What did that mean? No heavy-care beds built during 
that period of time. 
 
In the 1980s, what did we see? I would ask that member to go 
to the people in Wawota and ask them whether or not that 
heavy-care facility should have been built in Wawota or 
Whitewood or Broadview or Wolseley or Stoughton or Carlyle. 
And I just don’t have the list in front of me of all the facilities 
that were built. But more than 1,800 heavy-care beds were built 
during the 1980s. And guess what, Mr. Speaker? Changed 
governments — 1,200 beds were reduced, taken out of the 
system. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, while the NDP were noted for reducing or 
increasing taxes, or reducing their expenditures in heavy-care 
facilities or capital construction, Mr. Speaker, the government 
of the ’80s, the Conservative government of the ’80s, believed 
that we needed to invest in this province. And as a result, while 
we’re still short beds, while there are crumbling capital 
infrastructure across this province, this current Saskatchewan 
Party government has continued to build and we have invested. 
 
[15:30] 
 
In fact, 11 long-term care facilities now opened across the 
province of Saskatchewan or under construction with the new 
long-term care facility in Swift Current under construction. We 
just opened a new integrated facility in Kipling, Mr. Speaker. 
Would the NDP have done that? I doubt it very much, Mr. 
Speaker. You ask the people of Kipling what they think of their 
new integrated facility. You ask the health staff, the three 
doctors currently working in Kipling and the nurse practitioner 
and the nurses and the staff working in that facility. Mr. 
Speaker, having walked through it and having had the 
opportunity to utilize it in a minor way, everything I hear is 
nothing but positive. People are very pleased to see how this 
government has shown their commitment to rural Saskatchewan 
and building some of the infrastructure that’s desperately 
needed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the issues that . . . and we heard a lot about 
it for about I would say probably a good month, month and a 
half prior to the budget, and the concern by municipal 
governments about the fact that this government was going to 
renege on its commitment of the 1 cent of the 5-cent provincial 
sales tax, and that it would really impact their abilities to plan 
for the management of their budgets, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker, as we heard last Wednesday, the Minister of Finance 
reiterated the fact that this government is committed to its 
ongoing revenue-sharing program with the municipal 
governments across this province enabling them to plan, better 
plan and plan consistently for the needs of their ratepayers, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
As a result of that 1 cent of the provincial tax, municipal 
governments actually saw an increase in revenue sharing. And 
one would say, well you know, the oil revenues are down. What 
constitutes that increase? Well, Mr. Speaker, that increase is 

coming about because of the consumer spending across the 
province and the fact that there are more people living in 
Saskatchewan. In fact just the other day the stats came out — 
1,132,640 people now living in the province of Saskatchewan. 
What that means, Mr. Speaker, is we have people moving into 
the province, is we have more and more people investing in this 
province. We have people spending in this province, from 
consumer goods to vehicles, providing for their households. 
And as a result of that expenditures, the revenues from 
provincial sales tax have increased which has allowed this 
government to share some of those revenues with municipal 
governments. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, just a couple of comments. SUMA president 
Debra Button says: 
 

Revenue sharing from the provincial government allows 
urban governments to make the most of property taxes. We 
can focus on putting that money into the services and 
infrastructure our communities need and our residents 
expect. 

 
A sound endorsement from SUMA president Debra Button. 
 
What did Regina mayor Michael Fougere have to say? 
 

Retaining of the full, unchanged revenue sharing formula 
is foundational to our growth and critical to our future 
plans. That funding ensures that we have a much-needed 
level of long-term financial predictability in the day-to-day 
operations of the City. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I could go through a long list of municipal 
government representatives and their views of this current 
budget and how this government has put in place a sustainable 
revenue-sharing program that enables them to just address the 
significant infrastructure challenges that they’ve been facing as 
a result of the growth we’re seeing in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This budget also provides for developing the training needed to 
address the workforce needs in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Six hundred thousand is the increase to adult education, basic 
education programs, for a record investment, Mr. Speaker, of 
$25 million, or an increase of 62 per cent since the 2007-08 
budget. This investment will add 200 additional ABE [adult 
basic education] seats, enabling young men and women the 
ability to upgrade their education and prepare themselves to 
meet the needs of the job opportunities that will be available, 
are available today, and will continue to be available. 
 
There is $500,000 allocated to support 100 new training seats in 
the Trades and Technology Centre at Parkland College in 
Yorkton. And this centre, Mr. Speaker, opens this fall as the 
result of an investment by this provincial government into the 
training, sciences, and trades in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is all about training young men and 
women to have the educational abilities and the training 
necessary to meet the job opportunities of the future in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
This budget also would, despite its challenges, is making an 
investment in the farm and ranch communities and agribusiness 



6650 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2015 

of the province of Saskatchewan. What this budget does, it 
increases up to $183 an acre for farmers to insure their crops 
while at the same time reducing premiums, Mr. Speaker. We 
have a significant increase in the agricultural budget. In fact, for 
’15-16 the Ministry of Agriculture’s budget is at $362.4 million, 
a commitment, Mr. Speaker, to the agricultural community of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
What this budget also includes, Mr. Speaker, despite the 
challenges that this government is facing, despite the 
challenges, what the minister was facing, is record investment 
in highway construction across the province of Saskatchewan. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d be remiss if I didn’t speak for a minute 
just about the completion of Highway 48 from the community 
of Kipling to No. 9, the fact that you can now access Highway 
48 at White City and drive right through to Manitoba, in fact to 
Virden, Manitoba, and just have a beautiful highway to drive 
on. And every day I hear comments about that, the fact that that 
piece of highway is now completed and the type of construction 
that was put into the completion of that highway. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that was a commitment that this government 
made to ensure that highway maintenance and repair is 
completed, also that there is access for the heavy truck traffic, 
not only from the oil sector but the farming community in my 
area. And so, Mr. Speaker, this government is committed not 
only to past upgrades and maintenance of highways, but also to 
building for the future as this province continues to grow. 
 
And what we have in this budget, Mr. Speaker, we hear a lot 
about the Regina bypass. And I think each and every one of us 
are aware of it. And I’m not sure if there isn’t a rural member 
who doesn’t hear about access to Regina almost every day or 
every time you’re talking to people. And they keep asking, 
when are you going to move forward with a bypass that actually 
moves the traffic out of the centre part of the city and gives 
traffic flow, creates a more uniform traffic flow around the city? 
Well this budget is committed to moving forward with a Regina 
bypass. 
 
This budget also commits 19 million to the start of construction 
of twinning of Highway 7 from Saskatoon to Delisle. Mr. 
Speaker, as this province has grown, a number of people have 
chosen not just to live . . . Both of our two major cities have 
grown, but a lot of the surrounding communities have grown. 
And what that means is more and more commuters travelling 
back and forth to jobs in the city. And what the construction of 
twinning on Highway 7 says, that we’re creating a safer driving 
environment for those people who are driving from Delisle and 
communities in between Delisle and Saskatoon to access their 
job opportunities in Saskatoon. 
 
We also have funding for the twinning of 39 from Estevan to 
Bienfait, Mr. Speaker, and there are a number of other projects. 
I’m not going to go into them all because a number of my 
colleagues on this side of the House will no doubt want to speak 
about the highway commitments that will be taking place in 
their constituencies and the added benefit that it will bring. 
 
This budget puts investments in provincial parks. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we have seen over the past number of years an 
increase in the demand for parking spots in our parks for 
campers, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to see that this budget has 

funding to replace the service centre buildings at Moose 
Mountain Provincial Park and Blackstrap Provincial Park. It’s 
also development of full-service campsites. There will be a 
further development in Moose Mountain Provincial Park as 
well as other parks across this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what I’d spoken of about No. 48, not only 
does No. 48 create easier access for transportation in the area 
that I live in. But we’re also seeing, now that No. 48 is 
complete, more and more traffic flow flowing down to Moose 
Mountain Provincial Park, which has meant that we’ve had to 
look at more full-service campsites at this park because of the 
demand. 
 
And also let me just mention, Mr. Speaker, as a result of the 
opportunity to speak with the former minister responsible for 
Environment and the current minister, working with local 
people we’ve found a way to move water from the back country 
into the Moose Mountain . . . into the lake, Mr. Speaker. And I 
would invite any of my colleagues to come out to the park and 
just look at what that lake looks like now with the increased 
flow and with the levels of the waters that are up. What it’s 
going to mean, it means more recreation for the people who 
attend the park. It’s going to mean in the future more 
opportunities for people who enjoy fishing to now get back out 
on the lake and to engage in their favourite pastime of fishing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the movement of water into the lake which for 
years there was study after study as to what’s happening to the 
water, and the reality is we just needed to talk to some of the 
local people and find out there’s a local solution if we’re willing 
to work with them, whereby we can move water from the back 
part of the park into the lake, creating a great tourist attraction 
in that part of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget puts more money into First Nations 
and Métis partners on child welfare transformation, and it also 
increases benefits to the Saskatchewan assured income for 
disability programs for the fourth year in a row, Mr. Speaker. In 
June 2015 those in residential care will receive an increase of 
$20 a month for individuals, and couples will see increases of 
50 and $55 respectively, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am pleased to be part of a government that is willing to invest 
not only in the young people but also willing to invest in the 
people with disabilities, Mr. Speaker. I would say, Mr. Speaker, 
that is one of the things that I really treasure the most, the fact 
that we are thinking of those less fortunate and willing to invest 
in them and to tell them that they are respected and they have a 
place in growing the province of Saskatchewan. So thank you to 
the Minister of Finance and my colleagues for supporting 
initiatives of this nature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have increased the seniors’ income benefit 
and increased the funding for individuals who are living in 
private care homes. The funding now will bring assistance to 
seniors who are on a low fixed income, giving them the 
opportunity to have access to about $2,000 to help them pay for 
the needs that they are receiving in personal care homes across 
this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say to those who are running 
these homes, thank you so much. Thank you for investing in 



March 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6651 

this province. Thank you for thinking of the fact that there are 
seniors who don’t qualify for heavy care but are in a position, a 
point in time in their lives when it’s really not . . . They don’t 
have the ability anymore to remain on their own but still can 
provide for themselves with a bit of assistance. So thank you to 
the many men and women who have invested in personal care 
homes in the province of Saskatchewan. Your commitment to 
this province is truly appreciated. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, another thing and a question that I got — this 
certainly was the first one that came up — was the graduate 
retention program. Mr. Speaker, there was a sense or an 
understanding or, if you will, a lack of information that went 
out there that this program was being discontinued. The facts 
are, Mr. Speaker, this program is not being discontinued, but 
this program will now be paid out over a 10-year period. 
 
This program isn’t just about handing out a cheque. This 
program, as young men and women enter the labour force and 
start to generate income in the province of Saskatchewan, they 
will be able to get a tax credit which will reduce their provincial 
tax payable based on what they have coming to them from the 
graduate retention program. Mr. Speaker, I believe this is an 
excellent program for young men and women who are 
educating and giving them a strong reason as to why they 
should live in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve shared a number of things, initiatives that this 
budget is doing to support the people of Saskatchewan and, as 
we continue to move forward, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to be 
part of a government that is investing in people, that is leaving 
more money in the pockets of people, that is investing in the 
infrastructure of this province and is looking to build the 
province of Saskatchewan. So, Mr. Speaker, I will be 
supporting the main motion and not supporting the amendment. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
little tough I guess hitting cleanup, so to speak, after three 
veterans just so eloquently talked about the situation within 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to start off by thanking a few people. First 
and foremost, I’ve got to thank my wife, Leane. It’s very 
difficult as members not from Regina or area that we’re 
travelling. We’re away from our family quite a bit. Leane holds 
down the fort for me in Saskatoon, doing all of the daily stuff 
that I’m not able to do, Mr. Speaker, so I wanted to say thank 
you very much. I very much appreciate all of her support in the 
day-to-day stuff while I’m down here working on behalf of the 
people of Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
And of course I’d be remiss if I didn’t thank my kids and in the 
same breath apologize to them. There’s lots of things that I 
can’t attend, Mr. Speaker, because of my responsibilities down 
here. 
 
I wanted to thank my two stepdaughters, Kassidy and Keely. 

Kassidy is working two jobs right now, living independently 
and trying things away from home, so I wish her the best of 
luck with that. And my other stepdaughter, Keely, who is a 
straight-A student at Holy Cross while maintaining, five nights 
a week, dance, up to three to four hours a night, a very 
impressive little dancer . . . She’s in competition this week so I 
want to wish her the best during her competition in Saskatoon. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, I’ve got to thank my own kids, 
Courtney who is just the apple of my eye . . . She is the most 
beautiful thing out there, Mr. Speaker. I am very proud of her. 
As a typical 16-year-old teenage girl, presents some challenges 
here and there, Mr. Speaker. There are some challenges, I can’t 
deny. And anybody who has lived through the teenage years, as 
I believe a few of my colleagues have, it’s challenging times, 
Mr. Speaker. But she is an absolute beauty. She’s participating 
in Special Olympics these days in four different sports, as well 
as we just got the best parent-teacher interview, my ex-wife and 
I, on Friday, that she is doing the best that she’s ever done in 
her two years at Holy Cross. So very proud of Courtney. 
 
And again I do have a few other . . . my son Carter who I’ve 
been told is the spitting image of me but much more athletic 
and much better at school than I was, Mr. Speaker. He’s doing 
very well, maintaining well above a 90 average in school, and 
made city-wide hockey teams with the Saskatoon Kodiaks. 
They didn’t have a very successful season, Mr. Speaker, but 
they made a run in the playoffs. I think they won six games 
throughout the season, but in the playoffs they seemed to hit 
their stride and knocked four teams out of the playoffs and 
finished third overall in the city. So again congratulations to my 
son and the Saskatoon Kodiaks for all their hard work. 
 
And I want to thank all of the coaches within minor sports. I 
know my colleague from Regina Dewdney as well as lots of 
other people in this Legislative Building give their time to 
coach the kids, and I think that that’s very important, that we 
recognize that the coaches are out there. We want the kids to 
win. We want the kids to have fun. But the coaches are giving 
their time freely, Mr. Speaker. So again I want to thank the 
coaches on my son’s team and all the hockey teams, and all 
minor sport coaches and volunteers out there for all of the hard 
work that they do throughout the year keeping our kids busy. 
And if the kids are busy in sport, Mr. Speaker, my feeling is 
that they’re not going to get into trouble and that they will lead 
productive lives, know how to work independently as well as on 
a team. So again thank you for that. 
 
My parents. Obviously my father had a major influence on me 
coming down to Regina and running for the Saskatchewan 
Party and making sure that we keep this province going in the 
right direction. A lot of people that are in this Legislative 
Assembly were born in Saskatchewan and chose to stay here. 
We chose to move here from Ontario in 1988 when southern 
Ontario was very successful. We saw the opportunity here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, to raise a family. 
 
And Saskatchewan, there is no better place in this country, and 
I’ve travelled from one end of it to the other. There is no better 
place than Saskatchewan to be able to raise a family when you 
have the ability to be 15, 20 minutes from a school, you can see 
the teachers in the supermarket, you can see them out at the 
events, you can talk to them, and you know that your kids are 



6652 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2015 

safe in the communities in Saskatchewan. So I want to thank 
both my father, Ted, and my mother, Marie, for instilling the 
values in me and hopefully I will be able to instill those values 
into my children and other people that I meet, that 
Saskatchewan is strong, Mr. Speaker. We saw it back in the 
’80s, but man, did we have some dark years. 
 
We had some really dark years. Sixteen years of living through 
what the only thing that I can qualify is, is as a depression. We 
had a downturn, a depression. People were leaving here. I grew 
up and went to high school at Campbell Collegiate just around 
the corner from here, Mr. Speaker, and people were leaving in 
the droves. It wasn’t a joke in the early ’90s, ’92 on, that people 
were leaving. 
 
Suitcases were the grad gift. They were gone. I lost most of my 
friends to outside — Manitoba, Alberta, Ontario. They wanted 
to get out of here because they saw no opportunity in 
Saskatchewan. And I’m pleased to say, Mr. Speaker, that they 
have come back. Lots of people have come back to 
Saskatchewan, lots of expats as well as people coming from 
around the world. 
 
And I think this budget is one of those messages that the 
Minister of Finance was able to get out there to be able to say, 
Saskatchewan is strong. Send the message across Canada. We 
have a balanced budget. We are on track. We have a AAA 
credit rating, and we’re moving forward even though times are 
difficult, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Before I get too much into the budget speech, I want to thank a 
couple of other people. I want to thank the Minister of Finance. 
I want to thank him for all of his hard work. I also want to thank 
. . . People might not understand, outside of government, how 
this works. But within government, during December and 
January, we have people from our caucus that make up treasury 
board. Now these people deliberate each and every ministry, 
and every minister has to come in and present to this group and 
convince them on why they need to do this.  
 
This is not an extra position. Nobody gets paid extra for this, 
Mr. Speaker. But what they do is they go through everything 
line by line by line of the budget. And you can just imagine 
how large that is when we have a $14 billion budget. They 
analyze everything. And the treasury board people, I wanted to 
thank them for that, the Minister of Finance and his staff, 
countless hours of working, thinking about this to make sure 
that the budget was balanced. And we actually have $107 
million surplus, Mr. Speaker, so that’s very important. 
 
I want to thank my colleagues, the MLAs certainly on this side 
of the House, Mr. Speaker, for being able to give me some 
knowledge in areas that I didn’t have a very deft knowledge as 
far as different areas of Finance, certainly with Justice, 
Environment. There’s some areas that I needed to broaden my 
horizons in. 
 
And I wanted to say that the ministers were always open to 
answering questions, whether it’s in caucus or on an individual 
basis, to be able to enlighten me on what is going on in certain 
areas within the government. Because it is a big machine, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a huge machine. And the more knowledge that I 
have, the more I can pass on to my constituents and people 

when I’m talking on a day-to-day basis. The caucus staff, Mr. 
Speaker, John and all of the people that are working within the 
caucus, Paula and Megan, to be able to prep us and give us all 
the information that we need and bring our needs forward. 
 
I also wanted to put a quick thanks out to my in-laws, Leo and 
Sylvia Durand, down in Willow Bunch, Saskatchewan. They 
are very interested in what’s going on here from a farming 
perspective. My mother-in-law was a 30-year RN in Willow 
Bunch area before the Willow Bunch clinical unit was shut 
down and she was moved over to Assiniboia. And my 
father-in-law, Leo Durand, who farmed for 40 years in the 
Willow Bunch area and is retired, now working for my 
brother-in-law, Collin MacLean and the MacLean family down 
out of Fife Lake. So a quick thank you to all of them. 
 
But now getting into the budget — now that I’ve done all of the 
official thank yous so I can cross that off my list, Mr. Speaker 
— I want to talk about our plan versus their plan. And the only 
reason I can say . . . They don’t have a plan over there, Mr. 
Speaker. We haven’t seen one. The newly minted leader of the 
New Democratic Party, 750 days plus, Mr. Speaker, we have 
not seen anything as far as a plan. There is nothing that they 
have presented to the people of Saskatchewan to say, this 
thing’s different. They are criticizing us, Mr. Speaker, in all 
aspects of the government, but yet they don’t have any 
suggestions. 
 
Now I was taught very young — and I’m trying to instill this 
into my son — is you don’t come always with a problem. If my 
son has a hockey problem I say, you know what? You need to 
present an alternative to your coaches, to be able to say this is 
how you would do it. Then you can discuss it. I’ve instilled this 
with my daughter as well. Don’t always come with a problem. 
Come with a solution. I haven’t seen anything on their side of 
the legislative or in any advertising that they’ve done, anything 
that they’ve done out there, Mr. Speaker, to be able to say, this 
is where we stand.  
 
And we keep talking to him about their previous record, and the 
leader over there of the New Democratic Party doesn’t want to 
talk about it. He said openly in the House, well this is when I 
was in high school. I don’t answer for that. Well guess what? 
You absolutely do answer for that. You answer for everything 
that the New Democratic Party has done to this province. 
 
They have kept this province down and I don’t care if he was 
sitting in this Legislative Building at the time. His 
great-grandfather, somebody’s distant relative was a member of 
the NDP or the CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation]. 
He answers for that. He answers for every hospital that they 
closed, every school that they closed, every time they raised 
taxes, Mr. Deputy Speaker. He needs to answer for that. 
 
He represents the New Democratic Party now and forever, right 
back into . . . as I’m sure that my good friend from . . . will talk 
about the Regina manifesto and . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
from Wood River, thank you, that will talk about the Regina 
manifesto and how business is bad and capitalism should be 
absolutely eradicated. 
 
Now on that, just on a quick note on the capitalism, it should be 
eradicated, I don’t know how they can honestly stand over there 



March 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6653 

and say that they support businesses. When they presented a 
local business bill to this Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker, 
they couldn’t even spell “business.” They had difficulty spelling 
the word “business.” So I don’t know who they’re talking to in 
the business community because I . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . And yes, that’s exactly right. They have a teacher over there 
that would be able to correct this, plus all the technology that 
we have out there with the autocorrect, Mr. Speaker. But I’m 
curious as to why they think that they can support business if 
they’re not even spelling the word properly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again, I want to talk a little bit about my experience just last 
week and over the last year. I’ve been out talking to people in 
the community. I talk to business leaders. I talk to 
community-based organizations. I talk to people in the health 
care. I talk to people in education. Every time I go to my 
school, the people that work in education, they’re not coming 
up to me and saying the same things that the opposition is 
saying. They’re saying, yes we understand what’s going on. We 
appreciate what’s going on as far as the new schools and the 
investment that we have put into education. 
 
Because unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, when we formed 
government, we had a $1 billion deficit in the education system 
alone. And then the opposition, the critic for Education, stands 
up and says that we are doing things wrong within education, 
that we have schools propped up. We’re trying to fix them as 
fast as we can, Mr. Speaker, but the problem is we can’t catch 
up because the pit is so deep. We will catch up, but we have to 
make sure that we do not deficit finance these schools, Mr. 
Speaker. We do not need to go into debt. 
 
We have a plan on what’s going to happen with the schools in 
the next few years. We are building 18 new schools, 9 joint-use 
schools, in the Leader of the Opposition’s backyard. He was the 
guy that stood up here, Mr. Speaker, and said 52 times or 59 
times, petition after petition, I need a new school in my area. He 
got a new school in his area. Wasn’t at the announcement for 
the school. Wasn’t even there at all. Disregarded that the school 
was even being built there. And I’ve been in his area door 
knocking and talking to the people. They’re not talking about 
the leader’s hard stance on P3 [public-private partnership]. 
They’re talking about a new school that’s going in. They can 
see what the Saskatchewan Party government is doing when 
that new school goes in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:00] 
 
I want to touch a couple of things, Mr. Speaker, on our 
economy. As the Premier has said and as we firmly believe over 
here, the reason that we are able to provide the services within 
social services, health care, education, highways, advanced ed, 
education K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] is because of our 
economy, Mr. Speaker. The only reason we can do this is 
because Saskatchewan has a diversified economy. 
 
Now this is our plan. When the Saskatchewan Party was newly 
formed and our Premier was sitting as leader of the opposition, 
he presented a plan: this is what we were going to do. This is 
how we are going to do things different. And within that plan 
was economic growth, growth of population. And we’ve all 
heard the quotes that the NDP thought that it was farcical that 
we could actually grow this province. That absolutely boggles 

my mind, Mr. Speaker. How can you actually be in a state of 
mind where you think you can’t grow any more? Does that 
mean that you can’t continually learn as a person? I can’t grow 
as an individual. We can’t grow as a province. We can’t 
diversify our economy. We can’t do anything — that’s the 
mindset. 
 
And I really hope that the people of Saskatchewan, when we go 
to the polls, they understand exactly what they did. They did 
nothing. They don’t have a plan. They never did have a plan. 
All they had a plan was, Mr. Speaker, is they reached into my 
pocket. They reached into my pocket and raised the PST. They 
reached into my pocket to . . . They raised the PST three times, 
raised income tax twice. So now they’re in this pocket, Mr. 
Speaker. They raised the business tax four times, Mr. Speaker. 
So now we’ve got another pocket on the inside here that they’ve 
dipped into, Mr. Speaker, another one on this side, and this 
doesn’t also count the property and education tax hikes as a 
result of their failing to properly fund education. 
 
They reached into . . . Whenever they had a crisis over there, 
whenever they ran out of money, we can go through a list of all 
the things. The member from Saltcoats went through a litany of 
bad investments, and I think about 95 per cent of them were out 
of Saskatchewan, all the way from Australia to Nashville and 
on and on, Mr. Speaker. Why did they feel that every time that 
they made a mistake or something went wrong, they had to dig 
into my pocket and take some money out of me? Why is it like 
that? 
 
That’s the difference between this government and the previous 
government. When we’re presented with a challenge, Mr. 
Speaker, we figure out a way how to solve the problem without 
reaching into somebody’s pocket. That is not a solution. That’s 
the quick and easy way that the NDP did that. How would they 
do that? They just kept going on and on and on raising the 
taxes. And on top of raising the taxes — you would think that’s 
bad enough, Mr. Speaker, that they just continually raised the 
taxes — no, on top of that they shut down infrastructure. They 
stopped building Saskatchewan. They stopped it dead in its 
tracks. They also closed 52 schools, one a week for a whole 
year. 
 
We were just talking about this. The Plains hospital, they closed 
down the Plains hospital. One of the worst moves that they 
could do. Unbelievable that they closed that hospital down. And 
they did it, I believe personally, they did it for purely political 
reasons, Mr. Speaker. They closed 176 schools. And on top of 
that they had the audacity over there to stand up and criticize us 
about building long-term care facilities. We are building 
long-term care facilities. They closed them down; 1,200 beds 
were closed down under their watch. 
 
The member from Regina Lakeview should remember because 
he signed off on it. He signed off on closing those 1,200 . . . 
[inaudible] . . . those 1,200 long-term care facilities, the 52 rural 
hospitals, and the 176 schools across this province. Everybody 
on this side remembers that. Our job, Mr. Speaker, is to make 
sure that everybody in Saskatchewan remembers that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about health. Because as 
we see, we all know that health is extremely important. It is 
very important for me as a father, for my mother who is going 



6654 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2015 

in for surgery this week. Health is very critical. And it’s all in 
Saskatchewan, when we go out and talk to people on the doors, 
this is what they’re talking about — the health. They’re 
certainly not talking about John Black and Associates. They’ve 
never even heard of John Black and Associates. What they are 
understanding is that they are getting into the health care system 
quicker. They are getting their surgeries done faster. They’re 
getting better care after their surgeries. That’s what they’re 
talking about. 
 
They’re talking about that they went from the longest wait list, 
when you would go six months to a year to even see a 
specialist, then it would be six months to a year to be able to get 
the surgery. And then when you actually had the surgery day, it 
would probably be postponed because we had a lack of doctors. 
We had a lack of nurses. 
 
But since we formed government in 2007, we have 423 more 
doctors operating in the province. We had a 29 per cent increase 
in specialists, a 44 per cent increase in pediatricians. We also 
have 2,600 more nurses of all designations operating in the 
province. That is what people are talking about. They’re not 
talking about John Black. They’re not talking about senseis. 
They’re talking about getting their health care done very 
quickly, done in a proper way, and moving on with their lives. 
That’s what they’re talking about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under the NDP, when I dug back into the archives 
of what was happening with the NDP, under their watch they 
had 173 few physicians. They had 455 fewer nurses of all 
designations. They lost 155 pharmacists. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how they can stand up 
and say that they are looking out for the people of 
Saskatchewan when all they did was slash and burn everything 
that they could. They kept everything to a bare minimum. They 
kept the infrastructure to a bare minimum and our schools and 
our hospitals and our highways. We even had the government 
of the time, the NDP, at the time say, well why can’t you go out 
and fix your own roads? That’s the way we should do it. Well 
why are we paying tax dollars if we should be fixing our own 
roads? It doesn’t make any sense. Because the problem with 
them after 16 years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is they became 
arrogant and they became complacent with the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This side of the House will never do that, and I can tell you that. 
Why, Mr. Deputy Speaker? It’s because we went out and 
knocked doors. We go out and talk to people. We just don’t get 
polling and say, this is the right thing to do to be able to hold on 
to government. We go out and talk to people and get our 
direction from that. And when we get our direction, we bring 
that to the caucus table and we discuss it, and from there it 
moves onto cabinet and then decisions are made. That’s how 
the process works, Mr. Speaker, is you get the information from 
the people on the ground, talk to people on their doorstep. 
 
I’ve been out knocking probably a dozen times in the last 12 
months, never seen anybody from the NDP out talking to 
anybody, never seen them out going to say, oh, is there 
anything we should do different? Because they firmly, firmly 
believe that they’ve never made a mistake. They actually didn’t 
make a mistake. They didn’t make a mistake in 2007. I think 

they blame the weather. And then in 2011, I don’t know what 
their excuse was because they kept getting all of their MLAs cut 
in half. So I’m not sure. I bet you their excuse when they come 
back after the next election, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is say, oh, we 
forgot our plan. We forgot to tell everybody what we were 
doing. We were just going to say, oh, we weren’t the 
Saskatchewan Party, so could you please elect us? 
 
That’s not how you get to people. People want to know what 
they’re doing. People want to know exactly what the NDP over 
there are doing as far as a plan on how to grow our province. 
 
They don’t want to grow the province. They don’t want 
anybody to come into Saskatchewan because all it does, Mr. 
Speaker, is it erodes their base. They had a 30 per cent solid 
base in Saskatchewan, and now that’s dwindling. 
 
Because we even get positive comments from the unions on 
what’s going on within our budget. We had a very positive 
comment. I’ll just have to pull it up here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
“SEIU-West is encouraged by the province’s funding lift for 
disability-focused Community Based Organizations.” That was 
in the SEIU [Service Employees International Union] West 
press release. So we’re getting support on different fronts from 
the unions because they’re frustrated with what’s going on. 
They don’t even understand what the NDP are doing these days. 
 
Now I want to talk a little bit about Social Services, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. This is something that’s near and dear to my heart 
after spending four and a half years at the Saskatoon Food Bank 
and Learning Centre. I saw that there were a lot of cracks in the 
system. There were a lot of problems within the system that the 
NDP had built up over 16 years that didn’t work for people. 
 
Now you have to consider this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 
Saskatoon Food Bank, as far as my numbers, and I’ll stand 
corrected on that, have marginally increased in food, food that 
they have been giving out. But that marginal increase doesn’t 
take into the size of Saskatoon. The size of Saskatoon 
population has increased a tremendous amount. And there are 
still a very select few people that need the food bank, and I’m 
glad the food bank is there to be able to help them out. 
 
But one thing . . . Well not one thing but several things that the 
NDP didn’t do is they never looked after . . . We had the longest 
wait-list for people with disabilities. And I credit the Minister of 
Social Services, prior to her stepping out of cabinet, in setting 
up the SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for disability] 
program, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because that gave people with 
disabilities some dignity. They weren’t treated like everybody 
else that didn’t have a job that was going through tough times 
or on the TEA [transitional employment allowance] program or 
some other programs that were there. They were not able to 
work because of their disability, and they didn’t get that respect, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This government stepped up. The member from Wadena, in her 
role as Social Services minister, stepped up and said, we need to 
look after these people. We need to eliminate the 440 wait-list. 
And I’m very proud to say that this government has eliminated 
that 440 wait-list, and I believe that it’s over 1,000 people that 
we have within the SAID program. 
 



March 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6655 

An Hon. Member: — And the member from Humboldt. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — And the member from Humboldt. Thank 
you. Let me tell you about the member from Humboldt. The 
member from Humboldt has done an absolute fabulous job with 
Social Services in being able to make sure that the SAID 
program is getting spoken to at the cabinet table and making 
sure that there is increases within there. So I very much thank 
the member from Humboldt for being able to take this and add 
onto it and build it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m not sure how much more time I’ve got 
to speak here. I’m just looking around to make sure . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You’ve got lots. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — I’ve got lots? Thank you. Thank you very 
much. I want to talk a little bit — obviously this impacts me as 
a father — on the education side of things. When the NDP was 
over there, they were continuing to close down schools. I’ve 
mentioned it, and it’ll get mentioned several times over here. 
 
We’re building schools. Why are we building schools, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? You can ask anybody in Saskatchewan, and 
you know what the good news is? Saskatchewan’s on the map 
nationally, so you can ask anybody across the country. 
Saskatchewan’s growing. Saskatchewan is strong. They’re 
getting AAA credit rating. They’re balancing their budgets. 
This is why we’re having to build schools is because people are 
coming to Saskatchewan now. 
 
They’re not leaving Saskatchewan like they did in droves. And 
everyone . . . And I still firmly believe that that’s why Rider 
nation is so popular across Canada is because all of those 
people were from Saskatchewan, and they all left. We had 16 
years of people just jumping out of this province as fast as they 
could. They would graduate high school; they would graduate 
university, and they were gone. 
 
We’re building new schools. We’re building schools in 
Saskatoon. I want to talk a little bit about the dollar amount 
because when you’re comparing things, you need to be able to 
give a good idea of what happened in the past. So under the 
NDP, the last seven years of their governing time they spent 
$190 million in total capital for schools. In comparison, our first 
seven years we’ve spent over $700 million investing in schools. 
Saskatoon alone got $155 million; Regina, $135 million. Those 
two areas alone got almost double what the entire province got. 
Why? Because it was easier for them to close down a school, 
shut down what was going on versus to try to invest in it. And 
the worst part of that is they weren’t investing in our most 
valuable asset, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which are our kids. 
 
[16:15] 
 
We used to talk about potash. We’d talk about oil and gas, 
uranium, agriculture — very critically important to our 
province. The most important thing to our province though, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is our kids. And unfortunately, because of the 
way that they invested in schools and that they invested in our 
children’s future, they decided that it wasn’t important for them 
to invest into our education, into our kids. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s a sad state when you look backwards 
in Saskatchewan’s history. We had so much potential. We were 
I believe the third largest province until the ’40s as far as 
population. What happened? What happened, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is socialism happened. Socialism happened across the 
board, and our province was hamstringed by that, that it was 
best not to grow. Now I’m proud to say, other than Walter 
Scott, the province has never grown as much as it did. We are 
second only to Walter Scott. Premier Brad Wall has grown this 
province more than anybody . . . Sorry, the member from Swift 
Current. Sorry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my apologies for that. 
 
The growth that we’re seeing within our province is substantial. 
I know that because I can see a future for my kids. I can see that 
we’re investing in schools. We’re investing in hospitals, and 
we’re investing in those who need some extra assistance. All of 
our economic growth is to try to bring everybody in this 
province forward, not just for, as they claim, they keep saying 
that, oh, we’re just doing this for big business. Then how do 
they explain the SAID program? How do they explain the 
children’s hospital? How do they explain the hospital in Moose 
Jaw, North Battleford, the investment in long-term care 
facilities? That has nothing to do with business. It has nothing 
to do with business. 
 
They stand up every day in this Legislative Assembly and it’s 
almost shameful, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because the information 
that they present to us in questions is very, very misleading, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I’m not understanding why everything seems 
to get twisted when we present and, say with educational, 
English as an additional language, we’ve actually increased it 
by 8 per cent. The opposition says, no. No, you’ve cut it. The 
numbers just don’t match up, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
difference is, we look at the entire facts of what’s going on 
within a specific area. The opposition seems to pick and choose 
their numbers, and it’s a little misleading to the general public. 
 
I want to talk about a couple of other things, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I want to talk about some of . . . I’ve heard the 
member from Athabasca say it quite a few times is where did 
the money go? Where did this all go? Well I can tell you where 
the money went. The money went to pay down our debt. The 
money went to invest in our schools. The money went into our 
highways, all of the things that they, when they were in 
government, the New Democratic Party, that they neglected. 
 
We’re playing catch-up, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we’re trying 
our best to catch up on everything. But like I said before, the pit 
that they dug in the infrastructure within our province because it 
was just . . . There was band-aids put on everything, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, if I can use that analogy. The highways? There was a 
band-aid, just a little patch here instead of repaving it. The 
schools? Oh well, we’ll just prop it up a little bit. Or you know 
what? We’ll just close down the school and centralize 
everybody and bus everybody across rural Saskatchewan. They 
put band-aids on everything. 
 
And what we did is, when we formed government, when the 
Saskatchewan . . . My predecessors who were elected in 2007, 
we started looking into this. And it was just every time we 
opened up a new file, we found another pit, that there was no 
money invested in this, nothing in the schools, that everything 
was falling apart. And it amazes me that they can actually stand 



6656 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2015 

there and say and blame us for this. I wish that they would just 
stop, look in the mirror, and be able to say yes, we made a 
mistake. I’ve heard it from some members. A former Finance 
minister, Pat Atkinson, said, I wish we could have done more. I 
wish we could have done more. 
 
The problem is the arrogance that’s still sitting over there, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. They still think they’re right. They still think 
that everything that they do is correct, but they don’t 
understand. What they don’t see is they are losing everything, 
any shred of respect that they had with the Saskatchewan 
people other than the faithful, faithful socialists that are out 
there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They’re not appealing to anybody in 
the new Saskatchewan. 
 
And the good news is our population numbers are going up, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to 1,132,640. Now that’s a huge number. 
There’s over 130,000 people that have never seen an NDP 
government. And our job here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to 
remind them that we cannot go back to that same old NDP. 
Because what would they have done with this budget? They’d 
have reached into my pocket again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
They’d have reached in both back pockets and they would have 
just grabbed all of my money that they could, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Take the loose change out of your 
pocket. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Absolutely. Maybe they would have hung 
me upside down — I don’t know if that could happen — and 
shake all the change out of me to try to balance their budget or 
try to be able to increase taxes again. 
 
The work that this government has done to make sure we didn’t 
reach into anybody’s pocket was huge. It wasn’t easy. As the 
member from Saltcoats said, this wasn’t an easy budget. This 
was a budget that was deliberated and discussed: treasury 
board, Minister of Finance, caucus, cabinet. 
 
It went around because we had to make sure that we didn’t lose 
our values. We remember what, who brought us here, and we 
make sure we remember that our core values are about looking 
out for the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan, not the 
best interests to make sure that you get re-elected but the best 
interests now and in the long term for the people of 
Saskatchewan. Everywhere from our youngest, newest 
Saskatchewan person to our oldest Saskatchewan person, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we make sure that we look after every one of 
them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So I want to talk . . . just a couple of closing comments, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I want to make sure that I touch on a couple of 
things. Again I think in Canada — and again I stand corrected 
on this, Mr. Deputy Speaker — I think we’re the only second, 
the only one of two provinces that have a balanced budget this 
year. That is something to say when our neighbours next door 
on both sides are struggling. 
 
So I guess the question would be to the general public is, if 
they’re struggling so much . . . Obviously they’ve been 
impacted by other economic things, but we’re affected by that 
as well. So what is the difference between them and us, is we 

manage our money in a very fiscally responsible way. We make 
sure that we invest in health, social services, and education. 
Those were the three ministries that got a lift in this budget, and 
I believe, again I stand corrected, every other ministry had to 
take a little bit of a haircut to make sure we didn’t reach into the 
pocket. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again I want to thank you for the 
opportunity to engage in this budget. I want to thank my family. 
I want to thank all the people here that have prepared me for 
this. Again I want to thank my parents. And I want to thank the 
caucus staff for everything that they give for me and that they 
gave to me. And I also want to thank . . . I want to thank my 
kids. And I want to thank, just one more time, I’ve got to thank 
the member from Humboldt because she’s just fabulous. And I 
will not be supporting the amendment and I will be supporting 
the motion put forward by my colleague from Lloydminster. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a pleasure to be able to reply to the budget speech by the 
Finance minister who’s done an outstanding job bringing down 
a number of budgets, all of them balanced, by the way. And 
that’s a real credit to him and to our government to have 
another balanced budget. 
 
I’d just like to recognize and thank a few people as well. My 
wife Cindy who’s an EA [educational assistant] at the school in 
Biggar. We have three children: Lacey who lives and works in 
Regina, my son Marshall works in Saskatoon, and my youngest 
daughter Alex who is going to university and working part-time 
as well. 
 
Lacey’s friend Nick works out at building the stadium and he’s 
a carpenter by trade. And it’s very interesting work and I enjoy 
the stories about working out there, especially in the cold 
weather and under interesting circumstances. He has a daughter, 
Surayya. And Cindy and I don’t have any biological 
grandchildren but Surayya is definitely our grandchild. I think 
when even Nick brings her out to visit, he must practise, have 
her practising grandma and grandpa because she’s really ready 
to go calling us grandma and grandpa. So we consider her one 
of our grandchildren as well. 
 
The other family I’d like to recognize is a young lady by the 
name of Desiree and her partner Reno and they have a child by 
the name of Zane, and he’s our grandchild too. In reality little 
Zane is a year and a half old and he’s just a joy to us. And if 
anybody wants to see pictures after 5 o’clock, come to my 
office. I’ll show you pictures of my grandchildren. 
 
When we talk about the budget and the NDP like to talk about 
where did the money go, you know, I just can from my part talk 
about my constituency. I can tell you where the money went. 
We have a brand new long-term care home that’s going to be 
open. Well the residents are moving in March 31st and April 
1st. They’ve renovated the hospital, attached a new long-term 
care to the hospital. That’s where the money went in Biggar, 
and it’s a fabulous facility and really look forward to the day it 
opens in a couple of weeks and all the residents move in. 
 



March 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6657 

There’s another interesting story I’d like to talk about where the 
money went. This wasn’t this year, but a couple of years ago 
when I did an interview with the local Biggar Independent. It 
was in the summertime and I ended the interview off by saying 
the only complaints the constituents of Biggar are going to have 
this year is that the delays in traffic and driving because of all 
the road and highway construction. And a couple of days later I 
got a call from a gentlemen by the name of Fred Walter, and 
he’s the head of Big Rose Colony. And Fred in his real dry, dry 
wit, he says, hi, Randy. I said hi. He says, I have a complaint. 
And so I knew something was coming. And he says, he says, 
my complaint is about all the delays when I drive down the 
highway to the field because of all the road construction. And 
he had a little laugh and said, thanks for everything; keep up the 
good work. 
 
And so then, you know, that’s where the money has gone in the 
past — building roads and highways and infrastructure, you 
know, municipal sharing, going into the rural municipalities. 
It’s been a great relief to the RMs to have the municipal 
agreement and the money that goes into their coffers so they 
can improve their road system, and through the last few years 
where they’re very wet years, PDAP [provincial disaster 
assistance program] and through Sask water security. The 
amount of money that has gone into Biggar constituency is 
phenomenal because of the flooding and the damage that was 
done. 
 
You look no further than Borden, Saskatchewan who was 
having a lot of problems with flooding, a potential flood that 
really would’ve drowned out the whole community and it was 
diverted at the last minute. But we put literally millions of 
dollars back into that community to help with flood mitigation 
and other things around the flood and the cost of pumping water 
and doing those projects. And the people of that community and 
the mayor, David Buckingham, did a fabulous job dealing with 
that potential disaster they could have had, very much 
appreciates the money that came through PDAP to help pay the 
tremendous bills, quite frankly, that they had to incur. 
 
You know, other projects in Biggar constituency . . . I had the 
privilege to attend the announcement with the Prime Minister of 
Canada and Premier of the twinning from Rosetown to 
Saskatoon, the other day. And you know that’s part of my 
constituency as well. 
 
[16:30] 
 
And the traffic, that is the traffic jams from Delisle to 
Saskatoon every morning and evening are quite amazing. 
There’s two potash mines out there, but so many people live in 
Vanscoy and Delisle and on small acreages that travel it 
morning and night and the traffic is . . . Well it was very much 
needed to have that stretch of the highway twinned. And it’ll be 
a welcome relief to traffic and, you know, it naturally improves 
safety, but also it’s good for the business sector and speeds up 
delivery of goods and services and of course the workers to 
their jobs. 
 
Throughout the years we’ve invested a lot of money. Highway 
16 from Saskatoon to The Battlefords goes through my 
constituency. You know, there’s been ongoing improvements 
and repairs to that highway now that it’s twinned. It was a great 

welcome to have that highway system in such good shape, as I 
mentioned twinning from Delisle to Saskatoon, that stretch of 
Highway 7. You know, Highway 14 runs through basically the 
centre of the constituency and we’ve done a lot of work on 
Highway 14 as well, and 4 running from Biggar to North 
Battleford. 
 
I always go back to the days when the former Highways 
minister, Pat Atkinson, was in government in the NDP and she 
used to shout across to me. She says, Randy, how do you like 
all that paving I got done in your constituency? And what the 
NDP did in those days, they did about a half a kilometre, maybe 
even less than half a kilometre in front of every community, and 
that was it. And I says, well, when are you going to join all the 
little pieces together? Because I mean that’s fine and dandy to 
have a half a mile in front of Asquith and in front of Perdue, but 
you know, they need to have a good highway system. You need 
the whole highway done. And of course they never did get it 
done. Much of it has been done since we formed government 
actually, and continue to build highways and roads, RM roads, 
and bridges and other infrastructure that was needed so badly. 
 
So that’s where the money went. And that’s the wonderful thing 
about this budget is that we never increased any taxes so the 
people and the businesses are able to keep their own money in 
their own pockets to save or to reinvest in homes or businesses. 
And our government is controlling spending. If we are asking 
other people to hold back or save, our government is doing that 
and our government is controlling spending, only increasing the 
budget by 1.2 per cent, and we’ll still be able to manage all the 
priorities that are needed. You know, it’s so important to 
continue to fund health care, social services, and education, and 
we continue to do that and still have a balanced budget and 
control spending as well. 
 
I spoke quite a bit about investments in infrastructure, and I will 
further on. But that’s the thing, that one of the big mistakes the 
NDP made when they were in government, when after an 
election they raised the PST by two points. Not only they did 
raise PST but they stopped investing in infrastructure. And that 
really . . . Well we’re still paying for those decisions today, 
trying to catch up on a lack of infrastructure, of building and 
investment that happened under the NDP. 
 
But not only those factors that affected the future growth of the 
province, but the NDP never looked after people. I mean, they 
closed 52 rural hospitals. We’ve talked about the closing of the 
Plains hospital. They closed 176 schools and they closed 1,200 
long-term care beds, and now they have the nerve to complain 
about our health record and our care for seniors. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I mean if they didn’t close rural hospitals and 
eliminate 1,200 long-term care beds, you know, we’d be in a far 
better place today trying to catch up with that infrastructure 
build and those problems. 
 
I think I need to speak, you know, somewhat . . . I mean the 
members will be speaking on all these points, but I think some 
of the statistics from the budget needs to be entered into my 
speech while I have the opportunity. 
 
You know, agriculture remains a very key business as part of 
our economy, and you know, in the Minister of Agriculture’s 
part of the budget, it is $362.4 million and we continue to give 



6658 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2015 

strong support in this budget and really minimal change over 
last year. The budget contains 71.6 million for strategic 
initiatives, including $26.7 million for agriculture research and 
innovation. And our government will once again provide 4.2 
million in industry assistance for support of organizations like 
4-H Council of Saskatchewan, the Western Canadian 
Agribition, and Agriculture in Classroom. 
 
The budget also contains $240 million to fully fund business 
risk management programs such as crop insurance, 
AgriStability, AgriInvest, to support farming operations as they 
look to grow and expand. The agriculture across the province 
and in Biggar constituency is a very strong and vibrant 
economy. You know, we’ve been fortunate with good weather. 
There’s always challenges in agriculture, because it is 
dependent on the weather which you have no control over. And 
farmers are also dependent on prices that they really have no 
control over or little control over. 
 
And our farmers are very efficient, and they are very good 
marketers. They’re making the best of every opportunity that 
they have. And the farmers of Saskatchewan have, you know, 
really gone out and applied themselves and taken up new 
technologies and new ways of farming to remain a very viable 
and important part of the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
And of course the 2015 crop insurance program includes 
ongoing enhancements, giving producers more choice and 
flexibility as well. Premiums are decreasing for producers while 
coverage levels on average are increasing to $183 per acre, up 
from $162 per acre in 2014. 
 
Another area that is very important, of course, is advanced 
education. And you know, our budget will keep Saskatchewan 
strong by investing in post-secondary educational institutes and 
supports for students. Since 2007-08 the provincial government 
has provided $477.5 million in capital funding to 
post-secondary institutions and 23.6 for preventive maintenance 
and renewal, 10.6 for renovation and expansion of southwest 
college in Weyburn, 7.9 million for Health Sciences facility at 
the University of Saskatchewan, 4.5 million for the Parkland 
College Trades and Technology Centre in Yorkton. 
 
But this is something that’s really dear to my heart as my time 
as minister of Rural and Remote Health, is that the budget 
provides an additional 2.5 million to fulfill the government’s 
commitment for more medical training seats in three areas. The 
budget continues to fund 40 additional medical undergraduate 
seats to bring the total to 100; 60 medical residency seats to 
bring the total 120; an additional 20 nurse practitioner seats to 
bring the total to 40. The budget also provides continued 
funding for 690 nursing training seats in the province. The 
government fulfilled its commitment to increase nursing 
education training seats by 300 in 2013. And these 
improvements in training and investment in students and 
doctors and nurses are so vital to the future of health care. 
 
And right in Biggar we have a very solid practice, three 
physicians. They have come through the SIPPA [Saskatchewan 
international physician practice assessment] program. And it’s a 
very good situation in Biggar and the surrounding areas that 
these physicians serve: as I mentioned before, a brand new 
long-term care home as well as a hospital that’s being renovated 

and will look after the people in the Biggar constituency very 
well. 
 
The government has a strong commitment to students, which 
continued through an array of support programs: 32.5 million 
for student aid funding, including student loans, grants, 
bursaries; 9 million for the Saskatchewan Advantage 
Scholarship, an increase of 2.3 million; 5.5 million for other 
scholarships; 6.5 million for the Saskatchewan advantage grant 
for education savings; 88.1 million non-refundable tax credit for 
the graduate retention program, and which two of my children 
are receiving. They’re both working and went to school and 
college in Saskatchewan and now receive the graduate retention 
program. 
 
Of course under the economy, you know, resource, it’s so 
fundamental to this province. With the downturn in the oil 
sector, the mining sector has remained strong, continues to 
grow, and we’re much more diversified than other provinces. 
And it’s showing on the balance sheet as we’re able to balance 
our budget with the other sectors that are doing very well in the 
province and in our economy — as I mentioned, potash. 
 
The 2015-16 budget will keep Saskatchewan’s economy strong 
by promoting responsible development of the province’s 
resource wealth, encouraging new investment and job creation, 
ensuring a sustainable, competitive business environment. 
Effective January 1st, 2015, the province is changing the way in 
which potash companies can claim capital expenditures as tax 
deductions. All capital expenditures will continue to accrue at 
the rate of 120 per cent, but the rate to which capital 
expenditures are deductible from the annual gross sale revenues 
will be reduced. Very, very common sense changes. 
 
I’d just like to speak a bit on the labour front. The budget has 
enhanced labour market programs, a $600,000 increase to the 
adult basic education for a record investment of $25 million. 
And that’s so fundamental because there’s a lot of young 
people, and some of them that aren’t young, that need to 
upgrade their training. They never got through grade 12, and I 
know a number of people that are taking this up and are able to 
go on and then get trained or retrained in other areas through 
SIAST or other areas, to gain the skills to be able to work in this 
new economy of Saskatchewan’s. $1 million increase to the 
provincial training allowance fund; 500,000 will be allocated to 
sport; 100 new training seats at the Trades and Technology 
Centre at Parkland College in Yorkton; funding for the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Job Grant is increased by two million for 
a total of $4 million — all these very important things. 
 
I can go on and on. There’s a lot of good things in here about 
education, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Our government remains 
committed to students across the province and is increasing its 
overall investment in education by 14 per cent over 2014-15 to 
a total of $2 billion. Incredible, Mr. Speaker, under a very tight 
budget. School operating funding for ’15-16, including revenue 
collected from the education property tax, will be 1.87 billion, 
up 52.8 million or 2.9 per cent over last year. And there’s just 
other great things that we’re doing in education. We’re 
supporting education as we support health care and other parts 
of the economy. 
 
There’s one area that I’d just like to speak about that’s very 



March 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6659 

important right across Saskatchewan, but certainly in Biggar. 
And there’s so many new Canadians have come to Biggar to 
work in the manufacturing businesses in Biggar. They’ve come 
through the nominee program and there’s people from all over 
the world. The highest number of percentage of people have 
come from the Philippines. They’re hard-working people. They 
build, they buy houses and vehicles, and they’re doing well and 
they’re filling the schools and the churches. And I’ve got to be 
friends with many of them, and they’re all wonderful people 
and they’re working out very well. And the nominee program 
which really helped get them here and get them set up, there’s 
other people from eastern Europe and right around the world 
from east Asia as well that have come through the nominee 
program who are valuable members of the community. 
 
I think I will probably end my reply now. This budget has, as I 
had said, has no tax increases. Our government has controlled 
spending and continued to invest in infrastructure, and based on 
those three things and all the other wonderful things that are in 
this budget, I will be supporting this budget and I will not be 
supporting the amendment. Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
[16:45] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well 
I rise in the House today to speak in support of the budget and I 
will not be supporting the amendment put forward by the NDP. 
 
Before I take the time to speak about the budget, I would like to 
extend my appreciation to the Minister of Finance. I’ve had the 
opportunity of knowing the member from Canora-Pelly since 
1995 when he was first elected. So I don’t consider him just a 
colleague but I also consider him a friend. And so I had the 
opportunity to know and realize that this is a gentleman who 
made the commitment to serving the public very much part of 
his life, and so I think each and every one of us appreciates that. 
We appreciate the attitude in which he brought forward this 
budget: very humble and very sincere. 
 
We also should be thanking the members on treasury board 
because the amount of time and energy that each and every one 
of our members have committed to ensuring that they provided 
a balanced budget was probably very taxing because, as the 
members were sitting down to put together the budget, they 
realized that in fact oil prices were tumbling and they were 
tumbling very quickly. So you can imagine the hard choices 
they had to make because that’s one of the things we’ve always 
held true to, is having a balanced budget on this side of the 
House. So because of that, hard choices had to be made. And 
because of that, they could have sat around wringing their 
hands, but they chose not to sit there wringing their hands but 
rather to roll up their sleeves, make the tough choices, and put 
forward a very commendable budget. 
 
In order to balance the budget without raising taxes, the 
government chose to control operating spending and again, as I 
stated, Deputy Speaker, this was done in very careful 
deliberation. Spending on the broad themes of health, 
education, social services, and assistance accounts for 73.2 per 

cent of all government expenses. 
 
And I’d like to speak directly about the choice they made for 
education. I know we’re very lucky here in Regina to have three 
joint schools that are going to be built. We have one in the east, 
one in the south and one in the northwest. And the constituency 
of Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, soon to be known as Regina 
Rochdale, is one of the recipients of one of these wonderful 
new schools. And the school is going to be located in Skywood, 
which is one of the new areas in the Regina northwest. Regina 
northwest, Regina south, and Regina east are the fastest 
growing areas within this city so these schools are very much 
needed. 
 
And within these schools we’re also going to see community 
space, but we’re also going to see, in the school in Regina 
northwest, 90 new child care spaces. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that’s pretty commendable because every time you drive down 
the street or you go into any of our shops in my area in Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley, the constituency of Regina Qu’Appelle 
Valley, we have young families that have chosen to make that 
their home. So we have lots of young families with children so 
the school is very much needed. 
 
We also have two other schools being replaced in the city, both 
Connaught and Sacred Heart. So I think Regina has been very 
lucky to have been the recipient of the choices made in 
education because, like I stated, education is one of the 
cornerstones of this budget. 
 
Another cornerstone of the budget is health care, and it’s 
interesting to see that our opposition has brought forward 
questions in question period extensively about senior care. And 
both our Health minister and our Rural Health minister have 
very much taken this to heart, but also have focused extensively 
on ensuring that funding is going to be there for senior care. We 
have made a commitment of 13 new long-term care facilities 
and, because of that, we are not going back on our word. 
 
That’s one of the things that as a government we have very 
much committed to doing, is what we say we will do, we do. 
We do not just pay lip service. One of the things the opposition 
was very well known for was making an announcement, cutting 
the ribbons. In fact on one occasion, they even had a 
earthmoving equipment go out, but nothing happened. And 
that’s one of the things we have made sure that we’ve always 
. . . What we said we were going to do, we have followed 
through on. 
 
And members have managed to attend quite a few openings of 
health care facilities. We’ve got a new hospital going in Moose 
Jaw. How many times wasn’t that facility announced, and it’s 
this government that is bringing that forward. The children’s 
hospital, a much needed facility, going to be built in Saskatoon. 
And again I know the members from the opposition talked 
about it but they didn’t do anything about it. Same thing with 
the Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford. That is a 
100-year-old facility and I’ve had the opportunity to tour that 
facility and it is in very much need of replacement. It’s not 
repair. It’s replacement. 
 
Again that is a commitment that we have made and we will 
follow through on it because as I said, health care, education, 



6660 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2015 

social services, those are the pillars of this budget. They are the 
three ministries that the treasury board has made a commitment 
to increasing the funding, not decreasing the funding. The other 
ministries had to sharpen their pencils and come up with how 
they can provide services to them without increasing the 
funding to them. So I think that was one of the commitments we 
made, was that we were not going to raise taxes. 
 
People in Saskatchewan work hard for their money. They feel 
that they want a government that also is prudent, and that’s one 
of the things that we can be proud of, is that we have kept an 
eye on ensuring that we did not raise any taxes but that we also 
invested in the infrastructure. Because one of the things the 
opposition did is that they absolutely halted any growth in this 
province. And my colleagues and members have stated that in 
fact people left this province in droves. With the change in 
government, we have a renewal of confidence in Saskatchewan. 
People are moving here, and why? Because they see 
opportunity. To ensure that we keep our province moving 
forward, we have to make the investment in infrastructure. We 
have to commit money to schools. We have to commit money 
to health care facilities and also to new highway construction 
because we have a higher population today so we have more 
people on our roads. 
 
I mean the Minister of Highways has made a commitment to 
twinning of some aspects of the highways, but also passing 
lanes. And passing lanes are going to ensure that even though 
we have more traffic on our highways, it’s going to ensure that 
we have safe manner of people moving to and from within 
communities. We have more and more people commuting to 
our major centres that are choosing to live in smaller town 
Saskatchewan or on acreages, so we have to ensure that they 
have transportation that’s safe. But through all of this, it’s to 
ensure that we keep Saskatchewan strong. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the things when I was 
in business, we used to, if we had tough choices to make, we 
had what we called a Ben Franklin close or a T-bar close. So 
you would line up the pros and the cons. And one of the things 
we can do is it’s pretty easy to make the choice between a 
Saskatchewan Party government and the NDP. Because with 
the NDP, they had no qualms about raising taxes. They 
increased taxes 17 times. We’re in fact holding the line on that. 
This budget was a balanced budget without raising taxes. 
 
One of the things that the NDP did was they closed 52 
hospitals, 52 hospitals, most of those in rural Saskatchewan or 
the Plains which was a much needed hospital here in the city. 
We’ve made commitment to building new health care facilities. 
 
The NDP also closed 176 schools. Now that’s nearly one a 
month for 16 years. As my colleague from Humboldt likes to 
say, one a month for 16 years. That’s shameful. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we’re building new schools. Why? Because we have 
young families that have moved here. We are making a 
commitment to our families. We’re making a commitment to 
our students to ensure that they have good schools with the 
facilities that can meet their needs. 
 
One of the things we’ve also done since we formed government 
is something that the NDP paid lip service to, but it’s a 
commitment we’ve made, is we’ve increased child care spaces 

by 53 per cent. Now that’s pretty incredible. I know myself 
within the constituency soon to be known as Regina Rochdale, 
our new school in Skywood is going to have 90 new child care 
spaces. That’s pretty incredible and I know that young families 
are going to be appreciating that. 
 
So as I said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you list their 
accomplishments, which were sad, and what they did, which 
was in most cases deplorable — closing schools, closing 
hospitals, not keeping up our highways — on the other hand 
we’ve got a Saskatchewan Party government which is building 
schools, building hospitals, ensuring that we have 13 new 
long-term care facilities. We’re paving roads. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I think it’s pretty clear. And I’m going to be very 
proud when I go to the doors because this is the budget that 
we’re going to be campaigning on. This is a balanced budget 
with no new taxes, with sustainable growth, and investing in a 
province that we want to keep moving forward, not moving 
backward which is what the NDP propose to do. 
 
So thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am going to be 
supporting the budget, but I will not be supporting the 
amendment put forward by the NDP. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a pleasure and I know I get a chance to speak before, but 
after supper. But one thing I haven’t heard from these folks 
when talking about the budget is the three new MLAs that they 
insisted on having put forward for the next election. Now 
they’re talking a lot about history. They’re talking about a lot of 
history but they don’t want to talk about the three new MLAs. 
We have not heard them talk about the smart meter fiasco, and 
we have not heard them talk about John Black. All of a sudden 
that part of history is erased from Saskatchewan. 
 
We need to talk more about those three new MLAs and what 
value they really have for Saskatchewan families in 
Saskatchewan today. We need to talk about John Black and the 
consultants — 228 per cent increase, Mr. Deputy Speaker. How 
are they adding value for Saskatchewan families? 
 
So I’ll have a lot more to say about this after supper, Mr. 
Speaker, because I know you’re going to cut me off in a few 
minutes. But people can tune back in, tune back at 7 o’clock 
because I’ll have some things to say about this budget, for sure, 
for sure. 
 
These folks like to gloss over what this budget, this borrowed 
balanced budget really means to Saskatchewan families in 
Saskatchewan today. It’s not a good thing. It’s not a good thing 
and whether we talk about the child care supplements, the 
subsidies that have been cut back, seniors thrown off the 
pharmacare, all of these things is not a good thing, Mr. Speaker. 
So come back at 7 o’clock and I’ll have more to say. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It now being 5 o’clock, this House 
stands recessed until 7 p.m. tonight. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6629 
  McCall...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6629 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6629 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6629 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6629 
  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6629 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6630 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6630 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6630 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6630 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6631 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Spring Free From Racism 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6631 
  McCall...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6631 
 Z99 Radiothon 
  Makowsky ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6631 
 Breaking the Silence 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6632 
 Celebrating the 25th Anniversary of the Borden Museum 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6632 
 Community Safety Officers 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6632 
 Education Funding 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6633 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Quality of Patient Care in Hospital 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6633 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6633 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6633 
 Housing of Young Offenders 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6635 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6635 
 Provincial Budget and Financial Management 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6636 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6636 
  Krawetz .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6637 
POINT OF ORDER 
  McCall...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6637 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6638 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6638 
  Krawetz .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6638 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Changes to Saskatchewan Immigrant Nominee Program 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6638 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6638 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6638 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6639 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6645 
  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6648 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6651 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6656 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6659 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6660 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


