
























































Hansard: May 06, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 60A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 6, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7107 
 May 6, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Welcome back. It’s good to have you here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to members of the House, 
I have a couple of guests I wish to introduce, seated in your 
gallery. The first is Hugh Nerlien. Hugh was born and raised in 
an entrepreneurial family in agriculture as well in the 
Greenwater Lake area within the Kelvington-Wadena 
constituency. Mr. Speaker, after college, he pursued a 
successful career in banking and in finance and developed a 
good network actually in the province of Alberta before 
returning home. 
 
He saw opportunity here, I think it’s fair to say, in the new 
Saskatchewan and came home to buy and build a successful 
retail group of businesses in Porcupine Plain, Mr. Speaker. 
With his contacts in Alberta, perhaps his phone’s been ringing 
after the events of yesterday about others in his network that are 
looking to follow him and pursue these opportunities. He has 
extensive volunteer experience, and I want to report to the 
House proudly that he will be the Saskatchewan Party candidate 
in the next election in Kelvington-Wadena. So I would just ask 
members to welcome him to the Legislative Assembly today. 
 
Beside him in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, from Canora, is the 
co-owner of Dennis’ Foods in Canora. They’re very famous for 
shishliki, very, very excellent shishliki called Terry’s shishliki, 
Mr. Speaker, which is fitting because I’m introducing to you 
and through you, Terry Dennis. It is sold, his product sold in the 
province between 35 to 40 stores thankfully so we can all have 
access to it. He was born in Canora. He’s lived in Canora all of 
his life. He was a town councillor for six years, the mayor — 
and an excellent mayor — there for 14 years. He has been a 
member of the SaskTel board as well, Mr. Speaker, and served 
on the Parkland College president’s advisory board amongst 
many other endeavours. And we’re very pleased that he’ll be 
carrying the standard for the Saskatchewan Party in 
Canora-Pelly in the next election. I’d ask all members to 
welcome him to his Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce two individuals seated in your gallery: my nephew, 
Robert Morgan, and his girlfriend, Ashley Ford. Ashley comes 
from Scottsdale. I think it’s part of a pattern that’s developed in 
Saskatchewan that people become romantically involved with 
Americans. I see the Minister of Central Services has a similar 
arrangement going on. And while we support good relations 
with our American neighbours to the south, I point out always 
that there are fine people in Saskatchewan as well. And I would 
like to welcome them to the legislature today and ask all 

members to join me in welcoming them. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I see that Jesse Todd 
is in the gallery, who is on the advisory committee for asbestos, 
a committee that’s doing good work. A rollout of the asbestos 
registry took place a few days ago, and I want to thank him for 
his continuing good work on that committee. And, Mr. Speaker, 
as you are aware, he is a candidate for another party in an 
upcoming election. I don’t wish him quite as much success in 
that endeavour, but I certainly want to thank him for what he’s 
done on the asbestos committee. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I too would like 
to welcome and introduce through you to all members, Jesse 
Todd who is here with us in the Assembly today, a tireless 
advocate for occupational health and safety issues here in the 
province and ensuring that Saskatchewan does well. And I’m 
very pleased that he is our candidate in the upcoming election in 
Saskatoon Eastview. So I’d ask all members to join me in 
welcoming Jesse to the Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members of the House, I would like to introduce 15 
grade 4 students from Beardy’s Okemasis Reserve from the 
Chief Beardy Memorial School. Yes, give us a wave, kids. 
There you are. Accompanying them is their teacher, Mrs. 
Beatrice Cameron, and Mrs. Laverne Gamble, Mr. George 
Gamble, and Mr. Cameron Dreaver. The chaperone is Mrs. 
Betsy Gamble; bus driver, Ms. Ashley Eyahpaise. So I would 
like all members of the House to welcome them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
through you and to you, I would like to introduce a number of 
individuals in your gallery that are here today as part of the 
Saskatchewan Book Awards. You know, the awards were held 
a couple weeks ago and there were a number of amazing artists 
and writers that were nominated. Today in the gallery we have 
three of the winners of the Book Awards. I see all three of them 
are here. We just had some readings in the Legislative Library 
over the noon hour, and it was very interesting to actually hear 
excerpts from their books and some of their thoughts. 
 
Anyways, we have Ken Dalgarno — thank you, Ken — we 
have Ernie Louttit from Saskatoon and Bruce Rice, all of whom 
won awards this year. We also have some of the Legislative 
Library staff, and we see Daniel Parr here as well who’s with 
the Book Awards. So through you and on behalf of the official 
opposition, we want to welcome them all to the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 
Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 



7108 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2015 

you, I’d like to join the member from Saskatoon Nutana in 
welcoming Ken and Bruce and Ernie, as well as Daniel, as well 
as those working in the Legislative Library. 
 
We know that these Saskatchewan authors have been 
undertaking readings from their award-winning books this 
morning. They’re also terrific proponents of literacy, learning, 
and libraries. And so I would ask all members to join me and 
the member from Nutana in welcoming these terrific 
Saskatchewan authors to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I have a few guests I’d like to introduce. First of 
all seated in your gallery, I’d like to recognize the organizers of 
the Twelfth Year, Mr. Speaker, a very special youth salute that 
celebrates and recognizes students and graduates from across 
Regina. The event was held on last Friday. It was spectacular. 
The member from Walsh Acres attended as well. And they just 
really put their passion and talents into really good use in 
recognizing very important success across our city. So I ask all 
members to recognize Ms. Andrea Norberg and Ms. Erin Ball, 
two very fine photographers here in Regina. 
 
And there’s a couple of other people I’d like to recognize as 
well. I see a friend, Mr. Keith Foster who’s joined us here 
today, someone who is no stranger to this Assembly, who 
worked in Hansard for over 27 years. He’s a writer. He’s had 
some success writing one-act plays; he recently has one that’s 
being produced right now. He’s a historian. He’s been 
published in Canada’s History writing about the Northwest 
Resistance, and I know he has an upcoming contribution on that 
front as well. And he’s a regular in involving himself in 
Regina’s arts scene and so many activities that are important to 
our community. So I ask all members to recognize Mr. Keith 
Foster to his Assembly. 
 
And while still on my feet, Mr. Speaker, in the east gallery, I’d 
like to recognize Ms. Maureen Eckstein, someone who’s very 
active within our community, supporting many great causes, 
Mr. Speaker, very active in civil society as well in the labour 
movement. And I ask all members to recognize Ms. Maureen 
Eckstein. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
also like to join with the member opposite and welcome both 
Erin and Andrea to the Legislative Assembly, this being 
Women Entrepreneurs Week. These two women have 
developed a very successful business here in the city of Regina, 
so I’d like to welcome both of them to the Legislative 
Assembly. And I have to tell you, Andrea did our photographs 
for Let’s Do Lunch for a minister and myself, and we really 
appreciate her fine work. So I’d like everyone here to welcome 
them to their Legislative Assembly. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — I guess there’s nobody else left. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. Through you and to you to the Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce two guests today that are seated way up top in the 
west gallery. I’d like to introduce Linda Machniak. She’s the 
executive director of our Battlefords Chamber of Commerce. 
She’s a tireless worker for our chamber up there, and we 
appreciate everything she does. A couple of years ago, Linda 
was honoured by winning the Canadian Chamber of Commerce 
executive committee award as the Executive of the Year for the 
whole nation of Canada. We’re very proud of her for that. She 
is also the proud mother of Vicki, who is a great Special 
Olympian swimmer, and she’s won numerous medals 
throughout Saskatchewan over the last few years. And we’re all 
very proud of Vicki as well. 
 
With Linda today is Brendon Boothman, the president of our 
chamber. Brendon was just inducted last January, I believe, and 
we’re looking forward certainly to working with Brendon. He’s 
a very tireless worker for the chamber and a great addition to 
our business community in The Battlefords. Welcome to both 
of these members. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the member from The Battlefords in welcoming Linda and 
Brendon to the Assembly today, thank them for their leadership 
in the community, the work that they do, and their commitment 
to ensuring that the people in The Battlefords and area have the 
best opportunities possible. So I ask all members to join me in 
welcoming them here to the Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce a 
petition that calls for support for better schools here in 
Saskatchewan. And we know that far too many of our 
classrooms are overcrowded and under-resourced, and that the 
Sask Party government has eliminated hundreds of educational 
assistant positions, and that students often do not get the 
one-on-one attention they need. None of this is acceptable given 
the record revenues this government has had over the last eight 
years. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on this 
government to immediately stop ignoring schools and start 
prioritizing students by capping classroom sizes, increasing 
support for students, and developing a transparent plan to 
build and repair our schools. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. Homelessness is a major problem in La Ronge and 
other parts of the North, and it’s getting worse. Shelter is a 
basic need for everyone, but under this government it’s getting 
harder and harder for people to find adequate housing, 
especially families, seniors, women and children who face 
abusive situations. The problem is getting worse because of the 



May 6, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7109 

rising level of poverty, skyrocketing home ownership costs. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Saskatchewan government to 
build a homeless shelter in the Lac la Ronge area to meet 
the needs of addressing homelessness in the Lac la Ronge 
area. 

 
And it’s signed by many good people of northern 
Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This is a 
petition that relates to the PPP [public-private partnership] 
transparency and accountability that is required for the people 
of Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately pass The Public-Private Partnership 
Transparency and Accountability Act. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Saskatoon, 
Regina, and Maple Creek, Mr. Speaker. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition in support of retaining Yarrow Youth Farm. The 
government has closed Yarrow Youth Farm and they’ve created 
an open-custody wing in Kilburn Hall, which is a 
secure-custody unit for youth considered a greater risk to the 
community. The provincial Advocate for Children and Youth 
has declared that he cannot endorse such a rationalization, as 
low-risk teens could be influenced and pressured by close 
proximity to high-risk youth who may be involved in serious 
crimes or gangs. And we know that Kilburn Hall is a more 
institutional environment that could intimidate and alienate 
teens that have committed minor offences. I’d like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the government to keep Yarrow 
Youth Farm open to ensure a caring home environment for 
youth who have committed minor offences and to provide 
support to help these young people redirect their lives by 
setting more positive goals. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Saskatoon. I 
so submit. 
 
[13:45] 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 

Emergency Preparedness Week 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to recognize that our government has proclaimed this 
week, May 3rd to 9th, as Emergency Preparedness Week in 
Saskatchewan. This nationally recognized event is designed to 
raise awareness of the importance of preparing for an 
emergency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan, as we all know, the weather can 
change in an instant. It’s not uncommon for us to experience 
severe summer storms, blizzards, and flooding. One way that 
Saskatchewan families can prepare for these kinds of events is 
to develop an emergency plan. This plan should always include 
an emergency kit which can sustain a family for at least 72 
hours. The emergency kit should include items for every 
member of your family such as water, first-aid kit, 
non-perishable food, flashlight, radio batteries, as well as any 
medications that might be needed. 
 
Recently our government launched SaskAlert, Saskatchewan’s 
province-wide emergency public alerting system. In the event 
of an emergency, alerts will be shared directly with residents 
through local television and radio, online at SaskAlert.ca, and 
on the Weather Network website and smart phone app. 
 
This is just one more tool to help keep families safe during an 
emergency. Mr. Speaker, I’d ask that all members of this House 
join me in recognizing Emergency Preparedness Week in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Twelfth Year Gallery Show 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday I 
had the pleasure to attend and to speak to a packed house for the 
Twelfth Year Youth Salute Awards at the Artful Dodger, along 
with the member for Walsh Acres. These awards and this 
program has been taken on and embraced by two talented 
Regina photographers, Andrea Norberg and Erin Ball. 
 
Twelfth Year brings together four outstanding leaders from 
each of Regina’s 17 high schools. Each of these students had a 
professional portrait done by Erin and Andrea, and they really 
took the time to capture each student’s unique passions and 
talents. From sports to music to fashion to science to business, 
these young students represent the best of what our city has to 
offer, and I know that we’ll be hearing so much more from 
these student leaders in the years to come. 
 
It was also great to see so many in our community come out to 
support these students. The strong support each student has 
received from parents, coaches, teachers, and friends has helped 
each one grow and excel. 
 
I ask all members to join me in thanking Erin and Andrea for 
their hard work and talent in organizing this great event, and 
importantly in celebrating the remarkable achievements of 
students being recognized at the Twelfth Year celebration, 
young people that will certainly play no small role in shaping 
and building a bright future here in Saskatchewan. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 



7110 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2015 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Remembering Justin Gaja, Kristian Skalicky, 
and Carter Stevenson 

 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ve 
made quite a few member’s statements over the years, but today 
is the hardest one I’ve ever made in this Chamber. Many times I 
have stood here and talked about our Carrot River Wildcats in a 
positive way. Today it is different. Today it is almost 
unspeakable and incomprehensible. 
 
Last Sunday three boys from our team were returning from a 
football camp and, through no fault of theirs, were killed in a 
tragic car accident. Carter Stevenson, Kristian Skalicky, and 
Justin Gaja had their whole lives ahead of them. School, 
hockey, drama, and friends are now forever gone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this loss has shaken our tight-knit community of 
Carrot River and the Carrot River Junior-Senior High School to 
the core. As you can imagine, in a small rural setting where 
everyone knows everybody, this tragedy has touched so many 
lives. Our hearts especially go out to the parents of all the 
victims at this time of great loss. I would like to ask everyone in 
this Assembly to keep Carrot River and the families of these 
young boys in their thoughts, minds, and prayers at this time of 
incredible hurt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in time we will recover, but we will never forget. 
This fall when the Wildcats take to the field, I’m sure Carter, 
Kristian, and Justin will be watching and chanting, “Go, Cats, 
Go.” I just wish they were on the field. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

The Fiddle History of Canada Performed in Carlyle 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Saturday I had 
the great pleasure of attending a very special performance at the 
Memorial Hall in Carlyle. Michele Amy’s fiddle studio and the 
Cornerstone Theatre partnered together for a well-attended, 
four-day run of Gordon Stobbe’s The Fiddle History of Canada. 
Combining fiddle music from the Irish, Scottish, Acadian, Cape 
Breton, and Métis traditions, this unique production celebrates 
the important place that fiddling holds in the Canadian story. 
 
The story begins with the first French settlers who arrived in 
what is now Canadian shores and then chronicles our history 
through the traditional live music that has been at the centre of 
community gatherings ever since the fiddle arrived in this land. 
It features each part of the country and the many cultures that 
make us strong as well as the key contributors to the genre, 
people like Don Messer who was played by young Kieran 
Stewart from Oxbow. 
 
The production required 360 costumes, 84 props, 54 fiddlers, 8 
musicians in the pit band, 5 actors, and 9 backstage assistants 
— no small task in a place like Carlyle. The fiddlers came from 
all across southeastern Saskatchewan to participate, including 
Alameda, Arcola, Carnduff, Estevan, Corning, Stoughton, 
Forget, Oxbow, Lampman, Manor, and Redvers. 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking everyone 
who played a part in making this production a reality, including 
Michele Amy, Doug Waldner, and Gordon Stobbe, and all the 
committed parents. With the hard work of volunteers and 
professionals like these, our province’s proud fiddling tradition 
is sure to continue for many more years to come. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 

Remembering Vinessa Currie-Foster 
 

Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great sadness 
that I stand here today and recognize a constituent of mine who 
passed away suddenly just last week, Vinessa Currie-Foster. 
 
Vinessa was tragically killed in a car accident on her way to a 
paddling symposium from Paynton to Saskatoon. Remembered 
as a caring and compassionate business owner and mother, 
Vinessa leaves behind her husband, Les, four-year-old twin 
boys, and a seven-week-old daughter. 
 
Vinessa was an avid canoer and owner of Clearwater Canoeing. 
With the dream of owning her own business coming true in the 
spring of 2007, Clearwater Canoeing caters to people of all 
backgrounds and gives them the opportunity to enjoy the 
amazing splendours and rich cultures of northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As a graduate from Lakeland College’s diploma program in 
adventure tourism and outdoor recreation, Vinessa’s love of 
canoeing and Canadian wilderness truly did show in everything 
that she did. Her dream of sharing a piece of that lifestyle came 
true with every guided tour of a lake or river with Clearwater 
Canoeing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Vinessa’s family has set up a GoFundMe 
campaign with almost $25,000 raised up to this morning. It is 
clear to see that this wife, sister, daughter, mother, teacher, 
friend, and paddler will be greatly missed by so many. I would 
ask all members to join with me in supporting Vinessa’s family 
in their time of loss and remembering such a vibrant young 
woman. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 

Autism Services of Saskatoon Opens New Group Homes 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise in the House today to celebrate the opening of two new 
group homes for people with autism in Saskatoon. At the grand 
opening when I talked to the families of the participants, they 
couldn’t thank our government enough for our investment. 
 
These two homes have officially opened their doors to help 
enrich the lives of 10 individuals with autism spectrum 
disorder. Mr. Speaker, our government is proud to have 
invested a total of $1.4 million in Autism Services of Saskatoon 
through the Ministry of Social Services in support of these 
important projects. This funding will provide the organization 
with capital and operating funding for two new group homes, 



May 6, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7111 

and leadership enhancement to support their expansion. Mr. 
Speaker, this funding will support 10 individuals, including one 
individual from Valley View Centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 1979 Autism Services of Saskatoon have 
been providing educational, recreational, and residential 
programs and services to individuals with autism spectrum 
disorder. Mr. Speaker, thanks to community-based 
organizations like Autism Services of Saskatoon, our 
government’s vision of making Saskatchewan the best place in 
Canada to live for people with disabilities is becoming a reality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Autism Services of Saskatoon on the opening of their two new 
group homes. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 

North American Occupational Safety and Health Week  
 
Ms. Ross: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to stand in the House 
today to speak about our government’s announcement to 
proclaim March 3rd to 9th, 2015 as North American 
Occupational Safety and Health Week. This year’s theme is 
Make Safety a Habit. North American occupational safety 
week, which is observed throughout North America, promotes 
health and safety in the workplace and at home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister for Labour Relations and Workplace 
Safety and the Minister of Corrections and Policing and myself 
had the opportunity to attend Saskatchewan’s Construction 
Safety Association’s Evening of Honour Gala last Friday. This 
event celebrated 20 years of industry-driven commitment to 
safety and formally recognize some of the volunteer board 
members and past Chairs who have shaped the success of this 
association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is making the workplace safer 
through launching a new user-friendly and searchable 
web-based asbestos registry. This is part of our ongoing work 
regarding asbestos safety. Saskatchewan is the only province in 
Canada with an asbestos registry of public buildings. It’s 
important workers know where asbestos is present and how to 
safely handle it so they can prevent exposure. Our government 
has established an asbestos advisory committee to provide input 
on asbestos-related health and safety issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government takes safety seriously, and we’ll 
continue to work to ensure Saskatchewan workers have a safe 
workplace environment. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Expenditures Prior to and During Government Trade 
Missions 

 
Mr. Broten: — When exactly did the Premier and his cabinet 
ministers start using travel scouts? On how many trips have 
they sent travel scouts? And what has been the cost to 
Saskatchewan families? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the 
international missions of this government, the government has 
used those who would go in advance of the mission to organize 
meetings. 
 
The hon. member is being criticized across the province for his 
line of questioning in this regard, most recently in the 
Saskatoon StarPhoenix editorial where they begin with, and I’m 
quoting now, Mr. Speaker, “Mr. Broten’s attempts this week to 
label two staffers of the provincial Intergovernmental . . .” Well 
they don’t want to hear this. “. . . two staffers of the provincial 
Intergovernmental Affairs officer as Mr. Wall’s ‘travel scouts’ 
and liken the premier to discredited former Alberta leader 
Alison Redford seems petty politics at best.” 
 
We’ll go through this editorial, Mr. Speaker, because they do a 
pretty good job of making the case against this line of 
questioning and against the Leader of the Opposition. But they 
conclude with this: “Advance planning for such missions is a 
standard practice for many governments, and Mr. Broten only 
discredits himself by continuing with this line of attack.” 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this Premier’s been criticized 
across this province for his sense of self-entitlement very 
clearly on display with the travel scouts. Mr. Speaker, these 
travel scouts, they’re not hammering out trade deals. They’re 
checking out hotel rooms for the Premier. His rhetoric does not 
match the reality, and the government’s very own documents 
show that to be the case. 
 
They’re touring five-star hotels and choosing which ones are 
the best. They’re inspecting the Premier’s room, demanding 
upgrades to fancier rooms. They’re demanding that staff at the 
hotel be assigned 24-7 and available by cellphone. They’re 
reviewing menus. They’re inspecting vehicles, arranging 
motorcades, arranging for separate transportation so the Premier 
wouldn’t have to travel with the whole delegation. They’re 
looking for the best VIP [very important person] lounges, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re asking for extra tickets to cocktail receptions. 
 
All of this, Mr. Speaker, defies good Saskatchewan common 
sense, but it clearly shows a sense of entitlement that we see 
from this Premier, Mr. Speaker. How on earth can the Premier 
possibly justify this practice? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the same way the NDP 
government of Manitoba justifies this practice, the same way 
the Liberal government of Ontario . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . Well the member from Lakeview wants to chirp up. Maybe 
he’d want to check with Manitoba and find out their policy. 
Maybe they want to find out what they do in British Columbia 
and Alberta. But you know, as I think my colleague mentioned 
yesterday, all of these governments are wrong, and The 
StarPhoenix editorial board is wrong. And frankly, the public 
opinion is wrong. The Leader of the Opposition is right. That’s 
his view. That’s what he’s presenting here today. 
 



7112 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2015 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday the deputy minister of 
Intergovernmental Affairs came out and confirmed that these 
officials — one is an executive director of international 
relations, one is the assistant deputy minister — do plan for 
logistics on the trip, but they are meeting as an advance for the 
actual mission. Here are some of the people that they met with, 
and I invite the member to kind of pay attention and maybe 
reflect a little bit on the list. 
 
On the India-Bangladesh mission: Reliance Energy, Mahindra 
& Mahindra, the Brita Group, the Confederation of Indian 
Industry — doesn’t sound like hotels to me — Cameco’s 
in-market representative, Canpotex’s in-market representative. 
You see, because when we travel, we’re trying to help secure 
uranium sales deals and potash sales deals for the province of 
Saskatchewan. When we travel, we’re trying to invest in the 
interests of this economy. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the results are in on that, by the way. 
Because of our resources and our companies, and yes, 
international engagement, trade is way up. This province is the 
number one exporter per capita in the country. We’ll defend the 
trade missions, how we go about them, and the results now, in 
the months ahead, and in the next election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier needs to look at the 
documents of his very own government. You look at the 
itineraries. When they do meet with a company, Mr. Speaker, 
the questions are, can the Premier bring his own photographer? 
Where should he be standing? Who’s going to be sitting where? 
Can the officials sit around the edge of the room? Mr. Speaker, 
it’s not hammering out trade deals. It’s looking after basic 
logistics. You do not need highly paid travel scouts going a 
month in advance to do that. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, in all the documents that we revealed 
so far, the travel scouts, the travel scouts asked two questions 
about the Premier’s hotel rooms that are blacked out. Mr. 
Speaker, this government says that that information is personal, 
and they’ve redacted it. They’ve taken a Sharpie and taken it 
out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s in the public interest to know what the 
travel scouts are demanding on behalf of the Premier. So to the 
Premier: what exactly are these travel scouts asking that he does 
not want Saskatchewan people to know? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there was no request on my 
part for that to be redacted. There’s actually no request on my 
part from them to ask the question. But these senior officials . . . 
And truly, Mr. Speaker, let’s pay some respect. This is an 
executive director of international affairs that was there when 
the NDP [New Democratic Party] were in power, and it’s an 
ADM [assistant deputy minister], Mr. Speaker, who are not as 
the member describes. But they know me. They’ve been at 
meetings with me, and so they asked a couple of questions 
based on that knowledge.  

And here it is, Mr. Speaker. Here’s the smoking gun. They’re 
asking — I didn’t ask them to, but because of a preference I 
have — if there’s Coke Zero available in the hotel. And they 
also asked — they know I like history — they said, are there 
sort of any historical points, any sightseeing around? You know 
what, Mr. Speaker? That’s how we roll, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
how we roll. This entitled group, every now and then after a 
long day of trade mission, we’ll pop the top on a Coke Zero and 
go around and read historical plaques, Mr. Speaker. That’s what 
sometimes we do in the off-hours. 
 
But during the meetings, during the mission itself, Mr. Speaker, 
the advance folks and us, we’re meeting with the companies. 
We’re meeting with those purchasers of potash and uranium. 
Mr. Speaker, we’re furthering the interests of the Government 
of Saskatchewan and our economy, exactly as we’re asked to 
do, exactly as The StarPhoenix expects us to do. And we’re 
going to keep doing that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Unbelievable to hear what this Premier is 
saying. He said, oh these are very important individuals doing 
important government work. It’s very necessary that they go in 
advance. And what he reveals is they’re asking about how the 
mini-bar is stocked — Mr. Speaker, it is unbelievable — and 
where they should go for a tour. He’s undercutting his entire 
argument that this is important work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He’s also undercutting his argument, Mr. Speaker, that he 
didn’t know what they are . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Well in the few days that I was absent, I got a 
chance to listen to the proceedings in the House, and I could 
hear very well what the members were saying. But it seems 
once I’m here, I can’t do that any longer. So I would like to be 
able to hear both the questions and the responses if possible 
because I don’t want to have to apply the cure that my doctor 
recommended for me, and that was, go home and stay home. So 
please let’s tone it down a little. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this Premier just admitted that he 
is sending two highly paid travel scouts to go to the other side 
of the globe to ask about Coke Zero in his hotel rooms, Mr. 
Speaker. My question to the Premier: will he table the 
documents unredacted in this Assembly? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well he’s jumped the shark now, Mr. 
Speaker. Him and Fonzie, they’ve got two things in common. 
They can’t admit when they’re wr-wr-wr-wrong, and they like 
to go shark jumping every now and then. 
 
Actually, Mr. Speaker, the professional public servants, when 
they’re on an advance mission that The StarPhoenix and others 
say is reasonable — and the NDP government does in 
Manitoba, by the way — they’re meeting with groups like 
Zen-Noh and Mitsubishi and Sojitz and Mitsui and Hitachi, 
advancing the interests of the mission to make sure we can get 



May 6, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7113 

some results. 
 
So while they’re there, I guess they’re asking some other 
questions about what might be complimentary and what might 
be free, but the advance to the mission, as The StarPhoenix 
points out, is important. Here’s what The StarPhoenix editorial 
said today: 
 

Surely, it makes ample sense [to everybody, by the way, 
but that member] to do as much advance preparation as 
necessary to ensure that trade missions to countries such as 
Japan, Singapore, the Philippines and India by the premier 
occur smoothly and efficiently, with little time wasted on 
the minutia during the actual trip. 

 
It goes on and on. I’ll get into it, Mr. Speaker, but this is why 
other provinces do it. We advance the mission. We achieve 
things in market. Uranium deals are signed. Potash deals are 
signed. Our exporters make sales of our pulse crops, Mr. 
Speaker. They want us to keep going. They like how we do 
international engagement. We’re going to continue to do it, 
continue to grow this province in unprecedented ways, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, no response at all about whether 
or not he’ll table the documents unredacted, first of all. You 
know, Alison Redford, Mr. Speaker, she had the same high-paid 
professional civil servants travelling the globe, asking the same 
nonsensical questions that we see by this Premier, Mr. Speaker. 
This is a bad practice in any jurisdiction by any political party, 
and that Premier needs to realize that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know that this Premier, Mr. Speaker, personally directed 
the leak of confidential information about a private citizen. He’s 
confessed and admitted to that. But on Monday the Premier 
claimed he didn’t know what kind of information was actually 
shared until the end of the week. Well we know for a fact, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Premier was told as early as April 23rd that 
the leaked information was highly specific, so why does the 
Premier claim, why does he claim that it was not until late last 
week that he learned what he was saying was wrong? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Because it’s the 
truth. The editorial in The StarPhoenix goes on to say: 
 

The costs Mr. Broten revealed [I’m quoting] for the 
advance planning of two Asia trips — $23,494 for the 
Singapore, Japan, and Philippines mission and $13,909 to 
plan for India — are by no means exorbitant. 

 
And by the way, the number he talks about in terms of Alberta 
is 330,000 by a former political staffer. But again, he’s busy 
shark jumping. 
 
They go on to say: 
 

And to make a huge deal, as Mr. Broten attempted to do, 
[attempted to do] about the officials asking whether a 
complimentary upgrade was available for the premier was 

simply silly, [Mr. Speaker]. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, there’s important trade work to 
do. You look at the itineraries of what was submitted by 
government. It was not about hammering out trade deals. It was 
about ensuring that this Premier and his delegation had the best 
luxury accommodations available, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, in a media scrum on April 23rd, three days after he 
ordered the leak of confidential information, the Premier was 
told that there was specific information included in that leak. 
Now the Premier got angry. He got annoyed with reporters for 
asking questions. But you know, he said, he said that he was 
“comfortable,” comfortable with the information that was 
shared. 
 
But the Premier’s story simply is not adding up. He admits that 
he ordered the leak. For almost two weeks he stubbornly 
defended it, said he was comfortable with what was disclosed. 
He repeatedly argued with reporters, with the opposition, and 
disputed claims that the information that was leaked was 
specific. But now he’s trying to tell us that he didn’t know it 
was specific until the end of last week. Well it is simply not 
credible. And he just said it Thursday, even though the evidence 
shows that he knew about it on Monday and Tuesday, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Does the Premier, does the Premier actually expect us to believe 
that he never spoke with his chief of communications and 
operations about the exact nature of the information that was 
leaked? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well the evidence is in, Mr. Speaker. And 
I’m going to address what he said in his preamble again that 
these professional public servants were there doing only 
logistics. This is the companies they met with in advance of the 
trip in Asia. By the way, these missions achieve results for 
Saskatchewan people, unlike the trips that cost more, that cost 
more even without the advance people that the NDP used to 
engage in. 
 
So let’s review them again: K-COLA; Chugai Technologies; 
Mitsui again; Sojitz; Hitachi; Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries in India; the Confederation of Indian 
Industry, again, that’s their major chamber of commerce; 
Export Development Canada to help facilitate agreements that 
are being signed. That’s why these officials are travelling. 
 
And as The StarPhoenix concluded with their editorial, they 
say, “Advance planning for such missions is a standard practice 
for many governments, and Mr. Broten only discredits himself 
by continuing with this line of attack.” 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Release of Information Concerning Worker 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the question to the Premier was, 
how on earth does he think it is believable for Saskatchewan 



7114 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2015 

people to take his claim that he only learned about the specific 
details of the leaked information on Thursday, when it is very 
clear that this was brought to his attention on Monday and 
Tuesday? How is it, Mr. Speaker, that we are to believe that he 
did not speak with his chief of communications and operations 
about the true and specific details of this leak? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Because it’s the truth, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
why. Because it’s the truth. The first email, which is the one 
that we were directed with respect to general information about 
Mr. Bowden, was the email that I was referring to in debate. I 
first heard of, had read to me, the second email with the 
specifics on Thursday. And so therefore that was my answer 
earlier this week, and I provided that answer, Mr. Speaker . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Well they’re saying they don’t 
believe it. I guess that’s their prerogative. I’m telling them 
today, as we have endeavoured to do on this side of the House 
since 2007, is to always commit to the truth, to simply tell . . . 
Keep your promises and tell the truth. That’s what happened in 
this regard. We’re going to let the Privacy Commissioner do his 
work. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s story is not adding 
up one bit. Last Monday in a scrum, a reporter told the Premier, 
“Four out of the six allegations we were provided details on, 
and then we were given two examples and they were specific 
examples.” That’s what the Premier was told on Monday. On 
Tuesday, the Leader-Post reported a second email, which 
contained specific allegations about a private citizen. Later that 
day, the Deputy Leader asked questions in the House, directly 
to the Premier, about the second email. This goes directly to the 
credibility of the Premier. How can the Premier possibly claim 
that he only learned about the second email on Thursday, when 
he was specifically told about it at the beginning of last week? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re aware that the Information and Privacy Commissioner is 
conducting a review of this particular matter, Mr. Speaker. This 
is a question of process, Mr. Speaker. We need to let the 
Information and Privacy Commissioner do his work, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s exactly what was suggested by the Leader 
of the Opposition earlier this week. We should let the 
Commissioner do his work, and we’ll be informed by the results 
of that work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, these stories that we’re hearing 
from the Premier and from the Justice minister simply do not 
add up. The Premier said this week that he only learned about 
the specific information of the second email at the end of last 
week, Mr. Speaker. We know for a fact he was asked about it 
by a reporter on Monday. He scrummed on it, Mr. Speaker. We 
know on Tuesday the second email was reported publicly in the 
papers, and we know he was questioned about it in question 
period on Tuesday. So the Premier needs to answer this. How 
on earth is it believable in any way, shape, or form that he did 

not know about the specific details and the information 
provided in the leaked information earlier on in the week, when 
it’s very clear in the written record, in the press, in Hansard, 
that he clearly knew. He needs to stand up and answer this 
question. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure what I 
can add to the answer that I previously gave, Mr. Speaker. 
There is due process which will be followed. The Information 
and Privacy Commissioner will continue with his work, and 
we’ll be informed by that work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition talks about due process, but yet 
when it comes to the work of the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner, he’s not interested in due process, Mr. Speaker. 
Let’s let the Information and Privacy Commissioner do his 
work. We will be informed by his work, Mr. Speaker and, as I 
mentioned before, that’s . . . [inaudible] . . . the opposition 
asked for earlier in the week. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Privacy Commissioner will do 
his work. And what this Justice minister, this government needs 
to agree to do is hand over the findings of that review to 
out-of-province prosecution, Mr. Speaker. We can’t have this 
government investigating itself. But we need to look at the 
Premier’s story. We need to look, Mr. Speaker, how the 
Premier’s story simply is not adding up, not adding up. 
 
[14:15] 
 
You know, on Tuesday in this House, the Deputy Leader of the 
Opposition said this. So, Mr. Speaker, members should listen to 
this because it’s very clear that the Premier was informed about 
the specific details. This is what the member said: 
 

We’ve now learned through media reports that the 
Premier’s chief of communications and operations actually 
sent several emails to reporters when she leaked 
confidential information about a care aid. And contrary to 
everything the Premier has said, those emails contain very 
specific information. In fact, the Premier leaked more 
specific information to reporters than the care aid had even 
received himself from the health region. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, that was on last Tuesday, but the Premier says 
he didn’t find out about specific information until Thursday. It 
is not believable. It is not accurate what the Premier has been 
saying. So the only way for the Premier’s story to be credible is 
if he doesn’t listen during media scrums, if he doesn’t listen 
here in the House, if he does not read the newspaper, and if he 
doesn’t speak with his chief of communications and operations. 
Is that what this Premier is trying to claim? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I listened very 
carefully to the question that was just posed by the Leader of 



May 6, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7115 

the Opposition and, Mr. Speaker, quite frankly it sounds like he 
doesn’t have any confidence in the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner to do his work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Information and Privacy Commissioner is an 
independent officer of this Assembly, and we have great 
confidence in him to do his work, Mr. Speaker. We are not 
going to speculate on the results. We are not going to speculate 
on the work that he’s doing or any recommendations or results 
that come out of that work, Mr. Speaker. We will wait for the 
Information and Privacy Commissioner to finish that work, a 
man who we have tremendous confidence in on this side of the 
House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this simply isn’t believable, what 
we’re hearing from this government. While the Privacy 
Commissioner does an investigation, we have a concern right 
now, Mr. Speaker, because the Premier’s story is not adding up 
one bit. He’s giving contradictory information based on the 
facts that we know as publicly reported and as stated in this 
House. 
 
The Premier claimed on Monday, Mr. Speaker, that he did not 
know about the specific nature and the content of the leaked 
information until the end of the week on Thursday. That’s what 
he said, and that’s what he’s sticking to now. But we know, Mr. 
Speaker, that on Monday he was asked by the media on this. 
We know on Tuesday the second email was reported in the 
paper. And we also know in question period he was asked about 
the specific nature and the details of that email. And then he 
claims, Mr. Speaker, that he only found out about it at the end 
of the week. 
 
He needs to explain, how is it, how is it that he can make that 
claim? It is not believable. It is not credible. This Premier needs 
to explain himself around this confidential leak of information. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to hear 
the Leader of the Opposition express some confidence in the 
Information and Privacy Commissioner. I’m not really sure why 
he won’t let that Information and Privacy Commissioner do his 
work. These matters will all be dealt with through his report, 
and we’ll be informed by the recommendations and the results 
of that work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have great confidence in the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner, Mr. Speaker. He’s an independent officer of this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. Well let’s let him do his work. These 
matters will all be dealt with through the work that he’s doing, 
Mr. Speaker, and we anxiously await for the results of all that 
work. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Responsibilities of Care Aids 
 
Ms. Chartier: — This government is now requiring many care 

aids to also do cooking and cleaning. And with this 
government’s horribly low staffing levels, care aids don’t have 
time for that. But instead of adding more staff, the government 
used a John Black lean team to bring some hoshin kanri to the 
whole process of cleaning residents’ rooms and bathrooms. 
 
For the care aids at Prairie Pioneers Lodge, this government 
created a John Black lean standard work process for cleaning. 
Care aids are given just six minutes and 42 seconds — 42 
seconds, Mr. Speaker — to clean an entire room and bathroom. 
How many care facilities have this restriction on cleaning? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of the way that care is delivered in a number 
of our long-term care facilities, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that 
care aids have been engaged in this work of cooking and 
cleaning in resident facilities long before John Black ever came 
to the health system, Mr. Speaker. In fact Tatagwa View in 
Weyburn, which was built under the NDP, has a model where 
the staff members within a pod also do cooking and cleaning for 
their residents. And in fact, part of what is allowed to do to, in 
part, engage the residents is actually have the residents involved 
in some of the cooking, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a different model of care that is being implemented. It is 
in place in places like Sherbrooke in Saskatoon, and in other 
places across the facility, Mr. Speaker. This has already taken 
place under the NDP, and it continues today. And we’re looking 
at other facilities that we may be able to implement this kind of 
system to provide for appropriate care for our residents. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — The instructions from the John Black lean 
team say that the toilet should only be cleaned if it’s visibly 
soiled. That is disgusting. These are care facilities. Proper germ 
and illness control requires proper cleaning, even if toilets are 
not visibly soiled. The same thing goes for floors, Mr. Speaker. 
Does the Health minister agree with the John Black lean team 
that toilets in care facilities and floors should only be cleaned if 
visibly soiled? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t have the document that the member is reading 
off of, but what I will do, Mr. Speaker, is I will look for it, 
because the last time they quoted from a document that 
indicated that it was John Black dictating times in terms of 
when activities would need to be done within a certain time 
frame, Mr. Speaker, what we actually learned after the fact, it 
wasn’t dictation being done by John Black and Associates. It 
was a couple of examples of actual real-time work that had been 
done in a facility, Mr. Speaker. So we’ll make sure that we 
check the facts before we rely on the members opposite, as 
we’ve had to do from time to time in this House in this session 
and other sessions. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that in terms of having staff 
members, care aids, doing things like cooking and cleaning in 



7116 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2015 

facilities, this isn’t new to health care in Saskatchewan. This 
has nothing to do with John Black and Associates; in fact it’s 
been done in this province in care facilities even under the 
NDP. Mr. Speaker, this is once again inaccurate information 
that’s presented by the members opposite. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 179 — The MRI Facilities Licensing Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move Bill 
No. 179, The MRI Facilities Licensing Act be now introduced 
and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has moved first 
reading of Bill No. 179, The MRI Facilities Licensing Act. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Next sitting of the House. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 177, The Insurance Act 
with amendments. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill and its amendments now be read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 
Whole on Bill No. 177, The Insurance Act with amendments, 
and that the bill and its amendments be now read the third time. 
Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read the first 

time? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 

Bill No. 177 — The Insurance Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments 
be now read a first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General that the amendments be now read a first 
and second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 
reading of the amendments. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 177 — The Insurance Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General that Bill No. 177, The Insurance Act be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Committee of 
Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — Committee of Finance. I do now leave the 
Chair. 
 
[15:00] 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 



May 6, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7117 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 
Subvote (EX01) 
 
The Chair: — I’ll call the Committee of Finance to order. 
Order. It now being 3 o’clock, the Committee of Finance has 
been called to order. The business before the committee is the 
estimates of Executive Council, which is found on page 55, 
vote 10. 
 
Before we get into the business of examining these estimates, I 
would just simply like to review for members and for voters, 
citizens that are watching. Committee of Finance operates 
differently than a standing committee. In Committee of Finance 
and Committee of the Whole, it’s only the elected members that 
can speak and participate. Officials cannot provide answers. 
Elected members can ask officials for information, but only it’s 
the elected members . . . Another difference that members will 
notice is that in this setting, when members are speaking, they 
stand rather than sit. 
 
This is a system, I would just simply like to put out there for 
information, this is a system that was used up until our changes 
of standing committees took place I believe sometime after 
2003 when we went to the standing committees. When this 
committee is sitting, it’s the only committee that sits, unlike our 
practices with our standing committees where we can have two 
committees meeting at the same time. 
 
So with those introductory remarks, I will just simply outline 
the process that will get us started. I will first call on the 
Premier to introduce his officials, and then I will call the 
subvote, and then I will ask the Premier to make his opening 
comments. So with that, Premier, would you introduce your 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — I will. Thank you, Mr. Chair of 
Committees, for the explanation of the process here. It’s an 
important part of the spring session when we have a 
considerable period of time, three hours or so, to focus on the 
broader issues of the day. And so I know I’ll get to introductory 
remarks in a moment, and I’ll get right to introductions. 
 
On my left is the deputy minister for Executive Council, the 
senior public servant in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Doug Moen. To his left is Kent Campbell who’s the deputy 
minister of Intergovernmental Affairs. James Saunders is just 
behind Kent. He’s the associate deputy minister, cabinet 
planning. We have Bonita Cairns, executive director of 
corporate services. Immediately to James’s right and beside 
Bonita we have Graham Stewart from House business, and Reg 
Downs from Executive Council. We look forward to what 
follows next. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you, Premier. The business before this 
committee is Executive Council, vote 10, subvote (EX01), 
central management and services. Premier, you may proceed to 
your opening comments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Chair of 
Committees, and members of the committee, the Committee of 

the Whole. This is an important part of the life of the session, as 
I was beginning to allude to when I should have been 
introducing officials, for a number of reasons. I mean early on 
in the term of the government, you know, I think it’s more of an 
accountability session, and should be, and it will be, I’m sure, 
tonight. I’m sure the Leader of the Opposition will hold the 
government accountable, hold me personally accountable as . . . 
in my role obviously. 
 
But I think as we get closer to an election it also has the 
opportunity, should the Leader of the Opposition choose to, to 
be a bit of a showcase for what’s coming up in the next election 
— basically a platform for both sides to maybe describe their 
vision of the province, things that they would like to see happen 
in Saskatchewan so that our economy can continue to grow, so 
that we might be able to enjoy a high quality of life. And I’m 
looking forward to that, Mr. Chair of Committees. 
 
This will be the last estimates before the next election. And 
obviously there’ll be debates in the intervening months and 
weeks, and there’ll be a campaign, of course. And there’ll be a 
debate in the campaign, but this would be a great place to start 
to have that particular debate of the competing visions and 
plans that we each have. 
 
I think we both want the same thing for Saskatchewan. We 
want it to be successful. We want it to be able to provide the 
best quality of life possible for all of our residents. We want 
people to share in what has been a remarkable period of 
prosperity. I think we have different ideas though, at least I’m 
guessing we have different ideas as to how to achieve those 
goals. And I say I’m guessing because I really don’t know what 
the ideas are from the member opposite, from the Leader of the 
Opposition. So I’m hopeful that he takes this opportunity to 
begin. 
 
I know he’s not going to release a platform now — nobody 
expects that — but at least to begin to provide some idea of his 
own plans, even as he holds the government accountable in 
estimates, in Premier’s estimates. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, we thank you in advance for presiding over this 
and for your patience with all members of the committee. I 
thank the Leader of the Opposition in advance for his questions. 
And sometimes it’s the practice for the Leader of the 
Opposition to allow others to ask questions. Should he choose 
to do that, well I look forward to that exchange as well. And 
thank you for this opportunity to provide an introduction, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you for your 
kickoff to this period of estimates that we have. And thank you 
for the Premier for his opening remarks, and I welcome the 
officials who aren’t the normal occupants of these seats in the 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. But I do look forward to the next few 
hours that we have together as an opportunity, Mr. Chair, to 
discuss issues of accountability as the Premier alluded to in his 
remarks. And we look forward to having information in those 
areas, most certainly, and talking about areas that matter to 
Saskatchewan families and where we’ve seen misplaced 
priorities by this government in a very clear way. 



7118 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2015 

I want to start, Mr. Speaker, around the issue of the privacy 
breach, and this is something we talked about in the question 
period just leading up to this period in time of estimates that we 
have together. Because the story that we’ve been getting and the 
facts that we’ve been getting from the Premier and from 
ministers and their officials who have been commenting, it’s 
not a story that’s been adding up and making sense. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, in a media scrum on April 23rd, three 
days after the Premier ordered the leak of confidential 
information, the Premier was told that there was very specific 
information that was shared. When he was confronted with this, 
Mr. Chair, through a scrum, we know that he got angry about 
that. He denied that there was a problem with the leak and he 
actually said that he was comfortable, comfortable with the 
information that his office put out. 
 
So my question to the Premier is, did the Premier not bother to 
follow up after that scrum on April 23rd when he was told that 
very specific details were leaked, or was he given the wrong 
information by his chief of communications and operations? 
Which one is it? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chair of Committees. Well the 
question’s been answered and it was answered when I made my 
statement. We’re talking about two different emails: one that 
was sent generally to the press gallery that had the general 
information that I asked be distributed, and one that had specific 
information. That was the one sent only to one reporter that I 
referenced. I’m talking specifically about the email which I 
became aware of on Thursday. I said that because that’s the 
case. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — So we know, Mr. Chair, last Monday in a 
scrum, a reporter told this to the Premier: “Four out of six of the 
allegations we were provided details on, and then we were 
given two examples, and they were specific examples.” That’s 
what the Premier was told on Monday. Then on Tuesday, the 
Leader-Post reported that that second email, which contained 
specific allegations about the private citizen . . . A day later, Mr. 
Speaker, the Deputy Leader of the Opposition asked questions 
here in the Assembly about that second email. As to what was 
said: 
 

We’ve now learned through media reports that the 
Premier’s chief of communications and operations actually 
sent several emails to reporters when she leaked 
confidential information about a care aid. And contrary to 
everything the Premier has said, those emails contain very 
specific information. In fact, the Premier leaked more 
specific information to reporters than the care aid had even 
received himself from the health region. 

 
So it was very clearly stated in the scrum on Monday, in the 
media on Tuesday, in question period on Tuesday, about very 
specific, detailed information, about additional emails that 
existed and that were sent. So my question to the Premier is 
this. Did he not bother to follow up after that scrum on 
Monday? The media reports, did he not follow up on those 

media reports? And did he not follow up on the statements that 
were made here in the House? So did he just say that this is an 
issue and he asked no questions — there was nothing? I can’t 
imagine that because it was a fairly significant matter that we 
discussed. Or was he given the wrong information by his chief 
of operations and communications? 
 
It has to be one of those, Mr. Speaker. After it was raised on 
Monday through a scrum, after we discussed it in the Assembly, 
after it was reported in the news, either the Premier didn’t 
bother to follow up on any of that information, which is pretty 
hard to believe, or he was provided the wrong information by 
his chief of operations and communications. Which one is it? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chair, and we thank the 
Leader of the Opposition for his question. The answer’s the 
same. I was aware of the first email that was sent out, which 
was of a general nature, to all of the media. Notwithstanding 
scrums that happened after that, that’s the email I was aware of. 
I was not aware of the email that had specific information that 
went to one reporter. I simply was not aware of it until 
Thursday. I took the opportunity to communicate the same to 
this Legislative Assembly when asked by the Deputy Leader of 
the Opposition. Mr. Chairman, the member may not like the 
answer, but it’s the truth. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Well we know, Mr. Speaker, that there was 
specific information in that email, and the Premier was told this. 
We know in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that there was a 
discussion about subsequent emails. So is it the Premier’s 
position that following question period on Tuesday when he 
was notified about other emails and very specific information, 
did he have any discussion about that email with his chief of 
communications and operations? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, on Thursday, that’s when I 
had a discussion with this person in the Premier’s office, in our 
office, about the particular email — Thursday. That’s what I’ve 
stated several times before, and I said those things because it’s 
the truth. And we’re going to let the Privacy Commissioner do 
his work. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Okay. Mr. Chair, the Premier’s story does not 
add up on this in any way with the chronology of events, but 
let’s go with what he’s saying and say that he learned on 
Thursday, Mr. Speaker. What is it that he learned on Thursday 
from his chief of operations and communications? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — [Inaudible] . . . that question on the record. 
The member can check Hansard. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 



May 6, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7119 

Mr. Broten: — Was he told about the very specific and 
detailed information that was provided by his chief of 
operations and communications to the media? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, I’ve already answered that 
question. The answer is, yes, I know what’s in that . . . I became 
aware Thursday what was in that email in terms of specifics. 
The answer is yes. It’s already been answered. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Did he learn about what happened on Thursday 
by reading Tuesday’s Hansard? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — [Inaudible] . . . Thursday because we had a 
discussion on Thursday. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Let’s look at some of the timeline here, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Premier’s been claiming about how and what 
he knew, and when. Could the Premier please explain how 
exactly it is that he came to know about this care aid’s 
suspension? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, it’s interesting. We’ve had 
this debate, these questions asked in the House, throughout the 
last couple of weeks. There’s been a complaint. There’s been a 
review requested by the Privacy Commissioner. I’ve been 
informed that the review is under way. We’re going to let that 
process work itself out. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Sadly, Mr. Speaker, we haven’t had answers 
from the Premier on this, Mr. Chair, that add up or make sense. 
And we see very clearly in the timeline of events the fact that 
on Monday, Mr. Chair, he was notified about detailed 
information in a scrum. On Tuesday, Mr. Chair, it was reported 
publicly in the media about subsequent emails. On Tuesday as 
well, in question period, details of those subsequent emails and 
the nature of them and some questions about them were 
presented here in the Assembly. But somehow this Premier 
would have us believe that he actually didn’t know about those 
emails and the content of them until Thursday. It just doesn’t 
make sense. 
 
In order for the Premier’s position here to make sense, we 
would have to believe that he wasn’t listening in the scrum 
where it was talked about, that he wasn’t listening or 
responding to questions here in the Assembly when it was 
brought out, that he did not read the paper on this issue, Mr. 
Speaker. We’d also have to believe that he doesn’t speak 
regularly with his chief of communications and operations, 
which also is not believable, Mr. Chair. So my question to the 
Premier: does he absolutely maintain the position that it was not 
until Thursday of last week when he learned about the 

subsequent emails? 
 
[15:15] 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — The answer is yes. We’re going to allow the 
Privacy Commissioner to do his work. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — So, Mr. Chair, how is it that the Premier in the 
first place became aware of the care aid suspension? We know 
that he asked for a heads-up. We know that there was some type 
of communication from the health region, perhaps from the 
CEO [chief executive officer], to the Premier. Could the 
Premier please explain to this committee how it is he was 
notified of the care aid’s suspension? Saskatchewan people 
deserve to know. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, he just asked that question. 
He just asked it a couple of questions ago. This is a matter of 
review by the Privacy Commissioner. I think he’s more 
qualified than me or the member opposite to vet this particular 
issue, and we’re going to allow him to do that. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The Premier has said 
that he personally made the decision in the direction to leak this 
confidential information to the media. My question to the 
Premier is, what were his exact instructions to the chief of 
operations and communications when he directed this 
confidential leak to take place? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, once again this has been asked 
in the media. It’s a matter of public record. My response is, it’s 
been asked in the House. Now we need to let the Privacy 
Commissioner do his work. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Unbelievable. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well the Leader of the Opposition says it’s 
unbelievable. Do you know why? Because he thinks he’s the 
qualified officer to make all these decisions. He does. He thinks 
when it comes to travel advance, he thinks he’s smarter than the 
NDP Premier of Manitoba, smarter than the Premier of Ontario, 
he’s smarter than the Premier of BC [British Columbia], 
smarter than the Premier of Alberta, smarter than any of the 
officials who come forward, by the way, earnestly to answer 
questions, basically to have the Leader of the Opposition come 
and disparage their comments. 
 
The fact of the matter is, I have faith in the Privacy 
Commissioner. I have more faith in the Privacy Commissioner 
to look at this particular review than I have . . . Especially given 
his track record this sitting of erroneous information before the 
House, I have greater faith in the Privacy Commissioner than I 
do in the Leader of the Opposition. 



7120 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2015 

The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, members opposite, they don’t 
have to like these questions, but Saskatchewan people deserve 
some clarity and deserve some transparency about the Premier’s 
actions on this file. This is not a minor issue. For the Premier to 
intentionally order the leaking of confidential information, 
employment information about an individual, at his direction, to 
his chief of communications and operations, Mr. Speaker, this 
is a question about the fundamentals of our democracy. These 
are the questions about whether or not a government thinks that 
they are above the law, whether the rules don’t apply to them, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question to the Premier: he has said on numerous occasions 
that he personally ordered the leak of confidential information, 
that he gave the instruction to his chief of communications and 
operations. My question to the Premier: how was that 
instruction conveyed to his chief of communications and 
operations? Was it done through a face-to-face conversation? 
Was it done through a phone call? Was it done through email? 
Was it done through a text, or was it done through Skype, as the 
Premier is now joking, Mr. Speaker? Not a laughing matter. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been honest and 
straightforward with the answer to this question, maybe not in 
terms of the detail, the manner of the conveyance, but I 
certainly said to the members of the House and to members of 
the media . . . Because it is a serious situation. They asked 
serious questions and I gave them answers. The answers are on 
the record, Mr. Chair, and we really should allow the Privacy 
Commissioner to do his work. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, it’s disappointing that at a time 
when this is to provide accountability to Saskatchewan people, 
provide an opportunity for the Premier to clear up a very 
confusing story that does not add up in any way, shape, or form, 
that he would simply provide such evasive answers, I think is 
concerning on this front in a big way. 
 
What is the job description of the chief of communications and 
operations? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chairman. I just checked with 
officials. They don’t have the job description with them. 
Obviously we will get that to the member. We should be able to 
get it prior to estimates concluding today. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I look forward to 
that information being provided. You know, Mr. Chair, to have 
members opposite scoff at this issue that we’ve been talking 
about, to have laughter coming, to have the Minister of Crown 
Investments, Mr. Speaker, to be heckling across, really I think 
is a tell that this government does not appreciate in any way the 
severity of what has happened with this privacy breach. The 

consequences of this breach as prescribed in the legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, include a financial penalty as well as jail time. This is 
not a minor thing. The consequences can be severe and 
significant. I know the Attorney General would understand that, 
I would hope, and communicate the importance of that to Mr. 
Wall, to the Premier. Excuse me. 
 
Mr. Chair, in earlier interaction, I think it was in a question 
period not too long ago, the Premier said that his chief of 
communications and operations had been taken off of this file. 
My question to him: what exactly does that mean? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — With respect to media relations or any 
communications, she’s simply not working on this file. That’s 
what it means. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Is the chief of communications and operations 
continuing to advise the Premier on this issue and provide 
briefings and information about the events that are taking place? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — No, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, who is it within the staff who’s 
assumed this role of providing advice to the Premier on this 
issue? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, it’s various people. Whoever in 
Executive Council that has monitored the scrums to report back 
what things the Leader of the Opposition has said about this or 
any other issue, generally that would be the person that provides 
a report back. Other than that, Mr. Chair, there’s a process 
under way with the Privacy Commissioner. So frankly there’s 
not a lot of discussion, and there ought not to be on our side of 
things, other than to get a report on what’s being said by the 
Leader of the Opposition in the media, or perhaps what the 
media are reporting, which is provided by someone other than 
the chief of operations and communications. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Chair, it’s been clear that the story 
that we’ve been getting from the Premier does not make sense. 
It does not add up. The events do not fit with the evidence that 
we see, that have been printed in the papers, that have been 
asked in scrums, that have been talked about here in the 
Assembly. So there are many unanswered questions and a real 
lack of transparency available today by the Premier on this 
issue in a big way. 
 
My question to the Premier: with respect to the investigation 
that is ongoing by the Privacy Commissioner, has the Premier 
or his office turned over any documents or phone records or text 
messages, anything of that nature? Has there been information 
that has been requested and provided to the Privacy 
Commissioner? 



May 6, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7121 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, we’re following the process as 
prescribed, and so therefore legal counsel within the Ministry of 
Justice has been liaising with the Privacy Commissioner and 
will provide any information that’s required. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Now the Premier doesn’t need to say what is in 
that information, but has information been handed over by the 
Premier or his office or his officials to the Privacy 
Commissioner? Yes or no? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. You know, we’re fully 
co-operating throughout this process with the Privacy 
Commissioner through representation in Justice obviously, Mr. 
Chair, making the presentation and answering any questions 
that may come. That’s what we’ll continue to do. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Has information — either written form, phone 
records, text messages — has information of any nature, doesn’t 
need to say what type of information it is, but has any 
information been requested by the Privacy Commissioner and 
has it been handed over? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. We’re going to respond 
to the Privacy Commissioner in a manner as he has requested us 
to respond. And so when and if there is a request for any of that 
information, it’ll be provided. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, big concerns about the lack of 
willingness here to provide information, to provide 
transparency, to explain a story that simply is not adding up. 
My question to the Premier is this: does he have any regrets 
about ordering the leak of this confidential information? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — No, Mr. Chair. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. In previous question 
periods, one question that was presented to the Premier but 
fielded by the Attorney General was whether or not — and this 
should be a no-brainer, it should be a base-level position that 
the government has — whether or not any findings from the 
Privacy Commissioner will absolutely be handed out of 
province for prosecution, Mr. Speaker? Will this government 
clearly, will the Premier clearly commit today that any findings 
from the Privacy Commissioner will be sent out of province for 
proper review? It is not appropriate to have this government 
investigate itself and to then deal with any sort of consequences. 
 

The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Chairman, we’re not going 
to prejudge the findings of the Privacy Commissioner. It’s been 
the case in our province that they’re the ultimate level . . . The 
ultimate level in terms of the findings has not happened in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and we’re just simply not going to 
prejudge what the Privacy Commissioner is going to do. This is 
highly speculative. Let’s let the Privacy Commissioner do his 
work. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Chair, the responses that we’ve had 
from the Premier, the lack of willingness of the Attorney 
General to make that commitment to send it out of province, it 
is concerning because the story doesn’t add up. The facts that 
we know, publicly reported here in the House, out in the 
rotunda, Mr. Speaker, do not back up the claims that the 
Premier is making. And to have the Premier today say, he has 
no regrets about ordering that leak, that is, well it’s telling, but 
it’s worrisome as well. 
 
Talk about another topic now, Mr. Chair, because the answers 
certainly aren’t coming from the Premier on the previous. Does 
the Premier believe that any student in a publicly funded school 
that wants to establish a GSA [gay-straight alliance] should be 
permitted to do so? 
 
[15:30] 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, the answer is yes. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — It is an important issue because it really is 
about life or death for many students. In looking at the . . . Now 
I want to back up one second. Based on the information that the 
education . . . Well based on what the Premier said, Mr. Chair, 
is it his position then that students have a right to establish a 
GSA in any publicly funded school in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Asked and answered and the answer’s the 
same. It’s yes. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. We’ve obtained some 
internal documents from the Ministry of Education, and this is 
some of the internal information that the ministry has provided 
and I’m sure has been made available to the minister and to the 
Premier as well. Here is some of the information that is shared: 
 

Sexual minority and gender-variant youth continue to 
experience discrimination, prejudice, and abuse within 
school systems that have the responsibility to provide for 
their care and education. 

 
Another quote: “Over half of GLBQT students, 47 per cent of 



7122 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2015 

gay males, and 73 per cent of lesbian females have thought 
about suicide.” That’s 47 per cent and 73 per cent. 
“Gay-straight alliances are identified as a critical change agent 
that can help to create safe, caring, and inclusive schools for 
gays, lesbian, bisexual, queer, and trans-identified students and 
their allies.” “Research indicates that schools with GSAs 
improve student achievement and educational experience.” “In 
many cases, the resistance to establishing a gay-straight alliance 
in a school stems from a series of common misconceptions.” 
“Gay-straight alliances are about safety and security for all 
Saskatchewan students.” 
 
My question to the Premier: does the Premier dispute any of 
these quotes from his government’s own documents? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — No, Mr. Chair. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The government’s 
internal briefing materials say that the Education ministry has 
“expectation that school divisions will respond positively to 
students’ requests to establish GSAs in schools.” My question 
to the Premier: does he share that expectation? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, the Education minister advises 
me that first of all, that is the policy of the government and of 
the ministry. We’ve actually gone looking, through the 
ministry, for any examples where a student may have been 
refused. There are none that we’re aware of, certainly, but it is a 
policy of the ministry and we’d expect it be followed by schools 
that benefit from public funding. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, we’ve heard of some evidence right 
from the ministry, from the officials talking about the 
importance and the value of GSAs, talking about the high rates 
of suicide and suicide attempts of lesbian or gay or GLTBQ 
[gay, lesbian, transgender, bisexual, queer] students. We know 
it’s important. We know that that’s, the Premier has confirmed 
that any publicly funded school should be, students should have 
the right to establish a GSA, that it’s an expectation. This is 
something that the Premier has agreed, agreed to, as I 
understand it at least in his responses. He can clarify if that is 
not the case. My question to the Premier: why won’t the 
Premier just agree to enshrine in legislation the right of 
Saskatchewan students to establish GSAs? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, again we’re simply not aware of 
any place, any occasion, any school where this has been denied. 
And this should be an affirmation for all the publicly funded 
schools in the province. I think we should affirm them. It’s the 
policy of the government, pretty clear, and the government 
actually writes the cheques. The government, through the 
Ministry of Education, the Ministry of Finance, supports these 
publicly funded schools, and so we have certain policies and 

expectations that they’re to live by. 
 
You can do it by policy. You can do it by legislation. The fact 
of the matter is, it’s the rule in Saskatchewan and we’ll make 
sure the rule is enforced. And again I want to repeat, this is . . . 
We’re not aware of any particular problems with this approach. 
If the opposition is, we would like to know about it and we’ll 
look into it further. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, does the Premier think that there 
should be any limits or conditions placed on the ability of 
students to establish a GSA in their school and, if he does 
believe there should be any limits on that, what are they? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, we want kids to be in class, 
obviously. So just in a general sense, this is the school boards’ 
decision and purview, but Education’s involved. We want kids 
to be getting their hours of instruction in the classroom. Other 
than that, what restrictions could there be? If they want to have, 
if a GSA is requested, it should be granted and it should be 
formed. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — So, Mr. Chair, if the evidence as prepared by 
the ministry clearly states that GSAs are of a huge benefit, if it’s 
the position that the Premier has stated that there should be no 
limits on students’ ability to organize a GSA, if that is the 
expectation of the ministry as well and of the Premier, as he 
stated, why not enshrine that right in legislation for 
Saskatchewan students so there’s no ambiguity, there are no 
question marks, and there are no barriers for students who want 
to establish a GSA under any circumstances? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, there is no ambiguity today, 
none whatsoever. If you wish to receive dollars from the 
Government of Saskatchewan, this is the policy that you will 
follow as a school in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — In the past when the Premier and I have 
discussed this issue or it’s been brought to his attention and he’s 
commented, he’s raised the concern about how the 
establishment of GSAs could infringe on religious freedoms. I 
think that was some of the initial responses that he provided. 
Does he think that the requirement to establish GSAs would 
infringe on religious freedoms? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Early on in the debate, Mr. Chair, we were 
canvassing the various issues around it, and obviously the 
central issue is the rights of those who wish to form a GSA and 
benefit from those GSAs. There is the question, as I’ve raised in 
the House, with respect to schools that are religious schools, 
Muslim or Christian, even the Catholic system. I can share with 



May 6, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7123 

members, and I think this is good news, the ministry and the 
minister have worked with the bishops. We have worked with 
the religious schools, so to speak, in the province, and they just 
simply have no problem with the policy. 
 
This is a very good thing. It didn’t need legislation to force it. 
The policy is being adhered to. It’s being adhered to on a 
voluntary basis. And we thank those partners for ensuring that 
GSAs can be formed without any problem at all per the policy 
of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. So we have the 
government claiming that every student should have the ability 
to organize a GSA if they want. We have the Premier clearly 
stating that this is the expectation. We have the Premier stating 
that this does not infringe upon religious freedoms. He said that 
that was perhaps an initial concern that was flagged but he says 
that’s not a concern now. So I can’t understand, Mr. Speaker, 
why there would be a hesitancy by this government, if there’s 
no problems with the requirement, if it’s a priority, why this 
would not be enshrined in legislation. 
 
Mr. Chair, as you would know, we’ve introduced legislation 
touching on a number of issues around human rights for 
students, including the right of students to be able to establish 
GSAs in their school. And as recently, Mr. Chair, as April 29th, 
2015, there was a government email that was provided when 
they were being asked about the legislation that the NDP 
introduced. And the question, Mr. Chair, that was posed was 
this. It says, “How does government feel about the Act the NDP 
has introduced?” And it says, Mr. Chair, “This bill appears to 
infringe upon the local autonomy of boards while increasing the 
workload of front-line educators.” So that’s the position that 
was given by a ministry person on this topic. 
 
So my question to the Premier is, if the expectation is there, if 
we know that the evidence backs it up, how is it that the bill that 
we have introduced around the establishment of GSAs infringes 
upon the local autonomy of boards? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I thank the Leader of 
the Opposition for his question. I have the assurance of the 
Minister of Education that that brief from the ministry has 
nothing to do with GSAs. Their bill that they introduced would 
have potentially required the principals have a responsibility for 
bullying, you know, all day long, on and off the school grounds. 
There was real problems with respect to the bill and the 
pressure it would place on front-line educators. And so the 
memo is presented as the hon. member has quite rightly read. It 
has nothing to do with GSAs. 
 
Mr. Chairman, legislation, I think, I think we should reserve the 
option for legislation — back to his original question — for 
where there are problems. Here in this particular example, we 
should be focused on affirmations of the public system, of the 
Catholic health care system, of religious schools in the province 
who are abiding by the policy of the government with respect to 
GSAs. Why would you want to slap them with legislation? I 
don’t understand that. 

If there is a problem, then we need to act. But the fact of the 
matter is, there is a policy. Funding flows through in part 
because of the policies of the ministry, so we’re covered off 
there. And finally it’s a chance to affirm all of those schools, 
whether they’re public or Catholic or religious schools in the 
province, affirm them for the decision they’ve made with 
respect to allowing GSAs. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, there are problems. Students don’t 
always feel secure in who they are. Students don’t always feel 
they have the ability to establish a GSA, Mr. Chair. These 
individuals may not be in a position where they can speak up, 
where they can always voice their concerns. But the evidence 
shows that, when you hear from students . . . Think of those 
suicide rates, of attempted suicide, presented. This is real. These 
are about kids. This is about students in the province. 
 
And I don’t understand, Mr. Chair, how the Premier could 
equate . . . I think he said, slap them with legislation. This is 
about human rights. This is about doing the right thing. This is 
about the Legislative Assembly of the province showing 
leadership, taking a clear stand, telling any kid who feels 
bullied, any kid who doesn’t have support at home because they 
are gay or lesbian or transgendered or whatever the case may 
be, this is about saying, I believe it should happen through 
legislation that we, as the province of Saskatchewan, we respect 
your rights to be supported, to find friends, to find allies, to find 
help, to find the support that’s required if they’re facing suicide, 
the thoughts of suicide. 
 
We have an opportunity in this legislature to do that. We have 
an opportunity in this legislature to do the right thing, to support 
those students, to support those kids, to support those teachers 
who want to be strong allies in their school community. And to 
say it’s slapping legislation, that’s a horrible characterization of 
what this could be. It shows a real hesitancy and a reluctance to 
take the clear stand. This is right. This is what the stand should 
be. This is right. This is appropriate. We’re taking leadership as 
a province saying, you have the right to establish a GSA and we 
think that you should be supported. 
 
So is the Premier definitively saying that he is shutting the door 
on legislation that would guarantee the right of students to have 
GSAs in their publicly funded schools? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well you know, Mr. Chair, we completely 
agree on the benefits of GSAs. We completely agree on this 
particular debate. 
 
We don’t agree that we need legislation. We have a policy of 
the government. Funding is tied to the policies of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. We know that it is being adhered 
to by all schools in the province. We’re not aware of a single 
example where it isn’t. So we don’t think . . . No, we don’t 
think there’s a need for legislation. 
 
And you know what else, Mr. Chair? Dan Shier, who’s with 
Queen City Pride, on Global News, March 12th, 2015 said, he 
was asked if Saskatchewan needs legislation for GSAs, and 



7124 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2015 

here’s his quote. I’m taking his counsel on this; I think we all 
should. He should, too, Mr. Chair: “. . . I don’t see it [currently] 
as being a huge necessity [just] because students are getting the 
services and the spaces that they require.” 
 
[15:45] 
 
So I think we’re going to agree with the folks at Queen City 
Pride. And we have this policy of the government. It’s working 
well. We don’t need legislation. You don’t have to take it from 
me, you can take it from the gentleman whose quote I just read, 
Mr. Chair. Should there ever be a problem in the future, then 
legislation’s a option. Right now, thankfully, this is a happy 
circumstance. We don’t need it. We don’t need legislation. 
Queen City Pride doesn’t think we need legislation. Does he 
agree with Queen City Pride? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, a happy circumstance? Mr. Chair, 
this is about ensuring that students are protected, that students 
have the right, that that message is clearly sent, that this 
legislature takes a stand and ensures that that is provided 
through legislation. 
 
You know, some of the stats that I read that were prepared by 
the government ministry talk about the high suicide rates, Mr. 
Chair. Do you think a student who is at the end of their rope, 
discouraged, feeling isolated, feeling alone, maybe not getting 
the family support that he or she might need — those 
individuals aren’t necessarily going to be coming to the rotunda 
of the legislature voicing concerns. That’s why we need to set 
the tone. We need to set the direction. We need to take a clear 
stand as a province through legislation guaranteeing that right. 
Why not take that step? Why not do it? 
 
The Premier suggests that the boards are supportive. But why 
not take that step and enshrine it in legislation? And if you look 
at the evidence, if you look at all of the people in the 
community, Mr. Chair, who want this, I think it is the right 
thing to do. And I would hope, Mr. Chair, that the Premier 
would in fact change his view on this because it is the right 
thing to do. 
 
Has there been a discussion within the ministry, between the 
Premier and the Education minister about the prospect of 
introducing legislation that would enshrine GSAs for students 
here in the province? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, this province has taken a stand. 
This legislature, this government has taken a stand. It’s the 
policy of the government, and what could be more clear than 
that? Legislation doesn’t mean anything without the services, 
without the intent. That is what is existing in the province of 
Saskatchewan today without a challenge. So we can debate 
about whether policy is good enough or legislation is good 
enough. Fair enough, I guess. I note again that the gentleman 
from Queen City Pride didn’t feel the necessity for legislation. 
We happen to agree. 
 
I can tell you, Mr. Chair, that there were no discussions 

between me and the Minister of Education about potential 
legislation because we have a policy, because it’s not needed. 
And our government’s not going to react to everything with 
legislation if there’s not a particular problem, if there’s not 
correction that might be needed. 
 
In this case, the policy is working, and we hope that continues. 
If it doesn’t, I guess every option will be on the table. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Chair, I would hope for a stronger 
and clearer leadership than what we have seen because this 
shouldn’t be a controversial item. This is a no-brainer, Mr. 
Chair. We see the government’s very own documents talking 
about the need. We have certain members opposite, I think, that 
would support this, and I think it’s important. I know it’s 
important, Mr. Chair. If it is the policy of the government, why 
not enshrine it in legislation? Why not take that step so that 
every child has the security and assurance that they need? 
 
I want to talk, Mr. Chair, about the youth companion program. 
This is something that we’ve discussed in question period and 
has received attention in the paper and in the news. My question 
to the Premier: why did the Premier scrap the Radius youth 
companion program? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, I’m going to answer specifically 
on the program that the hon. member just asked about. But first 
let me just say this. There are many policies of the Government 
of Saskatchewan, including when members opposite formed the 
government, that didn’t have attendant legislation. We would 
never leave this place if there needed to be legislation for every 
firm policy of the government. It sort of betrays a lack of 
understanding. I mean all . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The 
member from Nutana is chirping from the back about protecting 
kids. 
 
This is the policy of the government tied to funding, supported 
— supported — by the government, Mr. Chair, and we don’t 
have a problem in the province. So I believe this: I believe if a 
policy is working, we ought to let it work. If there’s something 
more that’s needed, we’ll be able to provide that. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’ll answer the question with respect to the 
Social Services funding program shortly. 
 
Well, Mr. Chair, as members of the House will know, we 
brought down a difficult but balanced budget and made some 
hard choices in the budget. But, Mr. Chairman, with respect to 
this particular part of the program, it was felt that it fell outside 
the core responsibilities of Social Services in terms of child 
protection. And further, it was decided to . . . we decided to 
make the cut based on our review that indicated that supports 
for children provided by the funding could be provided 
elsewhere. I think the minister has indicated that if folks want to 
come forward with concerns that she will work with them, the 
ministry will work with them to try to identify through CBOs 
[community-based organization] those same supports. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 



May 6, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7125 

Mr. Broten: — Well it’s strange, Mr. Chair, that this 
government would take a program that is working well, that is 
serving a big need, that is really helping young individuals and 
helping families and say that they’ve cut it, but they’re open to 
providing supports through other things, Mr. Chair, when we 
know that it’s working, that it’s important, that’s helping many 
young people and helping many families. 
 
You know this is a cut that will significantly affect young 
people with severe cognitive disabilities, and it will save just 
$64,000 for the government. My question to the Premier: is he 
open to reversing this decision or is it closed? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, while I’m sure the families 
that used the services would rather that they continue, there’s 40 
families and we’ve had one complaint. So the Leader of the 
Opposition, as sometimes he’s wont to do, is painting a much 
broader picture than might actually exist. Still it’s a difficult 
decision because 40 families are 40 families. We have had the 
one complaint. I’ve indicated the reasons for the complaint. 
 
And you know, budgeting is a process where sometimes a 3 or 
$4 million savings you can find is important. And towards the 
end of budget finalization, the hundreds, the many hundreds of 
thousands of dollars of individual savings you can find — 60, 
70, 80 — repeated over time gets you into balance. We do a 
difficult assessment. 
 
The Minister of Social Services did the difficult assessment 
asking the question, is this part of the core child protection 
mandate where we really want to focus, where we have been 
focused as government? Witness the 90-plus new front-line 
child care workers we’ve invested in, with much more needed, 
granted. That’s the focus of the government. This particular 
program was deemed to fall outside of that particular focus, and 
so we’ve made the decision. There were 40 families, again for 
the record, and we’ve had one complaint. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, many families are furious. We 
have heard from them. Not everyone is willing to speak 
publicly, Mr. Chair, but this is important. It’s a nonsensical and 
it’s a mean-spirited cut. 
 
Samantha Neill is the mother of a young man with severe 
cognitive disabilities. This is what she says, “I can tell you that 
there are virtually no other resources for families in terms of 
locating potential caregivers for our children.” She goes on to 
say, “This is completely unacceptable.” And we know that 
Samantha has fact-checked the things that the minister has said 
on many occasions, Mr. Chair, as incorrect information has 
been provided by her. 
 
My question to the Premier: will he listen to Samantha, and will 
he reverse this very harsh decision? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Chair. I thank the 
Leader of the Opposition for the question. I’m looking at a 

letter sent out April 16, 2015 from Radius to their clients that 
highlight the different agencies, the different CBOs that can 
provide service, that can work with the 40 or so, if indeed all 40 
wish to continue with some form of service. And so it is as the 
minister said; we want to work with those who’ve used the 
program in the past. There were other decision in the budget we 
made in terms of discontinuing funding or decreasing funding. 
This is one of them. 
 
I also want to point out, with respect to the minister’s work on 
this file, when it was raised in the Legislative Assembly, her 
chief . . . We have emails. We have the email. Her chief of staff 
contacted the individual that the members raised and reached 
out, and certainly asked officials to reach out, answer the 
questions, and provide some sort of service as we wish to do 
when matters come before the Assembly. Ministers’ offices 
take that seriously and want to ensure that we are reaching out 
to those who’ve raised concerns. 
 
You know, the answer’s not always going to be yes. The answer 
is not always going to please everybody. That’s the nature of 
government. You could take actually any individual decision 
that the government makes over time, including the New 
Democrats when they were in office. Maybe they make a 
$100,000 decision here or a $50,000 decision here. The 
cumulative impact either puts you in deficit or surplus or 
balance. 
 
[16:00] 
 
And so all those decisions are important and the amount of 
money is not unimportant at all, Mr. Chairman, but when we 
put together this most recent budget, we were achieving balance 
and looking for efficiencies. And in this case, as I’ve already 
said, we looked at, what is it that we want the core services of 
Social Services to be in terms of child protection in the province 
of Saskatchewan? And we just felt that this part of the program, 
which was more about pre-screening and some other supports 
for parents, fell just a little bit outside of that, and we made a 
difficult decision to decrease the funding. 
 
The Chair: — Leader. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, the information that was just 
provided by the minister, Samantha clearly says that the chief of 
staff did not call her. She wrote about that in an article that was 
published in the paper. So we have again inconsistencies from 
this minister with what is the reality, based on what the 
individual who has brought this forward is clearly stating. 
 
And of course, I mean the Premier read a letter from Radius to 
the families that were benefiting from this important program. 
Of course Radius is going to try to help and find some sort of 
options for these families. But this does not change the fact that 
this decision to cut this $64,000 program left a lot of families in 
the lurch and a lot of families concerned, a lot of families facing 
barriers to ensuring that their children with cognitive disabilities 
can in fact receive the safe and proper care that they need. 
 
You know, here’s another quote from Samantha Neill: 
 

From the outset I honestly believed the minister would 
change course once she learned the impact of this cut on 



7126 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2015 

some of the province’s most vulnerable citizens. As it 
became clear that neither she nor her officials really 
understood the program they were cutting, I held on to 
hope they would ultimately find a source of funds for the 
program. 

 
She goes on to say that families that rely on this program “. . . 
have been treated like a political problem and dismissed with an 
ever-changing volley of inaccurate answers.” And, Mr. Chair, 
we see that same dismissive approach from the Premier today 
about the importance of this program and the value that it 
provided to Saskatchewan families. 
 
So my question to the Premier: how can the Premier plow ahead 
with this cut to an important program that will hurt youth with 
cognitive disabilities and their families? How can he plow 
ahead with that plan? 
 
The Chair: — Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and thank 
the member for his question. I’m looking at an email from the 
minister’s chief of staff almost immediately after question 
period that day, Tuesday the 21st. It is to officials, but it’s about 
the case that Samantha raised in the House through the Leader 
of the Opposition, and here’s what it says: 
 

Can we get an official to call Samantha Neill at 30 . . . [and 
the phone number]. She has some concerns with the 
funding decision with respect to Radius Community Centre 
in Saskatoon and wants to share them. Some alternative 
services people she could access would be also 
appreciated. 

 
Then he says in his email, “She is free for the rest of this 
afternoon and tomorrow afternoon.” He is able to say that, he 
says, because he contacted her and found out her schedule. He 
said, “She is free for the rest of the afternoon and tomorrow 
afternoon. She’s not free tomorrow morning because she’s in 
court.” How would the chief of staff have known that if he 
didn’t phone her and ask her? “I said we’d either do it today or 
this afternoon.” Then it goes on to say, “Can you have someone 
do this and then loop back to our office once complete? This is 
fairly urgent.” 
 
So that’s the email from the chief of staff to the Minister of 
Social Services, to officials in Social Services. It referenced the 
fact that the chief of staff knows her schedule and her 
availability, that she’s available that date. You know, it’s 
because he talked to her, I would say to the member 
respectfully. He also notes in here that she won’t be free 
tomorrow morning because she’s in court. Now how would he 
know that if he hadn’t talked to Samantha? I think he did. I 
believe that he did. 
 
Then I have the details of the information. She had a long 
conversation with officials and, granted, she didn’t agree in the 
end. You know, other services were offered through community 
living. You know, I’ve seen the nature of the conversation. She 
decided she wasn’t interested in any other services, and I 
respect that. 
 
Again would we rather a situation where we don’t have to make 

any of these changes, any of these reductions in spending? Well 
sure we would. The fact is we do have to make the decisions. 
We looked at this with respect to the core services in child 
protection. This falls outside. Forty families are affected. We’ve 
had one complaint, and we’ll proceed with the decision. 
 
The Chair: — Leader. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m going to be taking 
the word of Samantha for the chronology of the events and with 
whom she has spoken, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Chair, last week the Rural Health minister tabled a petition 
calling for legislative restrictions on abortion. What is the 
Premier’s position? 
 
The Chair: — Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. It’s the policy of our 
caucus, when an MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 
receives petitions from constituents in the province and we’re 
asked to lay it on the Table, that is done. That’s what the 
member did in this case. There’s no change currently planned 
for policy in this regard. 
 
The Chair: — Leader. 
 
Mr. Broten: — I don’t believe that they were his constituents, 
but anyway, that matter aside, Mr. Chair, so is the Premier 
clear? Does he have any plan? Can he be clear? Does he have 
any plans to implement restrictions on abortion services? 
 
The Chair: — Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — No. And furthermore, Mr. Chair, does the 
hon. member, do his members present petitions only from their 
constituents or perhaps from people around the province? 
 
The Chair: — Leader. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m simply curious 
about the petition. It would indicate a policy change for the 
government, so I simply want . . . I think it’s of note when a 
minister of the Crown presents such a petition, so I want to 
know whether or not there will be any change, Mr. Chair, with 
respect to the government’s position on those services. I think 
it’s something that those who signed the petition can know, and 
those who haven’t signed can also know, Mr. Chair. So I thank 
the Premier for his response. 
 
Looking at another step that this government took that has hurt 
Saskatchewan families and imposes a concern to many people 
in the province, the Saskatchewan employment supplement is 
supposed to give a little extra money to low-income, working 
parents with children, but this government chose to cut that 
supplement for parents whose children are over the age of 12. 
 
My question to the Premier: is he willing, is he ready to be 
willing to admit that that was a mistake? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Well 



May 6, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7127 

we’ve been discussing difficult decisions that were made as a 
result of a very tight budget. Members of the House will know 
we were short about $700 million in oil revenue and we wanted 
to achieve a balance without increasing taxes, Mr. Chairman. 
It’s been the experience in our province in previous times when 
governments have faced some fiscal challenges that their first 
reaction has been to increase taxes. I think the member would 
agree that was the practice of his party in government. We 
chose a different path, but that required us to make some 
decisions around budget. 
 
And so here again with respect to the employment supplement 
that the member has asked about, we want to make sure that 
there’s support through the supplement which is principally 
used — not only, but principally used — to help obviously with 
the costs of care, child care, that it be focused on . . . If we had 
to make a change, that we’d still provide it up to the age of 13, 
13 and under, or under the age of 13, and made a change with 
respect to 13 to 18. That’s the part that was changed in the 
budget, Mr. Chair. 
 
So there is still the support there for young kids, for child care. 
And as they get older, where their child care needs are lessened 
obviously . . . That was our experience in our own home as our 
kids got into their teenage years, got a little older. There wasn’t 
child care needs, which is a positive thing. 
 
And so, Mr. Chairman, it’s worth though exploring the huge 
amount of supports that we’ve provided for low- and 
middle-income — especially low-income — families in the 
province of Saskatchewan over the last eight years or so. We 
introduced the children’s drug program. No parent pays more 
than $20 for their children under 14. Mr. Chair, we eliminated 
the PST [provincial sales tax] for kids’ clothes to the age of 17. 
We’ve doubled the low-income tax credit, Mr. Chairman, which 
is particularly helpful to low-income families. The child care 
subsidy is available to low-income families to help also with the 
cost of child care. 114,000 low-income people don’t pay any 
provincial tax at all now, income tax, because of the changes 
that we made. 
 
Additionally, minimum wage we’ve increased 28 per cent since 
2007, and it’s now indexed. Here again, that’s something that 
the social democrats would talk a lot about, about boy, wouldn’t 
it be good to index the minimum wage, but they never really got 
around to it. Never really got around to actually making a lot of 
these changes. Didn’t get around . . . 
 
We were just talking about the disabled community. Never got 
around to really providing the supports that those in the 
intellectual disability community need. You know, Mr. 
Chairman, I remember I was surprised when the current 
Minister of Social Services — and this work was completed by 
the subsequent minister, member for Kelvington-Wadena — 
surprised when she reported to cabinet that under the NDP, who 
talk a lot about the vulnerable, who talk about . . . They’re for 
the little guy, you know. We hear all the rhetoric. I’ve heard a 
lot of speeches. I’ve been here since 1999. Surprised then to 
hear when the minister reported to the House, and I know the 
member for Saskatoon Centre’s interested in this because he 
had a chance to change things when he was on the government 
side in cabinet, 440 people with intellectual disabilities 
languishing on a wait-list for the dignity of a home. 

Now they would say, well we had some fiscal issues. No, they 
didn’t. Not the last three or four years. They were sitting on 
$700 million, a mountain of money. They had a mountain of 
money in their bank account. And yet when families with 
intellectually disabled kids were saying, we can’t find them the 
dignity of a home; there’s no respite programming in this 
province . . . We have this great social democratic government 
that has turned a blind eye to this issue. So we were surprised to 
hear about it. 
 
Do you know what we did, Mr. Chair? Sometimes this member, 
well he hasn’t been asking it much lately, but they used to ask 
in some commercials and maybe one or two question periods, 
where did the money go? Well about, I think, about $40 million 
of the money that we’ve received because of a strong economy 
went to eliminating that wait-list. And we still have work to do 
because people get added on to the list but, Mr. Chairman, gone 
are those days when over 400 families with a family member 
with an intellectual disability was waiting for a place to live in 
Saskatchewan. It’s sort of what we see from members opposite. 
 
Now it’s on the low-income supplement. Now they’re going to 
raise concerns about it and be the champion for this issue in 
opposition. Were they ever to get on this side of the House, 
heaven forbid, we’d find again complete inaction. More 
speeches, more talk about 1960 this and Tommy Douglas that, 
but a lack of action for people that need it. 
 
Mr. Chairman, with respect to the low-income supplement, this 
support is there for kids 13 and under. It should be there. We 
made a change with respect to older kids. Most of it’s for child 
care, but there are many other supports in government and 
we’re proud of the record of the government in this regard. 
 
The Chair: — Leader. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. You know, when you 
look at the costs of raising a child, yes, there are costs when 
children are under the age of 12 and child care is required. But 
it’s expensive to raise teenagers as well, Mr. Chair. There’s a 
lot of expenses there and families that were benefiting from this 
support, from this program, and with teenagers, they have 
expenses too. They needed this help. It was helping them, and 
this was a cut that is not certainly in their best interests. 
 
You know, I think of the statements that were made by 
Reverend Peter Gilmer of the Regina Anti-Poverty Ministry. He 
says this: “. . . at a time when we are now tied for the lowest 
minimum wage in the country, losing that support is going to 
have a significant impact.” He goes on to question how 
committed this government is to the anti-poverty strategy 
because this kind of cut “doesn’t move us in that direction at 
all.” 
 
Now I think Reverend Gilmer is right. Does the Premier dispute 
what Reverend Gilmer is saying? 
 
[16:15] 
 
The Chair: — Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — I want to thank the member for his question 
and point out that . . . and thank the minister for moving ahead 



7128 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2015 

with the poverty strategy for the province. It was referenced in 
the Speech from the Throne, and the government is certainly 
serious about that. The poverty strategy is going to look at the 
entire continuum, if you will, those who are facing short-term 
issues related to poverty. But really, really we need to get at and 
do a better job on the structural side, the root causes, those 
facing long-term poverty. 
 
Here’s the good news though about the economic confluence 
. . . the confluence, I should say, of the economy and this 
particular program that he’s asking about. Because we have a 
very strong economy in the province of Saskatchewan, I’m 
proud to share with members that the average time for a family 
on the SES [Saskatchewan employment supplement], on the 
employment supplement, is down to seven months. Now this is 
very positive. This means folks are taking advantage of the 
employment supplement and then they’re finding, then they’re 
finding that they’re moving forward. The economy is providing 
some solutions. The workplace is finding some solutions. 
 
I should also point out, Mr. Chair, that those who are currently 
in the program will be grandfathered. And I had not said that 
yet and that’s my fault. So let me state that for the record for 
those that might be watching, that there’s no particular change 
today for those who are in the program. They’ll be 
grandfathered. It’s something that’s moving forward, 
post-October 1 I believe it is. And again I think it’s worth 
noting that the good news is that folks are transitioning off of 
the employment supplement. It’s lasting on average about seven 
months. 
 
The Chair: — Leader. 
 
Mr. Broten: — What we know, Mr. Chair, for the many 
families that will have children going from that 12-year-old 
bracket into the teen years and for other people, this is an 
important program that has helped many families. And Peter 
Gilmer clearly illustrates and states the significance of it. 
 
Just a question to the Premier. When was the decision around 
grandfathering made? 
 
The Chair: — Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. I think it was in the 
budget. 
 
The Chair: — Leader. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you to the 
Premier. By slashing the Saskatchewan employment 
supplement, this government says it’ll save roughly $1 million. 
So that’s $1 million less for those families with teenagers who 
are trying to ensure the basic needs are kept and that their kids 
can do well, Mr. Chair. 
 
Meanwhile, if we look at some of the places where this 
government, where this Premier has been happy to spend 
dollars, we see examples of a lot more than that. You know, we 
know this Premier spent $3 million on his American lobbyists. 
We know that there’s been about $4 million spent on 
accommodation and travel for the $40 million American lean 
consultant. 

We know about the . . . of the $5 million research grant that was 
given to the failed American smart meter manufacturer, yet this 
government is choosing to cut the employment supplement for 
low-income working families just to save $1 million. My 
question to the Premier: how can he justify this type of harsh 
cut for working families here in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Chair: — Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Chairman, we can get into this, 
you know, you cut here but you still spent here . . . There’s 
another long list of other areas where we’ve spent for 
vulnerable people in the province of Saskatchewan — hundreds 
of millions of dollars. Millions of dollars to ensure that the 
children’s drug program is implemented in the province of 
Saskatchewan, I can certainly point to that. Millions of dollars 
to eliminate the PST for children’s clothes, obviously families 
benefit from that. Millions of dollars to double the low-income 
tax credit, that’s also very, very important. Millions of dollars to 
drop 114,000 low-income residents off of the payrolls 
altogether. Mr. Chair, we’ve invested 200.4 million in 2015-16 
budget alone in the area of disabilities, 100 per cent more 
funding — 100 per cent more funding — since ’07-08. So 
there’s a long list of where we’ve provided support for people 
who need it the most. SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for 
disability] clients will have up to 4,200 more per year in their 
pockets by July 2, ’15. There are now over 13,200 people 
enrolled in the program. 
 
And here’s an old friend of the Hon. Leader of the Opposition, 
Ryan Meili, who ran against him for the leadership, 
notwithstanding the conflict they had in Saskatoon Sutherland 
in the election prior to that. He said, quote, this is what Dr. 
Meili said: 
 

We have seen some progress. This is a good opportunity to 
say we mustn’t always criticize everything that the other 
guys do, and the improvements in the SAID disability rate 
have been positive for many people with disabilities. 

 
And so, you know, we’ve got to focus on a low-income 
supplement in terms of age. There are many, many other 
supports. When you total those supports for low-income 
families in the province, you’ll find, the member will find, 
they’re much, much greater now than they ever were, when 
what people got from the members opposite — too often I 
would suggest with speeches and not enough action — when 
they did have $700 million worth of money in the rainy day 
fund. But they’re happy to sit on it while these issues were 
unattended. 
 
The Chair: — Leader. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Chair, when we look at decisions 
being made, we know this $1 million cut will have an effect on 
many families. And we see choices being made by this 
government, you know, $4 million for John Black’s hotels and 
accommodation, dollars that are being wasted that should be 
going to things like helping these families. And we talk about 
the anti-poverty strategy. What we’re very closely watching and 
hearing from members in the community, Mr. Speaker, is what 
sort of follow-through takes place and is actually there. 
 



May 6, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7129 

I simply wanted the opportunity to address the comments that 
the Premier said on that instance. I understand by mutual 
agreements on this side, there’s a pause for five minutes. 
 
The Chair: — We’ll take a 10-minute recess. 
 
[The committee recessed for a period of time.] 
 
The Chair: — I’ll call the Committee of Finance to order and 
we’ll continue. I’ll just like to inform members that within the 
setting, the Committee of Finance, the rules do permit members 
to ask questions and the Premier to answer without the Chair 
intervening. If members are agreeable, we’ll do that and 
perhaps we can get more accomplished. However I will issue a 
bit of a proviso to that. If the Chair feels that things are getting 
somewhat out of control, the Chair will intervene. So we’ll 
proceed on that basis. 
 
Mr. Leader, you have a question and you’re ready to go? Okay. 
Let us continue. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. I suppose we get in 
the habit of being recognized before we speak, and so thank you 
for that reminder that it’s a little different here in the committee 
setting. 
 
Moving on to a different topic today, this afternoon, looking at 
the issue of travel as well. We know that Alison Redford didn’t 
just get in trouble for her use of travel scouts. She also got in a 
fair bit of hot water for her use of government planes. So my 
question to the Premier is whether he would agree to release the 
passenger manifest for all exec air flights under his 
government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, officials remember this being 
released with respect to a FOIP [freedom of information and 
protection of privacy], although we wouldn’t know who had 
made the freedom of information request. But I don’t see why it 
wouldn’t be available through that process to members 
opposite. There may be a fee, as there is from time to time with 
respect to the compilation of this information, but I don’t think 
there would be a problem. In fact I think we could go a step 
further and provide members with a manifest of who was on 
those planes, you know, for both governments, for our time in 
government and for when members opposite were using the 
executive aircraft as well. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we did request the passenger 
manifest information, and we were told that we’d have to pay 
$1,410. Mr. Speaker, I think it’s in the public’s interest to know 
who’s been flying on government planes. So my question to the 
Premier . . . I couldn’t quite . . . Maybe just to restate his 
response here, was he saying that if people want this 
information they should get it through freedom of information 
requests? My question to the Premier: would he be willing to 
simply table this information and present this information, 
release it to the public? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Right. You know, Mr. Chair, when there’s 
. . . There’s a professional public servant that is involved with 
the freedom of information requests when they come in. And 
it’s interesting the member now says in a subsequent question, 
they were the ones that asked, which is fine. That’s obviously 

their job as an opposition. We did the same thing in opposition. 
So you go through a process, and when there’s a fee for the 
compilation of it . . . We were faced with bills in opposition as 
well and had to make a decision whether to go ahead with the 
request or not. I invite members to do that. That’s part of their 
prerogative, to use caucus funds to provide . . . It doesn’t sound 
like an onerous amount, but reflective I guess of the amount of 
work that’s going to go through it.  
 
And we’ll go a step farther. I guess we could have a debate 
about the manifests themselves, but the information’s available 
to the members opposite. They’ve already made the request, 
and if they respond to the freedom of information officer 
accordingly, then the information will be provided. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Why can’t the Premier just agree to release 
information? Why require an FOI [freedom of information]? 
Why require a fee to be paid? I think Saskatchewan people 
deserve to know who’s flying on government planes. I’m not 
suggesting anything untoward, but I think it would be good for 
the sake of transparency to have that information available. Will 
the Premier agree to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well I would just say to the hon. member, 
why can’t he follow the process? He says, why can’t you just 
release the information, which by the way, is the same question 
we asked in opposition. There’s a process involved. It’s the 
same process that you had when you were the Government of 
Saskatchewan. We followed it. We’d expect you to do the 
same. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Why won’t the Premier just post this 
information online so Saskatchewan people have access to it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve already answered the 
question. I would say to the member opposite that no 
government in the history of this province has posted more 
information with respect to travel than our government. In fact 
we just learned last spring that when the NDP were in power, 
they never provided any information at all. And the former 
leader, the member’s mentor, Mr. Lingenfelter, made some 
comments about how he didn’t think it was really important for 
any disclosure to occur of travel. 
 
Well the members are smiling about those good old days when 
his mentor was here in the House, working directly with him 
and helping him develop the platform, and they’re enjoying that 
reminiscence. And I don’t blame them. I have fond memories of 
that as well, that time in the House. 
 
Mr. Chair, no government has provided as much information as 
this government has with respect to travel. We’re going to 
continue to do that. It’s interesting, when we do it, we note that 
with respect to travel, the numbers for the government are just 
way, way down, way down. 
 
And it’s worth revisiting, for those who are glued to their 
televisions for the proceedings, to note that the number of 
out-of-province trips in 2014-15 compared to their last year, the 
number of out-of-province trips for the government last year 
compared to their last year, down by 72 per cent. Seventy-two 
per cent, Mr. Chair. The cost of provincial travel decreased by 
75 per cent compared to ’06-07. That’s unadjusted for inflation. 



7130 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2015 

That’s just a straight-up savings for Saskatchewan people. 
Because you know what, Mr. Chairman? We’re worried about 
these things. We watch them carefully. These are taxpayers’ 
dollars. 
 
With respect to who’s on the planes, I can assure members 
opposite that we’re following the NDP policy. The NDP policy 
is that members . . . It spells out who of the elected members 
can fly on the plane, and it specifically mentions that family 
members can. Mr. Chairman, I would point out to members of 
the House that it’s been the practice of members opposite when 
they were in government to have family members on the plane. 
That’s continued under our administration. We can, I guess, get 
into sort of the details of that. I’d be happy to do it actually 
because I think that this has been reduced significantly as well. 
 
The bottom of this line is we are using the government aircrafts 
way less than members opposite did, but we’re disclosing more 
information ever than was disclosed by members opposite when 
they were the government. Because we think it’s important, 
we’re going to continue to provide that level of information to 
the taxpayers. They will know that as long as we are on this 
side of the House, we’ll carefully watch the costs with respect 
to travel. We’ll ensure that we’re doing it at a lower cost than 
members opposite when they had the chance to be in the 
government for some number of years. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, we know when we have these travel 
comparisons that the Premier’s providing and government 
members and officials have provided, that they do not compare 
apples to apples. We’ve seen with very different approaches 
they’ve taken with what they include, what they don’t include, 
the types of trips, and so on. The numbers presented, when it 
comes to travel by this government, simply cannot be trusted. 
 
And we see, Mr. Chair, we see, Mr. Chair, that the comments 
made by the Premier here, Mr. Speaker, about a lack of a 
willingness to provide this information. I think the information 
should be made public. I think that individuals have the right to 
know, and I would like to see the government take that course 
of action, Mr. Chair. 
 
In his first term in government, the Premier billed very little for 
mileage through Executive Council. He was paid just $858 for 
mileage through Executive Council in that first term. In his 
second term, he has been paid $32,059 for mileage, and that’s 
just through the Executive Council, not counting the mileage 
that would have been billed through MLA expense accounts. 
 
On his MLA expense travel, we also saw a significant increase 
in terms of travel costs in the second term. There’s about 140 
per cent increase in travel costs on the MLA side as well. And 
so my question to the Premier: what changed in the second term 
to account for the big increase that we see on the Executive 
Council side as well as the MLA side? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chair, for the first term, I had a CVA 
[central vehicle agency], a government vehicle. And subsequent 
to the election in 2011, I bought my own truck. 
 
[16:45] 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, we’ve obtained internal documents 

from Executive Council that shows that it’s almost always a lot 
more costly for taxpayers for a cabinet minister to use personal 
vehicles and bill mileage than if they were to use a vehicle from 
the government fleet. My question to the Premier: was the 
Premier aware of that when he chose to start using his personal 
vehicle and billing mileage? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, the answer is yes actually. 
We’ve done the analysis in government, and the member’s 
wrong. That won’t come as a surprise to very many that watch 
these proceedings. We’re going to get into a long list of the 
things that the member’s been wrong about in this session 
because there should be an accounting for that as well. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we’ve done the analysis of our own government 
because throughout our government we’ve had ministers, some 
will use the CVA — that’s a government vehicle — and some 
who will use a private vehicle. So here is the analysis. Actual 
cost to the government for the way we’ve been operating, in 
other words some using, many using their own vehicle and 
some using a CVA, actual cost for ’13-14: $111,667.90. He 
should write, he’s writing this down. I hope he’s writing this 
down now. Cost if we all use CVAs: $134,803. That would be 
more. 
 
Here’s the other advantage of using your own vehicle. And it’s 
up to members of cabinet to use their own vehicle. It’s actually 
also up to the Opposition Leader. The Opposition Leader also 
gets a CVA. And I believe that, I believe the Opposition Leader 
uses a CVA. I think you do, right. 
 
So the advantage of me using a truck, for example, is if I’m 
going to a party event, I bill the party. I’m not going to bill the 
taxpayers. That’s none of their business. When I get to the 
outskirts of Swift Current, that meter’s off. I’m not billing them 
beyond that, beyond me getting to my house if I’m going back 
and forth to work. If I’m going to get groceries on the weekend, 
no one . . . The taxpayers shouldn’t be paying for that. Not 
going to submit mileage for that. 
 
In fact, Mr. Chairman, that’s the advantage. And I wonder if the 
member should confirm, since he gets a CVA, does he do that? 
Does he rigorously keep track of the use of a taxpayer-funded 
van so if he’s going to a party event, he either uses a private 
vehicle or reimburses taxpayers for that trip to the party event? 
 
Or what I used to do, for example, Mr. Chair — and I think 
many members did — is that maybe twice a year, certainly at 
the end of the year, I’d try to write a personal cheque out to the 
Minister of Finance. I can inform members of the House, he 
dutifully cashed it. He’s very thorough that way, a little too 
thorough in my estimation. But I wrote a cheque for what I 
thought was probably the personal use of the CVA that I had. I 
had a Jeep Liberty. And I just think that’s the right thing to do. 
And I want to give the member a chance to confirm that’s 
exactly what he’s done with respect to the use of his vehicle, 
that he’s made sure to reimburse the taxpayers for any personal 
use for his government-supplied van. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Yes, that is the case, Mr. Chair. And you know, 
it’s interesting. I heard some of the members comment about 
car seats in my van, Mr. Chair. I have a baby, a toddler, 
pre-schooler. My kids come with me to events. I mean I could 



May 6, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7131 

put them in an apple crate I suppose, but I don’t think the law 
would like that. And so that’s very clearly why I would have car 
seats, Mr. Chair. It’s important in order to ensure that 
taxpayers’ dollars are used, Mr. Chair, in the most responsible 
way. 
 
The document that we’ve obtained from Executive Council says 
the break-even point, so the point where it’s either cheaper or 
more expensive to use a CVA and have a privately owned 
vehicle, they point out that the break-even point is 1654 
kilometres per month. From the FOI that was received, this is 
the quote from it: “The break-even point between a CVA 
Impala and a privately owned vehicle is 1654 kilometres per 
month.” 
 
We know, Mr. Chair, that the Premier’s monthly mileage 
claims through Executive Council alone, through Executive 
Council alone are between 30 and 45 per cent higher than that, 
and that doesn’t include any expenses for travel that would be 
claimed through MLA expenses. So my question to the 
Premier: on average, how many kilometres per month does the 
Premier claim on his MLA expenses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, we can get into this — sure, 
absolutely — if this is the burning issue for the member 
opposite. He’s referring to the analysis done for the 
government. When we were trying to make a decision, we 
provided the ministers the option. What I just gave them were 
the actual results. I’ll table them for him. These are the actual 
results of us doing what we’re doing, which is some members 
with a CVA, some members using the mileage system with 
their own private vehicle. That’s what I just gave him. And it 
won’t help much because, you know, with this particular 
member, you just sort of get up and say the same thing. We can 
have an official say, here are the facts, and it doesn’t really 
affect him. He just keeps saying the same thing. Fine. I think 
there’s an accounting for that coming in just a few months here 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But I want to share it with him again, and we’ll send the 
document over to him. He’s talking about an analysis of what 
might be. I’m giving him the facts . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . our facts. The member for Nutana said, our facts. Yes, 
because we asked the Minister of Finance and we asked 
officials in the Ministry of Finance would they just please 
manipulate the government’s mileage record for one day in 
estimates when this bizarre line of questioning would happen. 
That’s exactly what we did. 
 
Mr. Chair, actual cost to the taxpayers for the system we use 
today — this is from ’13-14 — actual cost of the system we 
use, some with mileage, some with CVA, $111,667.90. The 
cost that it would have been were all the cabinet using CVAs, 
$134,803.59. So from an actual basis, we’re saving money, and 
I hope the member will recognize that. 
 
Maybe he’ll want to change policies as well because I can tell 
him that we’ve done an analysis, and the cost of my mileage has 
dropped every year since I’ve stopped using the CVA in 2011 
and ’12, a 40 per cent decrease in ’13-14 mileage costs over the 
last full year of CVA use. My mileage in 2014-15 for the entire 
year was $8,290.95. His cost for a CVA for just April to 
November of ’14, $9,893. So you’re costing the taxpayers more 

money. 
 
Now if you want, there’s options out there. Now he doesn’t like 
it. He doesn’t like it. You’re costing the taxpayers more money, 
Cam, Mr. Broten. And I would say to the member opposite, I’d 
say to the member opposite, these are the facts, that what we’re 
doing now, with some members using a private vehicle and 
billing for mileage and some using a CVA, costs less money to 
the taxpayers than when we all got a CVA under the NDP, 
when everyone got a CVA. 
 
So you know, I guess we can debate this for a long time. I think 
he’s got another question. He’s all fired up to go. But the facts 
aren’t on his side. We’ll continue doing what we’re doing. I’m 
going to watch what we spend. We’re careful to make sure 
those members that have CVA vehicles, to make sure that 
they’re recording personal use as it should be, Mr. Chairman. 
We understand the value of the taxpayers’ dollars, and we act 
accordingly. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, the question simply was, how many, 
on average, how many kilometres per month does the Premier 
claim on his MLA expenses? We know from the government, 
through an FOI, that they say the break-even point between a 
CVA Impala and a privately owned vehicle is 1654 kilometres 
per month. This is a number created, produced, released by this 
government, Mr. Speaker. So again my question to the Premier: 
on average how many kilometres per month does the Premier 
claim on MLA expenses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, the total mileage is 
available. We all file reports for our MLA reports. It’s really not 
a matter for Premier’s estimates. It’s a Legislative Assembly 
account. 
 
The same for his. He’s got his own travel account. He might use 
his for his opposition . . . [inaudible] . . . duties or he might be 
using them for his MLA duties. He might be using them to 
travel to BC for media training. I don’t know. I guess that 
would be within the rules. Maybe he’s not. I don’t know. But 
it’s up to him to use those accounts and all members to use their 
accounts accordingly. I can tell members of the House that it’s 
all a matter of public information. 
 
I can tell members of the House that it’s more cost effective to 
operate cabinet the way we operate it, with an option for a 
private vehicle. I could tell members of the House that my 
particular travel, year over year, is down. And we’re careful to 
mark the mileage as is appropriate, and I’m comfortable, Mr. 
Chairman, with the information we have to date. And I’ve 
already supplied the members of the Committee of the Whole 
that the way I’m operating right now, using my own truck, is 
more effective for costs for taxpayers than when they were 
providing me a Jeep. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, I’ll release the information provided 
and released, which shows the break-even point between a 
CVA Impala and a privately owned vehicle is 1654 kilometres, 
released by this government. I do not have confidence in the 
numbers that the Premier is stating on this one bit. 
 
My question, Mr. Chair, to the Premier is, on whose 
instructions did the Ministry of Central Services undertake 



7132 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2015 

planning for the Premier’s library? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, on no one’s instructions was 
there any planning undertaken for the premiers’ library. 
 
I remember we were having a blue-skying session, planning 
session at Government House. We were talking about projects 
that would be something that government should want to pursue 
perhaps, and obviously there were pretty important issues in 
that discussion around health care and education and 
infrastructure and the economy. 
 
But we did get around to the history of the province, and there 
was a discussion around the rich political history of the 
province of Saskatchewan. And frankly in that room full of 
precisely no members of the New Democrats, no CCFers 
[Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] certainly, the first 
name we were talking about was Tommy Douglas. We have 
this very rich history that is of national import frankly from the 
province of Saskatchewan. We have others who have, in the 
case of his immediate successor, Premier Lloyd, who actually 
implemented the vision for medicare that Tommy Douglas had, 
and is sometimes forgotten in this regard, I would say, by 
history, pretty impressive achievement for him. 
 
We had Walter Scott, this amazing man who was debilitated by 
mental health issues, as my hon. friend will know, and managed 
to preside over not only the detailed design of this building but 
also lay the groundwork for what became SaskTel and our 
school system and built the University of Saskatchewan and 
built the Sask Hospital and any number of projects. 
 
We’ve had, in the case of Premier Romanow, a premier who 
took over from a very difficult situation financially, made some 
difficult decisions that we might not agree with, everyone on 
this side of the House, but in the main I think they’ve served the 
province well. 
 
And so the member opposite likes to talk about this library or 
this institution as something related to me. It’s quite the 
opposite. We thought it would be . . . In fact we thought about 
the Territorial Administration Building, which is underutilized 
and such a significant historical site in the province. If we had a 
few extra dollars — and we don’t — but if we had a few extra 
dollars, wouldn’t it be nice to have a museum celebrating the 
political history, a premiers’ library, “s” apostrophe, not 
apostrophe “s,” so all of the premiers that we’ve had in this 
province. We’ve had such a rich history. We don’t as a 
province, I don’t think — there’s a few busts around — we 
don’t pay enough homage to that history, to Premier Scott or to 
Premier Douglas. And we have the territorial building or the 
administrative building on Dewdney that is underutilized. 
 
So we asked . . . I said to the minister at the time . . . The 
current Minister of Highways was somewhere. There she is. 
She was then minister of Central Services. You know, let’s look 
at this. Is it possible? What’s the state of that building? And 
report back. Unfortunately is that it would take a lot of dollars 
to try to achieve this. It’s not something . . . It’d be nice, but it’s 
not at the top of the government’s priority list, this historical 
building, this historical museum that we could put together to 
honour our political history and our premiers. One day maybe 
we will be able to. Maybe one day we’ll be able to, through 

private donations, to achieve this and honour the history of our 
province and the great premiers that have served from all 
political stripes in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, it sure sounds like the Premier has a 
passion for this project. It sure sounds like it was his idea as 
well. When you actually look at the information, Mr. Chair, 
when it’s provided, it’s actually Premier apostrophe “s.” That’s 
the way that it’s recorded in the documents, Mr. Chair, and the 
information provided show that it was to be modelled after the 
Lyndon B. Johnson Presidential Library in the US [United 
States], that it would display manuscripts and prints, 
photographs and fine art. So it’s hard to believe that the Premier 
was not pushing this in a significant way. But punctuation’s a 
side point, Mr. Chair. 
 
My question on the Premier’s library: we know it was brought 
to treasury board on January 14th, 2014. Which cabinet minister 
brought it to treasury board? 
 
[17:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well I’ll see his apostrophe “s” and raise 
him an “s” apostrophe, Mr. Chairman, because I’m looking at 
our own briefing note. And I guess maybe there was a mistake 
on that one because here it is, premiers’ library, with 
information on the history that he’s recounting. 
 
I would imagine it would have been the Minister of Central 
Services that brought it forward. As mentioned, we’d like to 
celebrate the political history of the province. We’d like to 
honour the premiers who’ve served, and preserve their record 
and that memory in this way. 
 
Unfortunately, treasury board made the right decision, 
unfortunately then and now. There aren’t the resources to do it. 
I hope there is one day though. I hope we have the resources in 
the province of Saskatchewan, especially to use this building, 
one of the oldest . . . The territorial building is the second-oldest 
building in Regina. And members will know it was built in 
1890 to be a government administrative building for the 
North-West Territories. It has a great deal of history. The 
Territorial Administration Building was constructed, as we 
mentioned, in 1890. It served as our first Legislative Assembly 
and it’s, I mean it’s underutilized. It would be very expensive to 
rehabilitate it. I hope we can one day. I hope the members 
opposite would support us honouring the political history of the 
province which is rich and vibrant, obviously not without 
controversy. The advent of medicare, we all know what that 
wrought in the province of Saskatchewan and then delivered for 
Canada and Canadians since. 
 
So I’d like to see it done someday, but there’s simply not the 
dollars to have a museum for the political history of the 
province, for the premiers that have served down through the 
decades in Saskatchewan, and for the issues that they might 
have championed. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we prefer to focus on what 
matters to families, and a museum of this nature, Mr. Speaker, 
are not the issues that are at the forefront for Saskatchewan 
families. 
 



May 6, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7133 

My question to the Premier, perhaps he said it earlier on and I 
missed it, but my question to the Premier: when was the 
blue-skying session when this idea was brought forward? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — I don’t remember when the planning 
session was. We can provide that information to the member if 
he’s dying to know about what date that was. Fair enough. 
 
With respect to the treasury board presentation, Central 
Services presents to treasury board early on in the process, in 
terms of a general report on its assets and maintenance that 
might be required on its assets. And you can imagine the 
territorial building, as old as it is, built in 1890, is going to be 
on that list. So the specific discussion in treasury board, the 
specific discussion was the state of the building, the financial 
implications because of course it’s owned by the province and 
not about this museum for political history. 
 
Mr. Broten: — But it appears, Mr. Speaker, that a significant 
amount of work went into the proposal, based on documents 
that was released. My question to the Premier is, how long was 
this project worked on, and what expenses were associated with 
this project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, I have to correct the record. 
I think I probably had members believe that I was the author of 
the idea. I quite liked the idea. But I just want to be clear and 
the minister’s reminded me, driving over to cabinet planning 
that day, she had this idea for a political history museum for a 
Premier’s meeting. She met with myself and the Lieutenant 
Governor at the time to discuss it. We said, well go find some 
general information, and so she did with her assistant deputy 
minister. She got a quick estimate on costs to rehabilitate the 
building, and obviously they were prohibitive, and we didn’t 
proceed. So the cost to people for this idea that came up would 
have been zero; the time spent would have been probably 
minutes, Mr. Chairman. 
 
I hope that our cabinet members and others in our caucus will 
continue to come forward with new ideas. We would try to vet 
those ideas out, and if they fit within the budget, in the 
parameters of government, we would move on them. And if 
they don’t, we won’t. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I think it’s important for us to be careful with 
the history of our politics. I remember in opposition, and some 
members on this side of the House will remember a great deal 
of controversy over a movie that was funded significantly by 
the New Democratic government. The movie was about 
Tommy Douglas. I think the story of Tommy Douglas was fine, 
his history. But the movie had to be pulled from schools 
because of its treatment of Premier Patterson. The family of 
Premier Patterson were contacting us daily because this movie 
vilified him as the Liberal premier that, I guess, did battle with 
Premier Douglas in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
So you know, not only should we preserve and mark well our 
history, and maybe a museum like this is something we could 
do down the road if we could ever afford it, but we should also 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Premier Gardiner, right. It was 
Premier Gardiner, Jimmy Gardiner. But we should also be 
careful with the history of the province because here we saw 
one of the most egregious things I’ve ever seen, that an NDP 

government funded a movie about Tommy Douglas at the 
expense of Premier Gardiner, of his reputation and his great 
contribution to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
See we believe . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . They tried to put 
it in schools, I’d say to the member for Arm River, but it was 
yanked out because it was inaccurate, if you can believe it. 
They portrayed him as a drunk, and he was a teetotaller. They 
did this to Premier Gardiner. 
 
So we should be marking well our history. That was the idea 
behind this. There’s not the resources in the budget to do it now 
or any time in the near future. One day if there is, I hope we 
could do this to promote not just people like Premier Douglas, 
but also people like Premier Gardiner. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, the information provided by this 
government through a freedom of information request, Mr. 
Speaker . . . The information obtained here, Mr. Speaker, is 
lengthy. It’s detailed. For the Premier to suggest that a couple of 
minutes went into this project — a proposal, Mr. Chair, that 
clearly talks about the Lyndon B. Johnson Presidential Library 
as an example — how on earth would that simply come to pass, 
come to be, in mere minutes? Does the Premier stand by the 
information that was released by his government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t know if I understand 
the question. Sure, we stand by the information. I’m saying in 
terms of the amount of work that the ministry would have done 
on it to ask for sort of a general and cursory review of what 
would be needed at the building and what the other options are, 
that work was done, Mr. Chair. And there’s no particular 
expense to government for this.  
 
We’re going to vet some ideas from time to time, and I really 
don’t have much else to offer the hon. member except that he 
should, you know, sleep well tonight knowing that not a lot of 
time or resources were wasted on this. It was a good idea that 
was vetted but, for want of money, we couldn’t provide the 
resources to build a museum that would honour our political 
history. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, we clearly see a document in the 
review report by the Saskatchewan Information and Privacy 
Commissioner, point 14: 
 

In its submission, Central Services indicated that the 
proposal was created for the consideration of Treasury 
Board as part of Central Services 2014-15 budget 
submission. Further, that the record was presented before 
Treasury Board on January 14th, 2014. 

 
Finally, Central Services, Mr. Speaker, presented that 
information, it goes on. Not a little passing idea, Mr. Speaker. 
Work went into this. And I wish this government, instead of 
thinking about some museum as a shrine to politics, would be 
focused on the things that matter to families like better health 
care, like better schools, like fairness, and affordability. That’s 
where they should have their focus, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, we also have concerns with the spending and where 
this government has put its priorities around the Premier’s use 
of an American lobbyist. We know that $3 million, $3 million 



7134 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2015 

of taxpayers’ money has gone to an American lobbyist. My 
question to the Premier: what specific results have 
Saskatchewan taxpayers received as a result of this massive 
spending? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — I thank the member for the question. I’m 
happy to answer this. The number I’ve used, of course, is over 
the span of the contract over seven years. Many provinces in 
Canada have an in-market representative, a permanent 
representative in an office paying overhead, to be represented in 
the US capital. The United States represents 60 per cent of our 
export market. And we’re slowly seeing diversification actually 
in part, I think, helped by trade missions to Asia where we see 
less reliance on the United States, but I think all members of the 
committee will agree that we’re always going to be reliant on 
the United States with respect to the trade relationship. 
 
We have a story to tell in Washington, both to the legislators 
that are there, the administration in the White House, and also 
to the media. Because whenever we go down there, because of 
the work of the firm, there is a very heavy media program, both 
for back-home media to get Saskatchewan’s message out, but 
also to promote the province there in that community. And I 
remember Saskatchewan for some period of time was on the 
front page of the CNN [Cable News Network] website, in large 
measure because of the good work of this firm to put us in 
contact, whenever we’re there, with CNN. That’s pretty 
significant coverage for the province. 
 
More importantly, we want to engage with legislators and 
decision makers on Capitol Hill but also in the White House. 
And we’ve had it in the firm of Nelson Mullins, a firm with 
bona fides on both sides of the aisle, Democrat and Republican. 
And so whether it’s John Kerry when he was a senator; or Max 
Baucus, the Democratic senator from Montana; or Senator 
Graham; most recently, Senator McCain; or White House 
officials, we’ve been able to engage. Because of Nelson 
Mullins, the firm, we were able to engage with the Secretary of 
Agriculture just towards the end of the last White House.  
 
And we obviously need to do that on behalf of our agricultural 
producers, especially on the issue of country of origin labelling. 
We need, as a province, to take every chance we can to lobby 
all those legislators in the United States about the importance of 
getting rid of what is clearly a non-tariff trade barrier: country 
of origin labelling. And I know I’ve heard from stock growers 
who say thanks for going down there. Thanks for getting the 
meeting. We’re not quite there yet, but we’ll keep winning at 
the WTO [World Trade Organization], and I think eventually 
the Americans are going to relent. We need to continue the 
pressure, and certainly that’s part of what we do. 
 
Interesting as well, the most, one of the most recent trips to 
Washington, we were able to get into a very good meeting in 
the administration building just by the White House where, as 
members of the committee will know, most of the White House, 
many of the senior White House staff are working, to talk 
specifically to the EPA [Environmental Protection Agency] and 
other agencies about our clean coal project. 
 
The history of our province is one where the United States 
Department of Energy has made an investment. Credit the 
Romanow government for attracting an investment from the US 

Department of Energy — not a big amount but important, about 
$5 million — that got the ball rolling on our leadership in 
carbon capture and storage. I think now about a third of the 
world’s stored CO2 is stored in the province of Saskatchewan 
and done so efficaciously because of this arrangement that came 
together when two national governments, the provincial 
government, and at the time Pan Canadian I think was the 
company, and Apache and Shell and a few others got together 
on our CO2 storage project. 
 
Now we want the US Department of Energy involved if they 
can, if they’re interested in our clean coal project. We think 
there’s a real application for clean coal technology in the United 
States. They continue to burn coal, and of course coal states are 
concerned about that going away, so we wanted to make sure 
that they’re aware of it. We’ve had visits from the US 
Department of Energy. We’ve had visits from Senator 
Heitkamp in North Dakota who’s very, very interested in the 
project and is advancing it for us in Washington. 
 
We would have, we have many of these contacts and many of 
these visits to the province in no small measure because we 
have representation there. When we got elected, we said you 
know, Saskatchewan under the NDP had this strange sort of 
contracted mode. They didn’t tell our story anywhere. They 
weren’t engaged in markets. They’d go on the odd trade 
mission. One time they went to a trade mission to France where 
they were going to meet with Areva. I mean, we do business 
with them. The ambassador was here. We do some uranium 
business with them, little bit of agriculture, but principally 
they’d be there because of Areva. And the premier at the time, 
an NDP premier, refused to tour a nuclear plant. What a strange 
message this would send around the world. He just wouldn’t go. 
I think he sent Cline. I think Eric Cline went, and he didn’t go. 
We have a record of it. 
 
I mean that’s not the kind of engagement we need. We need to 
get our story out in an unambiguous way about what we have to 
offer the world, especially the parts of the world that wants food 
security and energy security. We need to be engaged in the 
United States, and so we have an in-market presence. We said 
that we would and we do, Mr. Chairman. And the amount of 
costs over the years, there’s been a return for it. I think we’re 
going to see more this spring. I would invite members to stay 
tuned for some real attention, some special attention to our 
leadership in clean coal technology as a direct result of this 
relationship. 
 
[17:15] 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, having this lobbyist send an email to 
CNN and asking that the Premier be interviewed and keep his 
bio on file, Mr. Speaker, is hardly good value for taxpayers’ 
dollars and has not brought concrete results as we would want 
and what we would expect. My question to the Premier: how 
much is the government spending this year on American 
lobbyists? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — 575,000 this year, reduced to 475,000 next 
year. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Will the Premier agree to table all the reports 
the government has received from Nelson Mullins? 



May 6, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7135 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Absolutely not, Mr. Chair. Here we have, 
engaged on behalf of the province of Saskatchewan, an agent 
that is representing our diplomatic interests, representing 
commercial interests in the province of Saskatchewan. No, we 
won’t be tabling those, Mr. Chairman. It would be irresponsible 
of the government to do it, regardless of the stripe of that 
government. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, the commercial interests can be 
redacted if necessary, but Saskatchewan taxpayers deserve to 
know what in fact is being produced for the kind of dollars that 
are being spent. This is not legal advice that is being given. We 
did an FOI again on this, Mr. Chair, and it shows the 
government said it would cost us $3,060 to get the information. 
I think, Mr. Chair, that this information should be disclosed. It 
should be available. My question to the Premier: why will he 
not agree to table this information for Saskatchewan taxpayers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, once again we’re back to the 
long-standing process of the House that members, when we 
were in opposition, we had to live by. I assume it’s the same 
standard now. I assume you accept that the standard that applied 
to the Sask Party in opposition should now apply to the NDP. If 
you’ve made a request and there’s a bill been presented, if you 
pay the bill, you’re provided the information. That’s how it was 
for us, and that’s how it should be for oppositions. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, if the Premier wants to be open, if 
he wants to be public, if he wants to share this information, this 
type of information is in the public interest. The Premier should 
not be hesitant to release this information. I do not know why 
he would not agree to it. Why would the Premier, why would he 
be so intent on digging in his heels and not releasing this 
information which is in the public interest? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, these contractors provide 
advice to the government which should be treated the same as 
advice from officials. Members opposite know the rules around 
that. They understand about the sensitivity with respect to 
advice from officials. Sometimes they’re going to come in the 
form of cabinet. Sometimes they’re going to come in the form 
of information provided by those who are contracted by the 
Government of Saskatchewan to represent us. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the programs that we have been able to execute 
in Washington, DC [District of Columbia], the meetings that 
we’ve been able to have and the profile we’ve garnered for the 
province is something that’s well worth having in-market 
representation. We’re going to see even further evidence of that 
just in a month or so, as our clean coal project at Boundary dam 
3 is a bit of a showcase not just for the world but specifically 
with respect to US interests who understand there’s still going 
to be coal burned, but we should be doing everything we can to 
clean it up. 
 
You know, he’s been provided a way forward in terms of some 
of the non-sensitive information that’s there, but this is akin to 
advice from officials, and he very well knows the rules around 
that. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Well it’s telling, Mr. Chair, that example after 
example today, we’ve had a government that has been reluctant 
to share information and give information to a Saskatchewan 

public when they are being questioned, when it is available, and 
when it is in the public interest. We also see, Mr. Chair, that the 
independent Provincial Auditor has been highly critical, highly 
critical of this government for its use of consultants. 
 
We know across government, the Premier has ramped up the 
use of consultants by 228 per cent. In the Ministry of Central 
Services, the use of consultants has jumped by 168 per cent, and 
this is very concerning. And 70 per cent of the time, 70 per cent 
of the time the Provincial Auditor highlights that they aren’t 
even tracking what the consultants are doing, unbelievable that 
70 per cent of the time they would not know what the 
consultants are doing even after that huge spike. My question to 
the Premier: what is the Premier’s explanation for the fact that 
70 per cent of the time government isn’t even documenting the 
reason for the consultants? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, a couple of points, Mr. Chairman, and 
to my hon. friend. These are consulting engineers, so let’s be 
clear about that in terms of referencing the answer that I am 
providing to members of the committee. 
 
There are now more engineers in the Ministry of Highways than 
there was in 2007. That’s a starting point, so we do need to 
continue to invest in in-house capacity and we are doing that. I 
would also point out that with respect to Highways alone, the 
capital budget’s increased by 135 per cent from 2008-09 to this 
year. Our government’s put record amount of dollars into 
highways, and some of the projects are pretty unique, so then 
rather than hire or add to your core group of engineers, your 
permanent staff, you’re going to use consultants. If you’re 
building more, you’re going to use consulting engineers more. 
If you’re building more highways, you’re going to need more 
consulting engineers. 
 
Here’s some interesting statistics. The number of culvert 
projects alone — and members of the committee will be aware 
of the amount of flooding we’ve had in the last little while over 
the last number of years — the number of culvert projects alone 
from ’08 to 2014 increased by 2,143 per cent. The number of 
TMS [thin membrane surface] upgrades from ’08 to ’14 
increased by 24 per cent. And so the ministries had to adapt 
quickly to this because obviously, in the case of a flood, 
reparations need to be made as quickly as possible. 
 
In some cases we went through significant flood mitigation 
programs in government over a number of years. Each of those 
required consulting engineers, so the use of consulting 
engineers is up across government. There’s no question about it. 
The overall amount of full-time equivalents in government are 
down significantly, but we are using more consulting engineers 
because we have these immediate needs because projects come 
along. 
 
We’ve had some disasters in terms of flooding. We’ve had 
increased budgets for highways. We’ve provided more 
resources even on the municipal side of things as well, and so 
you’re going to have more consulting engineers working in the 
province because we’re investing more in infrastructure and 
working hard to build the economy, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, there’s no explanation there as to 
why there is no documentation in 70 per cent of the instances as 



7136 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2015 

identified by the independent Provincial Auditor about why the 
consultants are being chosen. How is that not alarming to the 
Premier that you have such a huge percentage of these contracts 
being given out? What it does, Mr. Chair, is causes a problem 
for all consultants when there’s not the right documentation 
going on, an explanation for what is happening. So my question 
to the Premier: is he not concerned by the fact that in 70 per 
cent of the instances, as identified by the Provincial Auditor, 
there’s not a paper trail? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — The Finance minister has indicated that this 
has been discussed there, and I think some members of Public 
Accounts have discussed this as well. There’s a recognition that 
we need to do a better job in this regard, and we will be. 
 
I think it’s probably fair to say that the government was, you 
know, we were surprised ourselves significantly by floods in 
terms of the need for the consultant engineers that would flow 
from both increased investment in infrastructure and also the 
disasters we’ve faced. But the Minister of Finance has certainly 
confirmed that when the auditor makes a report like this, we’re 
always working hard to do better to listen to the advice, and 
we’ll be doing that in this case as well. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, it is concerning that you would not 
have an explanation here as to why there would be 70 per cent 
instances without the right paper trail and the right rationale 
recorded, Mr. Chair. We submitted an FOI. We requested “. . . 
any analysis comparing the use of consultants versus the use of 
government employees.” Now the Ministry of Central Services 
said that no such records exist. My question to the Premier: how 
can he explain that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, I want to point out what the 
auditor says here, and it’s close to what the member’s 
represented. It’s pretty close: 
 

However, we found that over 70% of the contracts with 
consultants that we tested did not document why a 
consultant was preferred over using in-house resources. 

 
Mr. Chairman, this wouldn’t have been a . . . When the 
government moves to contract something out because they 
don’t have the resources in-house, because we don’t have the 
consulting engineers in-house, if that’s not an option, it’s hard 
to understand the benefit of the comparison. I mean, if we had 
the engineers in-house to do it, we wouldn’t be going to the 
consultant engineer in the first place. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, when we see an increase of 168 per 
cent, a significant increase in the use of consultants, there ought 
to be a record as to why consultants are being chosen over those 
in the ministry. That is basic. Saskatchewan people deserve to 
know why that choice in fact is taking place. 
 
So my question to the Premier: how is he not concerned? When 
we asked for an FOI, we asked for information on this, they 
said that no such records exist about that comparison. How is he 
not concerned about the fact that there is no analysis available 
that can be given to Saskatchewan people and there is not the 
right tracking of this information in 70 per cent of the 
instances? 
 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well I just answered the question. But I 
would note some understanding and I appreciate this. One of 
the members of the Committee of the Whole is the member for 
Athabasca who was, on the 27th of April — just a short time 
ago, of this year — was commenting on this particular issue, 
and here’s a quote from him: “I agree, you do need specialized 
services.” So credit the member for this: 
 

I agree, you do need specialized services. And we don’t 
need five or six individuals sitting in the Highways 
ministry that are going to be used once every two or three 
years. I agree with that, that if there’s an instance where, 
where you’re able to look out and find some private firms 
that can do some of the specialty work required . . .” 

 
And that’s exactly what’s happened. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Well then, Mr. Chair, there needs to be a 
rationale as to why government’s going down this path, this 
Premier to be much more concerned about this than what he is 
showing. When you have the Provincial Auditor identifying that 
there’s not the right analysis going on, that there’s not the right 
track record of information, that the analysis is not available as 
the ministry said in the submission, this should be much more 
concerning to the Premier than what we are hearing. 
 
We also put a freedom of information request for “. . . all travel 
expenses including transportation, accommodation, hospitality, 
meals, incidentals, and miscellaneous for Ministry of Health 
staff to attend meetings and events related to John Black and 
Associates’ contract from January 1, 2010 to present.” Mr. 
Speaker, that is a reasonable request, because this government 
should be tracking what it has spent, what has been shovelled 
out the door, Mr. Speaker, with their lean pet project. But 
government said it would cost a massive amount of money for 
us to get that information. 
 
[17:30] 
 
It was a ridiculous amount so, Mr. Chair, we narrowed that. We 
narrowed that down to eight officials, eight officials highly 
involved in lean who should be able to . . . government should 
be able to provide information on their expenses. We narrowed 
it to Max Hendricks, Mark Wyatt, Pauline Rousseau, Kimberly 
Kratzig, Traci Schmekel, Tracey Smith, Sharon Smith, and 
Brenda Russell. So eight people. It was narrowed down to a 
reasonable amount. The government said it would take 70 hours 
to find that information and that we would be billed $5,378. 
 
My question to the Premier: why isn’t this government tracking 
all of its lean expenses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much to the member. I will 
get to the specific answer on health care travel, but I will just 
say once again, in the preamble to his question he said, well 
why doesn’t the government provide a rationale for contracting 
out? We’ve done that several times. When we don’t have the 
resources in-house, we contract out. And that’s what 
organizations do, governments do, and that’s what we’re doing. 
And we want to make sure we’re doing so in a way that’s 
effective. 
 
Just if I can, before we get to the travel question, it’s come to 



May 6, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7137 

my attention that ours was not the first political museum that 
was planned or looked at for the province. I wonder if the 
member would agree with this. I’ll send it over to him. But, Mr. 
Chair, it’s a picture of the legislative dome. The name at the top 
says, from Eldon Lautermilch. Eldon Lautermilch used to be the 
minister for the NDP. Remember him? The minister of 
SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company]. I think he was responsible for that. 
 
In 2006 . . . Now the member for Lakeview’s been sitting 
beside the Leader of the Opposition this whole time while the 
Leader of the Opposition’s been in somewhat of a dudgeon 
anyway about the fact that we would be even looking at a 
political museum. Here it is. There’s several in the dome of the 
legislature. How expensive would that be? Several places where 
you can go to have a political museum in the province, and yet 
when someone else does it and looks at it and even rejects it, it 
becomes a central part of estimates. It becomes part of question 
period. The problem I would say to my hon. friend is, he’s got 
to stop having one standard for the NDP and another standard 
for everybody else. He’s got to stop that or you’re not going to 
have the credibility that you need, that you want. 
 
We’ll answer your questions on health travel. I thank the 
member for the question. First of all, I think the provision of 
specific receipts can be made through the correct process. I 
think there will likely be a cost to that as a result of the freedom 
of information request. 
 
But I can provide a pretty good breakdown here for members in 
terms of health care administrative officials’ costing. And again 
we trust our officials to abide by the policies of the government 
with respect to per diems and the receipts that they are 
submitting for payment. We think that was the case when the 
members opposite were on the government side, and we trust 
the officials now, since 2007 when the government had 
changed. 
 
And so in 2013-14 is the most recent year. We have in terms of 
total spent on travel costs, including flights and ground 
transportation, 2013-14, $478,973. That’s about a 30 per cent 
decrease in the same cost when the NDP were in power in 2007 
— decrease — even with the North American tour, the lean 
tour, as the member refers to. 
 
The total spent on meals on per diems in ’13-14, the year we 
have a record for currently, 49,918. That’s a 47 per cent 
decrease from when the members opposite were in . . . apples to 
apples. This is health care administrative travel, not adjusted for 
inflation. 
 
And then total spent on accommodations and incidentals, 
’13-14, under our government — this includes whatever travel 
was happening with respect to lean — $189,330. When 
members opposite were the government, under the same 
category, health care officials, accommodations and incidentals, 
$225,940 — 16 per cent higher, unadjusted for inflation. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, when we asked for lean travel 
expenses for eight individuals, this government said it would 
take 70 hours to calculate that. These are eight individuals that 
are high ranking. They are not even tracking the expenses 
around lean. So my question to the Premier: how can we have 

confidence in these numbers that he puts out around lean when 
they’re clearly not even properly tracking the expenses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Okay. With respect to the North American 
tour specific request the NDP made, it was the estimate because 
it was going back over a number of years. It covered five years, 
back to 2010, for the individuals he’s referenced. It was 
estimated not by political people in government but by officials 
that there’d be 177 hours for eight officials on the lean travel 
expenses. 
 
The member for Riversdale made the request, did not mention 
that the request covered five years of material dating back to 
2010, contained extensive amounts of personal information that 
would have to be removed as per the freedom of information 
and privacy Act. All of this information was provided in a 
detailed cost estimate that is fully in keeping with the 
legislation, so all of the rules were followed. And finally the 
member from Saskatoon Riversdale, I don’t think has failed to 
mention . . . The member asking the question has failed to 
mention that I believe our privacy office worked with you in 
opposition, the opposition, to reduce the cost of their request to 
75 bucks. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we asked for the comprehensive 
information in order to get a true picture of the cost of lean. We 
have seen this government not provide an accurate picture 
around expenses around lean, so we narrowed it. We narrowed 
it to eight individuals. They should be able to provide the 
information. My question to the Premier: how can we have 
confidence in their claims around lean expenses when we know 
they’re not even tracking the expenses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, what the member just said is 
flat wrong. Of course the expenses are being tracked. I’ve just 
provided a report to all members of the Committee of the 
Whole that in fact the numbers are being tracked. They’re being 
tracked globally and they’re being tracked specifically. The 
global numbers have Saskatchewan Party government numbers 
for the same travel down significantly in every single category 
every single year that we’ve been in office. 
 
Well he’s going to turn back and talk to the former Health 
minister, and I hope he does because maybe the Health minister 
can provide a bit of highlight, some information for the Leader 
of the Opposition so he can get his facts straight. Moreover I 
just read to him, for the record, a note that speaks to the interest, 
the privacy interest of the information he asked. I mean I think, 
I know the member cares about privacy. I know he does 
because this has been an important debate we’ve had here over 
the last number of weeks. So the privacy office, privacy 
department’s work with you to eliminate any sensitive 
information, provide what you want, and brought the costs for 
your requests down to 75 bucks, what in the world is wrong 
with that, Mr. Chair? 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, that was for one individual. The 
point here with the Premier I’m making here, Mr. Chair, is that 
they are not tracking the information. And we cannot have 
confidence in the numbers that they claim around lean for these 
supposedly good savings because they don’t know what they’re 
shovelling out the door when it comes to the expenses, when it 
comes to all of the costs, the total picture of the lean pet project 



7138 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2015 

by this government. 
 
We also know, Mr. Speaker, in January The StarPhoenix 
reported that at last count there was “$1.5 billion backlog of 
school construction and renovation needs.” We FOI’d any 
analysis or reports around that $1.5 billion need. The 
government denied access to those records and said, “The 
reason for refusal of these records is that they could potentially 
disclose a confidence of the Executive Council.” 
 
My question to the Premier: why does he think this issue is a 
cabinet secret? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you to the hon. member for the 
question. Education capital is a very important issue. It’s been 
an important issue for our government since 2007. And, Mr. 
Chairman, I want to point out and, you know, there’s certainly 
lists readily available about projects that need to happen in the 
province of Saskatchewan. We want to make sure that folks 
know what those priorities are and when there is the possibility 
that there’ll be completely new school construction or 
replacements or renovations, and we provide that, Mr. Chair. 
 
The most important question here though isn’t the process. My 
hon. friend, he likes to talk about the process and lists and when 
is this really. . . The most important issue with respect to 
education capital is actually spending it. The most important 
issue is to build the schools. The most important issue that we 
face is to renovate the schools that desperately need renovation. 
The most important issue for us in 2007 was to look at just a 
woeful disregard — the Minister of Finance was then the 
minister of Education — a woeful disregard for basic 
maintenance in our schools, basic maintenance in our schools. 
And so in those early budgets we had to start with that. And 
now the population’s grown, and now we’re building schools. 
 
So here’s the bottom line. And I want to have this debate now 
and during the election campaign because in your last few years 
when you were the government, you were sitting on a mountain 
of money. I think the balance was about $700 million cash in 
the bank account. You could have done the right thing in terms 
of maintenance, in terms of education capital. You might have 
released a list, which is all good but, you see, you’ve got to 
actually do something with the list when you release it, I would 
say to my hon. friend. 
 
Here is I think an example of that, if I may submit respectfully: 
$948 million invested in education capital since we took over 
from your party, the NDP. That’s a 320 per cent increase. 
That’s the most important part of any of this debate is actually, 
are you getting the job done? Are you investing in capital in 
schools or are you worried about process and lists? People will 
know here is a number of projects that are next, the capital list 
that’s coming for the province of Saskatchewan. And you know 
what? I can’t wait for the election campaign to talk a little bit 
about the record. We can talk about their priority on releasing 
the right list, and our priority, which is to build schools. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, these questions are fundamentally 
about this government being open and transparent with 
students, with parents, with school boards, with everyone in the 
province, Mr. Speaker, the $1.5 billion of needs for schools. 
Think about the reality here that we have. We have schools in 

this province being propped up with two-by-fours, with lumber, 
Mr. Speaker, because of structural problems, because of 
concerns. And this government, instead of being open and 
transparent with the public about what is the real need, about 
what the total need is, you know what they do? They spend 
money to take ads out to run against school divisions. That’s 
their desire. That’s their intent. That’s what you see in their 
actions, is picking fights with school boards instead of being 
open and clear and transparent about the amount. What we have 
from government, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chair, is not saying that 
this information doesn’t exist, but they say that it is a secret for 
cabinet and that Saskatchewan people — students, teachers, and 
parents — don’t deserve to know what the needs are when it 
comes to our school buildings. 
 
My question to the Premier: why does he think it is a cabinet 
secret, that they can conceal $1.5 billion of infrastructure school 
needs in our province? Why won’t he release that information? 
 
[17:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, in answer to the member’s 
question: emergency funding approvals, École 
Notre-Dame-Des-Vertus in . . . It’s a Conseil des écoles 
fransaskoises school that’s on the emergent list. These are 
emergent projects of the government. It’s very much public. 
Here they all are. Langenburg High School, that’s air quality 
and HVAC [heating, ventilating, and air conditioning]. We 
know about that one. P.J. Gillen, that’s an HVAC issue. École 
St. Margeurite, the Holy Family School, Connaught, Langham 
Elementary, Delisle Composite, Hanley, Hague, Aberdeen. 
 
Major capital projects requested, there’s a number of them: 
Sacred Heart; St. Mary; Weyburn Junior High School; Yorkton 
Regional High School; Rosthern Elementary, High School. This 
is publicly available information. The list, I’m reading the list 
now: Colonsay School, Sidney Street School, Glen Elm 
Community School, Argyle elementary. So you have an 
emergent list. You have the major capital project list. 
 
And here’s something. Here’s another list, here’s . . . This is 
pretty important. Here are schools right in the middle of your 
constituencies of members opposite, where there’s certainly 
been a need: Athabasca, a brand new school in Turnor Lake; 
Cumberland, $33 million in renovations at Churchill High 
School in La Ronge. I know the member appreciates that. 
Saskatoon Nutana. Finally, finally money for Saskatoon 
Nutana, after years of the NDP with a member in that seat for 
all these years. She was the Education minister in Nutana, for 
all these years. You know what they were probably talking 
about? If we could just put Saskatoon Nutana on a list. That’s 
what you were probably thinking in government. If we could 
just put Nutana on a list, that would be good. You know what, 
Mr. Chairman? We decided that’s probably not good enough. 
We should probably get the job done in Saskatoon Nutana, $14 
million in renovations. 
 
Regina Elphinstone-Centre, two replacement schools, Sacred 
Heart and Seven Stones; Regina Lakeview, we’ve talked about 
that member a little bit today, replacement school for the 
Connaught community; Riversdale, a new state of the art school 
facility, St. Mary School; Saskatoon Centre, another member’s 
seat, 6 million in renovations for E.D. Feehan School; the 



May 6, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7139 

deputy leader’s seat, new licensed child care spaces in the same 
building as his constituency office. He’ll know it well. And the 
Leader of the Opposition, a brand new joint-use school in 
Hampton Village that he now opposes, that he is now on the 
record opposing because he doesn’t like the funding vehicle. 
 
You know, Mr. Chairman, I want to have this debate. I want to 
have the debate. I just read you a list of the emergent needs and 
the major capital projects, but there are other lists that we’re 
going to get into, projects that we finally got to after years of 
neglect by members opposite. Towards the end of their term 
they had hundreds of millions of dollars, but they didn’t have 
money for schools. And so we’re building 90 new schools, Mr. 
Chairman, 25 major renovations and additions, 32 million for 
preventive and emergency maintenance, 10 million for up to 31 
new relocatables, money to assume — I like this list; this is a 
pretty good list — money to assume 100 per cent of funding for 
capital projects, 155 million to begin working on 18 new 
schools, 9 joint-use facilities that the Deputy Leader opposes, 
that the Leader opposes because they’d rather have lists. We 
would rather have schools. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, there’s a $1.5 billion need in our 
schools. We have schools being propped up by two-by-fours. 
This Premier is claiming that the information of $1.5 billion is a 
cabinet secret. My question to the Premier: why is he hiding 
that information from the Saskatchewan public? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I just read the list of emergent 
needs in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, there’s a $1.5 billion need, $1.5 
billion, and the Premier reads off a few projects. Saskatchewan 
families in every part of the province deserve information on 
that $1.5 billion need. They can laugh at this, Mr. Speaker, but 
we have schools in Saskatchewan that are concerning when it 
comes to the safety of students. We see schools being propped 
up by two-by-fours. Why does the Premier think that the $1.5 
billion need, why is that a secret? Why won’t he share that 
information with the Saskatchewan people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, was the member paying 
attention? I provided him a list of emergency needs with respect 
to safety issues, with respect to air quality. I just gave him the 
list, in addition to the capital list. So I’m not sure what else the 
member wants. 
 
I would just say this, you know, if in the next election people 
want to choose somebody that’s good at making lists, they 
should choose the NDP. If they want a party that’s prepared to 
do something about what’s on the list, they might want to 
choose members on this side of the House. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, we know there’s information on the 
$1.5 billion need. This government is holding that back. 
They’re not releasing it. They say it is a cabinet secret, Mr. 
Speaker. Saskatchewan people deserve to know the complete 
and accurate picture. That information needs to be provided 
very clearly. 
 
We also requested documents, Mr. Chair, related to school 
division funding for urgent repairs, and we’ve had a bit of 
discussion about this, the urgent repairs since January 1, 2013. 

That request went out on January 20th, 2015, but we still have 
not received a response. This government, Mr. Chair, is 
breaking the law. It’s keeping this information secret, and 
parents deserve to see it. Why is this government not providing 
this information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, we don’t make the decisions 
around FOI timing. There’s a public servant that’s responsible 
for that. My understanding is that the request is in process. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Chair, they are well outside of what 
the legal requirements are when it comes to the releasing of 
information. That’s very clear. Mr. Chair, we also see concerns, 
we’ve had a big discussion around . . . when we talk about lean 
and we talk about the role of the Health Quality Council. Is the 
Premier aware that the Health Quality Council hired a freelance 
journalist to promote lean? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, my understanding is that an 
RFP [request for proposal] was sent out for this 
communications support through SaskTenders on May 2014. It 
was obviously a very public process. It was responded to by 10 
candidates. Interviews were conducted and a contract was 
eventually signed with a writer for this communications work. 
Last December a decision was made to end the contract. The 
in-house resources were identified to be as sufficient, and 
existing resources are being used to support communications 
efforts. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Sadly what we see, Mr. Chair, when it comes 
to the Health Quality Council is the role of this government in 
redirecting what Health Quality Council has traditionally done, 
good work that they have traditionally done, into being, Mr. 
Chair, more of a mouthpiece and a political speech machine, 
Mr. Speaker, for their lean pet project. And it’s been at the 
detriment of the traditional work that the Health Quality 
Council has traditionally done. 
 
Here are some of the examples, Mr. Speaker, what the HQC 
[Health Quality Council] is no longer tracking or reporting, 
important work that they traditionally did, Mr. Chair, that they 
are no longer doing: reporting things like patient’s rating of 
their hospital, or if patients suffered medical errors, or if 
patients had a long wait for a room, or if they received the help 
they needed, or how they rate the cleanliness of the hospital and 
the environment. All of these, Mr. Chair, are now listed as 
historical indicators. 
 
Well I think these are important indicators that can give a 
glimpse, Mr. Chair, as to how this government’s lean pet 
project has gone very wrong. They are no longer being tracked. 
My question to the Premier: why are these important indicators 
no longer being tracked? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, we’ve seen this Leader of 
the Opposition take a run at officials in the scrums, basically 
saying what they had reported with respect to travel wasn’t true, 
just categorically stating it as fact. We’ve seen his deputy leader 
take a run at a developer here in Regina without any facts to 
substantiate it. He almost was found in contempt of the 
legislature. He had to apologize. Didn’t do any research, didn’t 
call them, just a drive-by smear of a company that’s investing in 
this province and creating jobs. This is the MO [modus 



7140 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2015 

operandi] for those two, the future of the NDP, the leader and 
the deputy leader. 
 
What he just got up and said a moment ago was that the Health 
Quality Council was a mouthpiece for the government. I think 
that was a direct quote. We should visit who exactly is on the 
Health Quality Council. Dr. Susan Shaw is there, obviously; 
Dennis Kendel. We can get into some of the bios. Ross Baker, 
who’s been there for a long time, his member for Lakeview, the 
minister of Health, will know some of these people because 
they’ve served the province in this capacity, some of them from 
international places, some of them from the province, and some 
from other provinces in Canada. 
 
Dan Fox, I think is an acquaintance of the Health minister. Is he 
a mouthpiece for the Government of Saskatchewan? He needs 
to stand up. He can take exception with some of the decisions 
they’ve made. I understand that. That’s his job. He should be 
able to stand up and say, I don’t agree with the health care 
quality council on that. But that is a significant difference than 
what he just did, which was to smear them. He didn’t single any 
of them out or any specific reference. He called them a 
mouthpiece for the government, this independent group of 
leaders and doctors and people who serve from international 
places. 
 
Now would be a good opportunity for him to stand up in the 
House and apologize for that. We’ll have a debate about what 
he doesn’t agree with, things that the health care quality council 
has done that he doesn’t agree with. Absolutely, that’s fair 
game. But he should probably start with an apology to this 
independent group for smearing them as a mouthpiece for the 
government. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, we have absolutely, absolutely seen 
this government push and steer the Health Quality Council in a 
direction that takes it away from the traditional important work 
they’ve done. We’ve talked about the lean go-teams. We’ve 
talked about the focus that they have pushed onto the HQC, 
onto regions, through the ministry pushing the Health Quality 
Council to be more consumed, more consumed with the 
interests, Mr. Chair, of this government when it comes to their 
lean pet project, as opposed to the important work that needs to 
happen for Saskatchewan patients here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And it’s sad what this government has done to the Health 
Quality Council. I do believe that, Mr. Speaker, because they 
have taken the HQC in the wrong direction. You can look at the 
internal documents from the HQC, Mr. Chair. They said that 
taking over the provincial kaizen promotion office would 
significantly disrupt its ability to fulfill its mandate and 
undertake the important work that it is supposed to do. 
 
For example, what’s the status of long-term care surveying? Is 
that still happening? And when will we see the results? 
 
[18:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well first of all, Mr. Chairman, I want to 
get something else on the record. I really, I truly think the hon. 
member should have done the right thing there and apologized 
for calling the Health Quality Council a mouthpiece because of 
the people on this committee, some of whom were appointed by 

members opposite. 
 
You know, Mr. Chairman, it’s important for the record and for 
the hon. member to know that this was not something we forced 
on them in terms of their involvement with lean. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh, as if. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Oh, he just . . . There’s his “as if” again. 
“As if” is the response. It’s absolutely the case. They wanted to 
take this information on. They wanted to take this information 
on. And rather than disbelieve every fact that’s presented, I 
think he should be more measured and more circumspect, 
especially when he’s referencing a third party group like this 
that are serving this province. To write them off as a 
mouthpiece is not acceptable. I think he should just do the right 
thing and apologize for that, and we’ll have this debate. 
 
With respect to the long-term care survey, I want to share with 
the member that what we used to do was a survey that would 
happen after the fact. Sorry, the patient survey that we do. We 
do an after-the-fact survey three months down the road. Perhaps 
some would fill it out and send it back. But the realization by 
the system was that there wasn’t the fulfillment. People were 
not responding as we wanted them to. So right now we’re not 
discounting or disregarding or discontinuing surveys of 
patients. We’re piloting a new real-time survey. 
 
We’re piloting a new real-time survey in the province. The 
Health Quality Council is monitoring it to see what kind of 
information we’re getting. So while patients are in the middle of 
care and in the hospital — providing their feedback, good and 
bad, providing whatever constructive advice they have — we’re 
going to pilot this. And if the Health Quality Council feels that 
it has the chance to be expanded, then we’ll do that. If it’s not 
working, we may have to return to the imperfect survey that we 
used to have. 
 
But to say or to try to make people to believe that we’re not 
doing a survey is incorrect. It’s not right. And again, and again, 
you know, it’s okay every now and then to say, I misspoke. I’ve 
done it. I think the member should at least apologize, should 
apologize to the Health Quality Council, apologize for what he 
called them. He just called them a mouthpiece for government. 
That’s not acceptable here or anywhere else. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, everyone in the province knows that 
this government has taken Health Quality Council away from 
the important work that it has traditionally done. We see 
surveying, Mr. Speaker, that happened before that they now call 
historical indicators, very clearly, Mr. Chair. 
 
When we talk about admissions that should be made, Mr. Chair, 
this is the Premier today who stands by his decision to leak 
confidential information about a private citizen. That is of no 
concern to him whatsoever. He’s very clearly shown, Mr. Chair, 
a story that does not add up, a story that makes no sense, a story 
of when he learned about information, about leaking 
confidential specifics about a person. He says he learned at the 
end of the week. We know it was early on. We know, Mr. 
Chair, that this Premier is stubborn on this front and is 
unwilling to admit that he has made an error. In fact today he 
said he has no regrets, Mr. Chair. 



May 6, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7141 

I fully believe that this government has steered the Health 
Quality Council in a direction where it has taken it away from 
the traditional work that it has done. We have seen on so many 
instances from this government where they have been so 
concerned with the optics, with saving face, and trying to 
salvage something out of this lean pet project experiment that 
has gone horribly wrong. 
 
My question to the Premier was, what is the status of the 
long-term care survey? The Health Quality Council said 
because of the lean work being shoved on it by this 
government, that that is being put at risk. My question to the 
Premier: what is the status of this long-term care surveying? Is 
it happening, and when will we see the results? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Members of the committee, and to my hon. 
friend, we’re getting that information with respect to the survey. 
We should have it momentarily. 
 
And while we’re waiting, we’ve just noted that the member 
asked a question earlier in estimates about the fact that the 
member for Yorkton had tabled a petition with respect to the 
issue of abortion. And he was asking it, he said, to find out if 
it’s an indication of whether or not our position’s changed. I 
told him it hadn’t. His House Leader, the member for 
Elphinstone also tabled the petition. He didn’t mention that in 
his question, and I just wanted to know if his position also 
remains the same. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Yes it does, Mr. Chair. When we think about 
the important work that is at stake here when we come to the 
care of seniors in this province, sadly, Mr. Chair, here in the 
Assembly, we’ve had many examples where there have been 
premature deaths in care facilities. I think of Margaret 
Warholm, Jesse Sellwood, Lorne Rowell, Fern Chingos, Irene 
Hohne, Lois Rein, and the elderly gentleman with dementia in 
Moose Jaw. We’ve heard many heartbreaking and tragic stories 
that have come forward to the legislature that haven’t been 
made public, and we know that the Ombudsman has received 
79 formal complaints about seniors’ care here in our province. 
 
We’ve had a big discussion about what needs to happen for 
seniors’ care here in Saskatchewan in order to guarantee that 
every citizen has the protection, has the quality of life, and the 
dignity that they deserve. 
 
My question to the Premier: when it comes to minimum care 
standards, why has he been so stubborn? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, we have minimum care 
standards. The document’s 193 pages. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, to suggest that they have minimum 
care standards is simply not credible, and you don’t have to 
actually take anyone’s opinion for, or view of that, except for 
the political staffers of Sask Party ministers when we talk about 
minimum care standards. We know that it was this government 
that pulled them. Here is what one former Sask Party political 
staffer — he was the chief of staff to the Minister of Health — 
said, “Is there any further policy development or requirements 
under each of the items under section 1.4 for care standards? 
These are good but extremely general.” A senior ministry 
official wrote back saying, “I do not believe there are more 

specifics.” 
 
When we’re confronted here in this legislature in this province 
with story after story of seniors who are dying prematurely, of 
seniors who do not have the care that they deserve, the quality 
of life they deserve, the safety that they deserve, Mr. Speaker, 
how can the Premier pretend that these standards are anywhere 
close to adequate when his very own political staffers say they 
are extremely general and bureaucrats say that there are no 
specifics? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — With respect to the long-term care survey, 
we have officials including the deputy minister on the other end 
of an iPad with the minister who are unaware of the long-term 
survey that you’re referencing. 
 
There is the hospital, the acute survey, and I’ve already 
answered that question. So maybe that’s it. I don’t know if it’s 
something else that you’re aware of. We’re not, but we would 
be happy to try to find out a bit more about it and answer your 
question. We’re just not aware of such a long-term care survey 
that would be the purview of the Health Quality Council or any 
other agency or partner within the health care system. 
 
You know, Mr. Chairman, I think it’s fair to say, we know that 
improvements are needed with respect to seniors’ care in the 
province. I think it’s fair to say that we recognized this 
immediately upon election and even when we were serving in 
opposition because in opposition we watched the government of 
the day close long-term care beds. At a time when the 
population was rapidly aging, the NDP closed long-term care 
beds in government, and so we knew that it was an issue then, 
and we have sought of course to meet the challenges around 
long-term care. 
 
We freely admit there’s more work that needs to be done but, 
you know, there are over 800 more front-line workers in LTC 
[long-term care] and integrated facilities in the province than 
there were when the members opposite were in government, 
over 800 more front-line workers. There are more nurses of 
every designation, many of them involved in seniors’ care. 
 
We’re building new long-term care facilities after members 
opposite were closing long-term care facilities. We’re investing 
through, as we did, a partnership with the Catholic Health 
Ministry, early on in the life of the government, and Amicus. 
That was one example. There’s a Swift Current project. There’s 
13 others in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
We know there’s more that needs to be done, Mr. Chair. 
There’s no question about it. But again I would say, if the best 
indicator of future behaviour is past behaviour, the best chance 
for improvement and progress for long-term care in this 
province is with members on this side of this House versus the 
record of members opposite. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, it is concerning that they would not 
know about the effect of forcing lean on the Health Quality 
Council and what that means for the important work that’s 
being done. This survey in particular is talked about in the 
PKPO [Provincial Kaizen Promotion Office] transition plan, 
and we can talk about this on subsequent days as well. 
 



7142 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2015 

I know time is marching, but my question to the Premier, Mr. 
Chair, is this: does the Premier support regulated staffing ratios 
in child care facilities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well I’m interested in this notion from the 
Leader of the Opposition to regulate staffing levels, I think he 
said, in daycare. Certainly the ministry, the government is 
available if anyone has a concern with respect to the quality of 
care that’s provided. The member will know though that there 
are many daycare operators in the province, many of them who 
perform a very valuable service, who do a great job of 
providing care in their home that would fall out this category. 
So is he suggesting that all of them should now be regulated? 
I’m not sure where he’s going. But I would say that if there’s 
any concerns that someone has, the Minister of Education has 
confirmed that those can be looked at if they’re presented. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, in the same way that regulated 
standards and ratios are required for child care, you know, at a 
child care centre for example . . . You have so many staff 
members and care providers required for infants, for toddlers, 
for preschool because there are standards in place because it is 
recognized that in order to ensure that the right care is there, 
you need a certain number of people to do the job. And that’s 
why they’re there for child care. 
 
My question to the Premier: we think about seniors’ care. We 
know that a certain number of people are required to do the job 
in order to provide enough care so that we don’t have examples 
of seniors dying prematurely because of short-staffing, because 
of a lack of availability of staff to make sure that needs are 
being met. So my question to the Premier: if standards are 
needed for things like child care to have the right number of 
staff present, why does he believe that they are not required for 
seniors’ care here in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — You know, if the hon. member is trying to 
present the fact to the House that it’s a strictly per-child ratio or 
standard within child care, that’s not the case. He knows it’s 
about workload. He knows there’s flexibility within a child care 
environment for the needs of those . . . Well it’s true. The 
member from Riversdale doesn’t believe it, but it is true. And 
that’s precisely what the standards are in long-term care as well. 
They’re very much about the individual resident, the individual 
patient. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we’re going to continue to increase resources, as 
we have in the past, for long-term care in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I look forward to a bit of a wrap here, as we 
have concluded the evenings proceedings. But you know, with 
respect to long-term care, the record of the government is one of 
significant progress over what was the case when members 
opposite were in government. We acknowledge there’s more to 
be done. 
 
[18:15] 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Chair, the regulations in place for child 
care show the maximum number of children that one person can 
be responsible for. Very clearly they are provided on the 
ministry website because it’s recognized that those standards 
need to be in place in order to ensure that people are properly 
cared for. If the rationale applies to children, I believe it applies 

to seniors as well. This government needs to be recognizing 
that. 
 
Mr. Chair, I know we’ve reached the end of our time here for 
the questions and the time where we have sought answers, 
sought accountability, and we have looked for transparency 
from this government. But you know what? The responses that 
we’ve seen have not shone a light on what Saskatchewan 
people deserve to know. 
 
You know, we talked about, at the beginning, Mr. Chair, about 
this Premier’s decision to leak confidential information on a 
Saskatchewan private citizen. He says he does not regret the 
decision to do so. His story does not add up with respect to the 
timelines of events, but we have seen a stubborn decision to 
stick with the story even though it doesn’t make sense. 
 
We’ve talked about cuts, Mr. Chair, that have been experienced 
by Saskatchewan families, some of the vulnerable people here 
in the province. At the same time, we’ve seen the misplaced 
priorities and the poor spending decisions this government has 
made on a number of fronts when it comes to the expenses that 
they incur, the things that they’re willing to spend money on, 
the use of consultants without documentation and a rationale, 
when we see the decision for American lobbyists, when we see 
the decision to spend money on the things that don’t matter to 
Saskatchewan people and are not at the heart of the concerns 
that people have. 
 
Saskatchewan people deserve to know the information. They 
deserve to know about the $1.5 billion of needs in our school 
buildings here in the province. But this government says it’s a 
secret, and they don’t want to release that. Well, Mr. Chair, on 
this side of the House, we will stay focused on the things that 
matter to Saskatchewan people. We will stay focused on their 
priorities. That is what we’re committed to doing, Mr. Speaker, 
absolutely. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we come to the close, I do want to thank the 
Premier for this opportunity. I’ve not been satisfied with the 
responses, but it is an important opportunity. And I want to 
thank the officials for their role in this process as well, and I 
thank members for their presence here in the Chamber. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, I want . . . 
 
The Chair: — Premier. Are there any more questions from 
members? If not, I would ask both the Premier and the Leader 
of the Opposition if they wish to make concluding remarks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Chairman, thanks very much for this 
evening’s proceedings. Thank you as well to the member 
opposite for the question he’s asked. I want to thank the 
officials for being here. I’ll get this done now before I wrap up. 
We have talked a lot about a number of issues here, important 
issues. They’ve ranged from health care to social services to 
education to other matters of travel that are all certainly part of 
estimates and part of government accountability. 
 
But with respect to the important issues of health care and 
education and social services that have been raised by the 
Leader of the Opposition, I think he understands — I know that 



May 6, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7143 

he understands — that there’s only one way to pay for 
improvements in any of those things. There’s only one way to 
sustain a quality health care system, education system, social 
safety net. The only, only way to do it is the economy, is a 
strong and vibrant economy with as broad a base as possible 
and low taxes as possible so that we can, you know, complete 
the virtuous circle with that low, broad tax base attracting even 
more investment capital. That’s at the heart of our growth plan. 
 
We’re at a time in the life of the province today where there’s 
significant economic pressure, where families are losing their 
jobs in the oil sector. Where I live and in southeast 
Saskatchewan and up the west side and even in Regina where 
Halliburton has made some decisions for layoffs, we’re at a 
point in the economic life of the province where that pressure in 
the oil sector is real for families and real for the economy and 
real for the budget, down about $700 million in revenue. 
 
Mr. Chairman, you might know this. Throughout the spring, 
while we’ve been debating in the House various issues, we’ve 
had volunteers and MLAs door knocking, 20,000 doors 
knocked this spring. Do you know what we’re hearing on the 
doors? Not a lot of what the member had to ask today. What 
we’re hearing on the doors is the economy. There’s a concern 
out there about the economy. The good news is we appear to be 
diversified. The good news is a great announcement from Evraz 
responding to the budget’s new growth tax incentive, great 
announcement from Edgewood Products in Carrot River 
responding to our government’s budget and our growth plan. 
$1.7 billion expansion in a potash mine. New uranium sales, 7 
million pounds. 
 
So there’s hope that we have this diversified economy to 
overcome what’s happening in oil, but government needs to 
play a role in that. We need to be engaged internationally, in the 
case of resource sales. We also are the ones that need to provide 
the tools like new growth tax incentives to see the jobs expand. 
And if the opposition members can’t in three hours raise one 
economic issue, not one issue of the economy, the number one 
issue in the province, central to the provision of any quality of 
life we want, that is very telling. It’s telling tonight. It has been 
through session. There’s been virtually nothing on the 
economy. 
 
In the months ahead . . . Because in the election campaign that’s 
upcoming, and in just about 10 months, people are going to be 
asked to choose which party, which individuals have the best 
plan to keep the province’s economy moving forward to support 
health care and education and social services. And based on 
tonight and based on the session we’ve seen so far and what I 
expect to see or not see from members opposite, Mr. Chairman, 
the members opposite are not going to give them any reason to 
vote their way simply because they won’t talk about the 
economy. They will not. They refuse to talk about the most 
important issue facing Saskatchewan today. 
 
And so, Mr. Chairman, I think they’re a reasonably good 
opposition. I think the Leader of the Opposition is also a pretty 
good Health critic. But in about 10 months from now, that is not 
the decision Saskatchewan people are going to be making. 
They’re going to decide who the government should be. 
They’re going to decide who they want making these decisions. 
And based on what I’ve seen so far and the hard work we’re 

going to do to try to earn support over the next 10 months, I 
think they’re going to keep those folks over there and keep this 
party on this side of the House. 
 
The Chair: — I will give the Premier and the Leader of the 
Opposition a short period of time to thank the officials if they 
so wish. Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — I don’t think we can thank them enough. 
We have thanked the officials that have joined us tonight, but 
they represent thousands, thousands of public servants across 
the province who deserve not just the respect of members in this 
House but our thanks and the thanks of the people of the 
province. And so perhaps through you, Mr. Chair, and through 
the deputy, the senior deputy in the public service, we offer our 
thanks to these officials but to all of those who deliver services 
across the province, public services across the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I do thank the officials 
for their input. And I think it’s also appropriate at this time, as 
all members in the House have spent considerable time going 
through the committee process, that we thank everyone 
involved with the committee process and the scrutiny that is 
provided of the budget: those at the Clerk’s Table and those 
working in committees and those that keep this place looking 
great and keep us fed and everything else. So I’d like to extend 
my thanks to all those individuals involved. Thank you, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
The Chair: — We’ll now proceed to vote the estimates. 
Subvote (EX01), central management and services in the 
amount of $7,774,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX07), Premier’s office in the 
amount of $600,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX04), cabinet planning in 
the amount of $1,121,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. Subvote (EX05), cabinet 
secretariat in the amount of $499,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. Subvote (EX03), 
communications office in the amount of $1,373,000, is that 
agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. Subvote (EX08), House business 
and research in the amount of $442,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX06), members of Executive 



7144 Saskatchewan Hansard May 6, 2015 

Council, $133,000. That’s statutory and does not need to be 
voted. 
 
Subvote (EX10), Intergovernmental Affairs in the amount 
$4,480,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX11), francophone affairs in 
the amount of $779,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Subvote (EX12), Lieutenant 
Governor’s office in the amount of $684,000, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried. 
 

Resolved that there be granted to Her Majesty for the 12 
months ending March 31, 2016, the following sums for 
Executive Council, $15,752,000. 

 
Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
Members, there being no further business before the committee, 
I would invite a member to move that the committee rise, report 
progress, and ask for leave to sit again. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Chair. Mr. 
Chair, I move that the committee rise, report progress, and ask 
for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for 
leave to sit again. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. We await the Speaker. 
 
[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the committee to 
report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — The next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 10 
a.m. tomorrow morning. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 18:28.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7107 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7107 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7107 
  Kirsch ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7107 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7107 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7107 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7108 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7108 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7108 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7108 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7108 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7109 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7109 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Emergency Preparedness Week 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7109 
 Twelfth Year Gallery Show  
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7109 
 Remembering Justin Gaja, Kristian Skalicky, and Carter Stevenson 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7110 
 The Fiddle History of Canada Performed in Carlyle 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7110 
 Remembering Vinessa Currie-Foster 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7110 
 Autism Services of Saskatoon Opens New Group Homes 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7110 
 North American Occupational Safety and Health Week  
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7111 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Expenditures Prior to and During Government Trade Missions 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7111 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7111 
 Release of Information Concerning Worker 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7113 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7114 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7114 
 Responsibilities of Care Aids 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7115 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7115 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 179 — The MRI Facilities Licensing Act 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7116 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7116 
FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 Bill No. 177 — The Insurance Act 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7116 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 177 — The Insurance Act 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7116 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 General Revenue Fund — Executive Council — Vote 10 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7117 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7117 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


