
























































Hansard: April 29, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 56A  WEDNESDAY, APRIL 29, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7041 
 April 29, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
Clerk: — I wish to inform members that Mr. Speaker is not 
present to open today’s sitting. 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and 
Remote Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To 
you and through you to all members of the Assembly, it’s my 
pleasure to introduce 30 grade 10 students from the Yorkton 
Regional High School in the west gallery. Accompanying them 
are teachers, Mr. Perry Ostapowich, who is here at least a 
couple times a year, and it’s always a pleasure to see Perry; and 
Jessica Schmidt; and their bus driver, Kevin Coleridge. 
 
As is kind of customary with Mr. Ostapowich’s class, quite 
often he does encourage them to contact me through whatever 
source they can just to see if they can get some special 
acknowledgement. So I’ll do that again here today. I had four 
that I got contact from this time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ll ask 
them to wave when I call the names. It’s Jenna Eiffert — 
there’s Jenna — Sierra Unick, Helli Patel.  
 
And I guess a special shout-out to, yo, Colby Sparvier. Colby’s 
played a little bit of a trick on me. He tweeted me that I should 
check out his hot mixtape. And I thought he was musical, so I 
asked him downstairs. He said no, I’m just punking you. So I 
got punked by Colby Sparvier in the Assembly today, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I ask all members to welcome these fine grade 10 students to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To you 
and through you, I’d like to introduce some guests in your 
gallery who are here in Regina today to attend the 23rd annual 
Williston Basin Petroleum Conference. We have Terri Haverly, 
South Dakota state senator — you can give us a wave — Jeff 
Haverly, a former state senator of South Dakota; Steve Conzet, 
president of Wells Fargo Bank. We have Shawn Gab, chairman 
of the Rapid City Economic Development Board; David 
Kneafsey, the executive assistant to the Rapid City mayor; Ben 
Snow, the Rapid City economic development president; and 
Darrell Sawyer, the assistant to the vice-president of the South 
Dakota School of Mines. They will be attending the conference 
here today which is co-hosted by the Government of 
Saskatchewan and the Government of North Dakota, and the 
North Dakota Petroleum Council and the Petroleum 
Technology Research Council. I’d ask all members to join me 
in welcoming them to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if I can while I’m still on my feet, I 

have a school group here as well. And it’s not too often I get a 
school group from Saskatoon Sutherland, but I’d like to 
welcome the grade 7 students from College Park School, if you 
can give us a wave. I had a chance to bump into them just as 
they were coming in the door, Mr. Speaker, and very energetic, 
lots of pent-up energy after being on the bus for a couple of 
hours. So I very much would like to welcome them and their 
teacher, Lindsay Kelleher, Deanna Fast, Charlene Prpich, and 
Shauna Bradford-Wilson. I’d like to welcome you all to your 
Legislative Assembly, and yes, I will be providing some ice 
cream for the students. Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And just one more thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, while I’m on my 
feet, I’d just like to be able to wish my son a happy birthday. 
It’s his 13th birthday today, and I’m very sorry that I can’t be 
there, son. I love you, buddy. Take care. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to join 
the member opposite welcoming the delegation from the States, 
especially from South Dakota. 
 
My grandfather who came to Saskatchewan in 1913 spent seven 
years as an oil well driller and water well driller in South 
Dakota, working for Governor Norbeck and his brother before 
Governor Norbeck became the governor. And so we have many 
relatives in Rapid City from that side of the family. But also my 
mother’s family, her second cousin ran for governor of South 
Dakota, John Olson. And he was a Republican, so the members 
opposite would be really pleased to hear that. His only problem 
was that he ran for governor about a few months after President 
Nixon resigned, so he lost. 
 
But anyways, great to welcome you here. I have very many 
strong ties with South Dakota. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Policing 
and Corrections. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise today 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of this 
Assembly, Carla Ellert and her husband, Mike, and son, Alex. 
And they’re seated in your gallery, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Carla and Mike started Skate4Smiles to honour the memory of 
their son who passed away in 2010. I will share more of their 
story shortly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but I would like all members 
of this House to welcome the Ellerts to their Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and 
Remote Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. One 
more introduction, to you, through you, in the Speaker’s 
Assembly. Our first guest, one initial guest, is the magistrate 
from Australia, Catherine Crawford. Awarded the Churchill 
Fellowship and travelling to New Zealand, throughout North 
America, she’s looking at how communities are dealing with 
youth affected by FASD [fetal alcohol spectrum disorder] and 



7042 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2015 

involved in their criminal justice system. She’s been in Eastern 
Canada. She’s to meet with Judge Toth and others here in 
Regina and Saskatoon eventually, and Whitehorse and New 
Zealand. 
 
With her is Michelle Stewart, assistant professor of justice 
studies and strategic lead for justice intervention for Canada 
FASD initiative. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I ask all members to welcome these 
people to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Members, I’d like to join with the 
members that introduced our international guests. I’d like to 
express a welcome to them. It’s always good to have 
individuals from other countries, our neighbours to the south 
and those visitors from Australia. I hope you enjoy our way of 
doing things and our method of governance. So I would ask 
members to join with me in welcoming them. 
 
I recognize the member from Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the Minister of Rural and Remote Health in 
welcoming Michelle Stewart with the University of Regina here 
and her Australian guest, that’s Catherine Crawford. Welcome 
to the Saskatchewan legislature, and I hope that you learn much 
about Saskatchewan and have the opportunity to take that 
information home and use that in Australia. So I’d ask all 
members to join me in welcoming these guests to the legislature 
as well. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling for greater support for better schools 
here in Saskatchewan. And we know that far too many of our 
classrooms are overcrowded and under-resourced, and that the 
Saskatchewan Party government has eliminated hundreds of 
educational assistant positions, and that students often don’t get 
the one-on-one attention they need. And we know that none of 
this is acceptable, given the record revenues this government 
has had over the last eight years. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like 
to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on this 
government to immediately stop ignoring schools and start 
prioritizing students by capping classroom sizes, increasing 
supports for students, and developing a transparent plan to 
build and repair our schools. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. Homelessness is a major problem in La Ronge and 
other parts of the North, and it is getting worse. Shelter is a 

basic need for everyone, but under this government it’s getting 
harder and harder for people to find adequate housing, 
especially families, seniors, women and children who face 
abusive situations. The problem is getting worse because of the 
rising level of poverty, skyrocketing home ownership cost. The 
prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly take the following action: to 
cause the Saskatchewan government to build a homeless 
shelter in the Lac la Ronge area to meet the needs of 
addressing homelessness in the Lac la Ronge area. 

 
It’s signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I so 
present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 
pleased to rise again today to present a petition in support of 
maintaining hyperbaric services at the Moose Jaw Hospital. The 
petitioners point out that the people of Moose Jaw have worked 
hard for many years through fundraising and community 
activism in order to procure a hyperbaric chamber for the 
Moose Jaw Hospital. 
 
They talk about hyperbaric treatments as being essential for the 
proper treatment for many people living with diabetes, cancer, 
and other conditions. And they talk about how this hyperbaric 
chamber in Moose Jaw is the only unit of its kind currently in 
operation between Edmonton and Toronto. They point out the 
hyperbaric services will no longer be offered in the new design 
for the Moose Jaw Hospital because of the changes to the 
hospital design initiated through the John Black version of lean. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly require the Sask Party 
government to reverse its decision to scrap the hyperbaric 
chamber and to instead ensure that this service continues to 
be provided in the new Moose Jaw Hospital. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Moose Jaw. I 
so submit. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
rise to present a petition in support of safe staffing levels in 
long-term care. Mr. Speaker, in the prayer that reads as follows: 
 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan take the following action: to 
cause the government to commit to the creation of safe 
staffing levels for all valued members of the health care 
team and to reintroduce actual numbers of staff to match 
the level of care needs and the number of residents under 
their care in long-term care facilities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 



April 29, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7043 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by good citizens from 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition in support of retaining Yarrow Youth Farm. 
The individuals who have signed this document want to bring to 
our attention the following: that the government has closed 
Yarrow Youth Farm and they have now created an 
open-custody wing in Kilburn Hall, which is a secure-custody 
unit for youth considered at greater risk to their communities. 
The provincial Advocate for Children and Youth has declared 
he cannot endorse such a rationalization, as low-risk teens can 
be influenced or pressured by close proximity to high-risk youth 
who may be involved in serious crimes or gangs. I’d like to read 
the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the government to keep Yarrow 
Youth Farm open, to ensure a caring home environment for 
youth who have committed minor offences, and provide 
support to help these young people redirect their lives by 
setting more positive goals. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by individuals from Saskatoon. I so 
submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melfort. 
 

TheatreFest in Melfort  
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to stand in the House today to speak about TheatreFest 
2015 held last week in the city of Melfort. TheatreFest consists 
of seven long plays over a seven-night period. From all reports, 
the festival had a varied assortment of plays to entertain all our 
audiences. Community theatre groups from Weyburn, 
Battleford, Yorkton, Regina, Prince Albert, and Melfort all 
performed during the week-long competition. The plays 
entertained large audiences with live performance ranging from 
Adam and Eve to Shakespeare to a play about drama going all 
wrong. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the play with the longest name, The 
Farndale Avenue Housing Estate Towns Women’s Guild 
Dramatic Society Murder Mystery, by the Yorkton Paper Bag 
Players was judged to be the best play of the competition. 
 
Also recognized for their dedication to drama were two local 
ladies, Imogene Schick and Michelle Waldbillig, who gave 
many years of service to MAD, the Melfort Amateur Dramatics 
group. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the umbrella organization for TheatreFest is 
Theatre Saskatchewan, which is the oldest such theatre group in 

the country. I ask all members of the Assembly to join with me 
in congratulating Co-Chairs, Mel Annand and Peter Waldbillig, 
as well as the entire MAD [Melfort Amateur Dramatics] 
organization for hosting TheatreFest 2015 and making it a 
resounding success. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Regina Police Service Half Marathon 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Last weekend the Queen City was abuzz as runners, spectators, 
and volunteers headed outside for the 12th annual Regina Police 
Service Half Marathon. The RPS Half Marathon continues to 
display the Regina Police Service members and employees as 
community leaders and positive role models for active and 
healthy living. 
 
Over 700 people participated in this year’s event, walking or 
running 21.1 kilometres around Wascana Lake and the 
University of Regina. I’d like to commend all of those who 
headed outdoors, as the temperature was just barely above 
freezing and the wind was gusting up to 50 kilometres per hour. 
 
I’d also like to congratulate one-time legislative intern and 
current public servant, Kaytlyn Criddle, who took home the 
women’s title with a time of one hour, 28 minutes, and 23 
seconds; and Iain Fyfe who had the fastest time overall of one 
hour, 13 minutes, and 41 seconds. I’d also like to give a 
shout-out to Woody from Jack FM, who’s not just fast on the 
draw but quick off the mark with a time of one hour, 52 
minutes, and six seconds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to join me in thanking the 
Regina Police Service; Chief Troy Hagen; the event organizer, 
Patti Sandison-Cattell, as well as the many volunteers, sponsors, 
and organizers who donated their time and support into making 
such a great event and such a great tradition here in Regina. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 

Purple Blankets for Senior Auxiliary 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Recently I was fortunate enough to win a draw by the Insurance 
Brokers’ Association of Saskatchewan in which an MLA 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] wins 25 purple blankets 
to donate to a charitable organization in their constituency. The 
purple blanket has become the national symbol of trust and 
security when dealing with a professional independent 
insurance broker, and the IBAS [Insurance Brokers’ 
Association of Saskatchewan] would like to pass on the feeling 
to those in need. 
 
Last Friday Pat Panter from Panter Agencies and myself had the 
wonderful opportunity to deliver these 25 purple blankets to the 
Big River seniors’ auxiliary at the Big River Health Centre. 
They were very excited and appreciative of these new blankets. 



7044 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2015 

The Big River senior auxiliary is a social club that raises money 
for the long-term care home. They organize community 
fundraisers with the proceeds going to improving life for the 
residents at the care home. 
 
I was very pleased to be able to meet with the seniors, staff, and 
organizers at the auxiliary and at the long-term care home. They 
work very hard to provide their residents with the best of care. 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I ask all members join with me in 
thanking the insurance brokers of Saskatchewan for providing 
me with the 25 purple blankets to give to the Big River senior 
auxiliary. Thank you very much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Fundraiser for Musée Ukraina Museum 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This past 
Sunday I had the pleasure to attend, along with the member for 
Saskatoon Riversdale, the Elevate to Celebrate Gala, the annual 
fundraiser for the Musée Ukraina Museum, located in my 
constituency. For many years, the museum has been an 
important part of our city’s cultural landscape. This August 
marks the 60th anniversary of its operations in Saskatoon. 
 
Saskatoon’s Ukrainian community has been fundraising for 
many years for their new museum. Their beautiful new 
building, now open on Avenue M, is close to local Ukrainian 
churches and seniors’ homes, and it houses more than 20,000 
artifacts. The museum is located in Pleasant Hill, a 
neighbourhood that has had a Ukrainian flavour for a very long 
time. I’m glad that tradition will continue with the museum’s 
new building. With the generous support of Ukrainian 
Canadians all across Saskatchewan, they’ve been able to finally 
finish phase 1 of this impressive project. They are now looking 
to complete phase 2, which includes an elevator, finishing the 
second floor, and landscaping. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking 
everyone who helped make the Elevate to Celebrate Gala a 
great success, and also in thanking the Musée Ukraina Museum 
board of directors and volunteers for the work they do in 
promoting and preserving our province’s proud Ukrainian 
heritage. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Corrections and Policing. 
 

Skate4Smiles Supports Children’s Hospital 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Last month 
in my constituency of Regina Wascana Plains, the fifth and 
final Skate4Smiles Skate-a-thon was held. This fundraiser, 
which my colleague from Regina Dewdney attended, was in 
memory of Dawson Ellert. At the age of eight years, Dawson 
was diagnosed with a brain tumour. Dawson went to Saskatoon 
for surgery but sadly passed away soon after from a massive 
stroke. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only is the experience of surgery extremely 
traumatic for a child, but the hospital wards and rooms can be 
equally as terrifying, as it was for Dawson. The Ellert family 

wanted to change this for other children in care, so they started 
their annual Skate4Smiles fundraiser. All monies raised goes to 
the Children’s Hospital Foundation to ensure that the new 
hospital is a comfortable place for children and their families. 
The family was also able to name a beautiful family space 
bordering the pediatric ICU [intensive care unit] after their son 
Dawson. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year was the final year for this fundraiser, and 
I’m extremely happy to announce that it raised a total of 
$106,000 this year, Mr. Speaker, making the grand total over 
the five years just over $500,000. I ask that all members join me 
in thanking the Ellert family for all their amazing work that they 
have done to raise money for sick kids in Saskatchewan in 
memory of Dawson. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 

Children’s Hospital Jeans and Jewels Gala 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Last Friday evening the member for Saskatoon 
Fairview and I had the great pleasure to attend the 2015 
Saskatchewan children’s hospital Jeans and Jewels Gala in 
Saskatoon. This year’s gala had a candy theme and the ballroom 
at TCU Place was decorated with a spectacularly colourful and 
delicious display. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this annual gala is one of the most exciting social 
events of the year in Saskatoon and is the signature fundraising 
event for the Children’s Hospital Foundation. The Children’s 
Hospital Foundation realize that events like this not only bring 
the community together but raise funds to go above and beyond 
in caring for our sick children. 
 
The Children’s Hospital Foundation board Chair, Greg Yuel, 
and executive director, Brynn Boback-Lane outlined their $50 
million fundraising goal. A sellout crowd of more than 700 
people attended the gala including local celebrities, 
Saskatchewan Roughrider members, and members of the 
provincial business community. Sporting their favourite blue 
jeans and jewels, attendees enjoyed a fun atmosphere at the gala 
and were treated to delicious food, sparkling champagne, and 
many live and silent auction items. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thanks to a $235 million commitment from this 
government and the incredible generosity of Saskatchewan 
people and businesses, construction of a new state-of-the-art 
children’s hospital began last fall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
Children’s Hospital Foundation on another successful gala and 
in thanking the generous donors who are helping turn the dream 
of building a children’s hospital into a reality for Saskatchewan 
families. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Moosomin. 
 

Moosomin Emergency Services Spring Ball 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 



April 29, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7045 

Saturday, April the 18th, my wife and I had the privilege of 
attending the fourth annual Spring Ball in Moosomin. The 
spring ball is a fundraiser put on by the Moosomin Fire 
Department, Moosomin RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police], and Hutch Ambulance. 
 
So often these fundraisers feel like just another supper, but 
organizers of the Spring Ball provided a great dress-up and fine 
dining opportunity for all attendees. 
 
The goal of this year’s ball was to raise money to purchase 
cardiac monitors and breathing apparatuses for the Moosomin 
Fire Department. At this year’s event, the Moosomin Kinsmen 
Club presented a cheque for $30,000 to the Moosomin Fire 
Department for the purchase of new breathing apparatuses. This 
$30,000 will go a long way in assisting the fire department 
reach their goal of $60,000 needed for the new equipment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to extend our appreciation and 
gratitude for the efforts of our fire and first responders for 
ensuring the safety and security of our communities. I would 
also extend a special thank you to the spouses and families of 
the first responders. Their personal sacrifices so often go 
unrecognized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in thanking 
the emergency services ball committee and first responders for 
leading the way in this initiative. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Release of Information Concerning Worker 
 
Mr. Broten: — Will the Premier table the emails sent by his 
chief of communications and operations when she leaked 
confidential information at his direction? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, as the member has noted a 
few days ago, the Privacy Commissioner’s looking into the 
matter. We should allow the officer to do his work. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s pretending 
that he cares about due process when it comes to this file, only 
when it’s his poor actions, Mr. Speaker, that are clearly exposed 
here. The problem here, Mr. Speaker, is that the Premier’s story 
does not add up, and he’s given very contradictory statements. 
But the Premier has a chance to clear at least some of the air 
today if he tables the emails that his chief of operations and 
communications sent, that she leaked at his direction. Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t understand why he wouldn’t do that. He says, 
Mr. Speaker, that it was just general information. He says there 
were no specifics. He says this information was provided just 
on background, Mr. Speaker. So we’d like to see if that’s 
actually true. 
 

Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: why won’t he just table those 
emails today so we can see exactly what his chief of 
communications and outreach leaked at his direction? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much. Mr. Speaker, I 
would note for the record and for all in attendance here today 
that it is the Leader of the Opposition who has said, and his 
party has said, they’ve seen this gentleman’s file. And because 
they’ve seen the file, they’re convinced that he’s facing 
potential discipline in the workplace because he came forward 
at the legislature. By the way, that’s not true. The health 
region’s confirmed it’s not true. I’ve confirmed it’s not true . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Mr. Speaker, here’s the point I 
would make. I’d make this point to the Leader of the 
Opposition, notwithstanding his strange heckling right now. I 
would just say to him, he should probably provide to the House 
the file that he says he’s . . . If he wants documents tabled, then 
he should table the document. 
 
The basis upon which he has concluded that the only reason 
there’s any disciplinary, potential disciplinary implications 
facing this individual is because he came before the legislature. 
We know that’s not true. Mr. Bowden himself has now said in 
the media that some of the allegations, some of the complaints 
from his colleagues are true, Mr. Speaker. So whatever the 
Leader of the Opposition has, he should table it. He should also 
forward it to the Privacy Commissioner. I understand there’s a 
process under way. We’re happy to work with the process, and I 
hope he would too. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what this Premier is 
so afraid of sharing. Why won’t he table these emails that his 
chief of communications sent, Mr. Speaker? What we see from 
this Premier instead of accountability, instead of transparency, 
instead of a commitment to due process, we see this Premier 
leaking confidential information about a health care worker, 
throwing due process out the window, Mr. Speaker, all in an 
attempt to sully that care aid and to put a chill on other health 
care workers here in Saskatchewan. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, that this Premier received confidential 
information from the CEO [chief executive officer] of the 
Saskatoon Health Region on the only care aid that came to this 
legislature as a whistle-blower. We know, Mr. Speaker, this 
Premier saw a political opportunity. He saw a political 
opportunity to discredit and undermine the care aid. He saw an 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to cast doubt on the concerns brought 
forward, and he saw an opportunity to cast a chill on all other 
health care workers. And that is the quick decision that he made 
on a Monday when he directed the leak of the information, Mr. 
Speaker. The member from Sutherland is worked up. He should 
be concerned that his Premier is leaking confidential 
information, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know yesterday the Premier and the Health 
minister said what Mr. Bowden said was untrue, even though 
it’s absolutely backed up with their very own CEO tour report. 
My question to the Premier: why is the Premier making every 



7046 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2015 

effort to discredit this care aid, Mr. Speaker, and why is he so 
afraid to share what his office leaked? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, who’s worked up 
here? That’s a question I would offer for the member to 
consider. Well now, you know, he’s saying he’s worked up. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the hon. member and I disagree. I believe 
that the information was provided in the public interest and 
have said so because we want to ensure workers that they could 
come forward without any implications, that there were other 
reasons for the investigation of this particular individual 
predating his attendance to the legislature, informed by 
complaints by his colleagues, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we 
wanted to have the information out. 
 
You know, this is about debate. Fair enough. It’s been the 
Leader of the Opposition’s position that he doesn’t agree with 
that. He doesn’t agree with my position. So that’s fair. So that’s 
fair. I mean he’s saying that the information ought not ever to 
have been provided. Fair enough. Why then is he demanding 
that same information be tabled in the House today? 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, because this Premier said the 
information is general. This Premier said, Mr. Speaker, that 
there are no specifics, Mr. Speaker. This Premier said that it 
was provided simply as background, Mr. Speaker, but now he is 
afraid and will not have the courage to publicly table the 
information that he chose to leak to the media, Mr. Speaker, 
violating the privacy of that care aid. And members, the 
government, the Deputy House Leader is laughing. It’s a big 
joke to this government, Mr. Speaker. This is how serious they 
take this. 
 
From day one, Mr. Speaker, I have said that there should be due 
process, due process for this case. The Premier’s actions have 
undermined that entirely. Because of the Premier’s 
inappropriate actions, the government now has incredible 
motivation to ensure that they finish the job, finish the job of 
decimating this care aid’s reputation. And you can bet, Mr. 
Speaker, that they will be in overtime to do that. You sure can. 
Meanwhile, Mr. Speaker, this government keeps neglecting 
what really matters, and they keep pretending that problems in 
seniors’ care are just one-offs, that they’re isolated.  
 
Talk about messed-up priorities. All the time in the world and 
attention to leak confidential information; no attention to what 
actually matters for the priorities for seniors. My question to the 
Premier, Mr. Speaker: we know he’s doing everything he can to 
stick to his guns and try to pretend that this smells okay. 
Everyone knows that it stinks. He won’t apologize for the leak, 
Mr. Speaker, but will he at least stand today and admit that his 
inappropriate actions have compromised this entire process? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Let’s remember, let’s remember what we 
learned yesterday on this file, Mr. Speaker. Let’s remember 
what the Minister of Health reported to all members of the 
House. The information that that member brought forward to 
the floor of this Assembly, where we’re obviously duty bound 
to communicate the truth and have a debate about that, the 
information he brought forward from this gentleman in question 
was wrong. The characterizations of care at Oliver Lodge that 
he presented as fact, the Minister of Health has done the 
investigation, and those facts again, not surprisingly, coming 
from that member are incorrect, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the question then to the member is this: before he raised 
those questions in the House, did he do any due diligence? Did 
he do any research to find out if Mr. Bowden’s claims were true 
or not? Mr. Speaker, did he have a conversation with Mr. 
Bowden as to why he was asking for immunity, for protection 
in the workplace? I think these are all important points, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The hon. member now, as some sort of a tactic, is to demand 
that the emails be provided. I think members opposite have seen 
them. They’re the subject of debate because they were made 
public, not in a leak, but in a way that we’ve already described. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is this: is it still his position — 
because he said it in the preamble — is it his position that this 
gentleman is facing potential discipline in the workplace solely 
because he came forward to the legislature, or are there 
workplace concerns that should be dealt with? Mr. Speaker, 
what will the Leader of the Opposition say about that? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, with this Premier, it’s all attack, 
as opposed to all transparency and accountability. That’s very 
clear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we checked what Mr. Bowden had to say, and 
here’s some of the research that we found, Mr. Speaker. 
Staffing levels are an issue. Staff are stretched too thin with 
care aids, RPNs [registered practical nurse], LPNs [licensed 
practical nurse], and physio. If staff call in sick, they are not 
replaced. 
 
Thirty, 40, 60, 90 minutes go by waiting to go to the bathroom, 
very great loss of dignity when you have to just go to the 
bathroom in your pad. “My husband was taught when he was a 
child not to pee his pants, and now they are telling him to just 
go in his pants.” Mr. Speaker, you know where this is from? 
The government’s very own CEO tour report. Is it now the 
Premier’s position that his very own CEO tour report is all 
made up and incorrect? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I’ve indicated in the 
past in terms of what has taken place at Oliver Lodge, certainly 
the complaints that were brought forward by Mr. Bowden, the 
specific complaint about a ratio of 1 to 32 was not accurate. The 
policy that was put in place, the directive about changing a 



April 29, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7047 

soiled resident at night was not accurate. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are taking very seriously the 
CEO report. This one was taken place from 2013. Those have 
followed in 2014, 2015. 
 
But I would also say to the members opposite, the CEO tour 
report also says, RNs [registered nurse] are too busy and paid 
too well to do this. Is it the Leader of the Opposition’s opinion 
that RNs in the system are paid too well, as indicated by the 
CEO report? These are important reports, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
We also have to put them into context. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, here’s a question for the Premier. 
If the Premier’s being forthright, if the information, Mr. 
Speaker, that was leaked was simply general, if it was simply 
background, if it was innocuous, Mr. Speaker, why won’t the 
Premier table the emails that were sent by his director of 
communications and operations to the media as a leak? Mr. 
Speaker, why won’t he do that? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the fact that we’re having this 
debate centres around the principle, the truth of the matter, 
which is the government quite forthrightly has said there needed 
to be some extra information in this case provided. Why? Why 
did that need to be provided? The reason it needed to be 
provided is that member of this legislature who routinely stands 
up and is incorrect with the facts, Mr. Speaker, routinely, stood 
up on that day, presented facts, as the Minister of Health has 
pointed out that were incorrect, on behalf of this individual but 
asked three times for his complete protection from any 
workplace incidents for coming forward. I gave that promise, 
Mr. Speaker, and I stood by that promise and asked to be 
notified of any change in the status. 
 
When we were notified of the change in the status, we wanted 
to make sure that people understood with clarity and complete 
credibility that there was no other reason other than those 
workplace complaints of the individual for him facing potential 
disciplinary action, Mr. Speaker. That information was out. In 
fact that’s why he’s upset. He doesn’t agree with the 
government’s position. 
 
So again I would ask the member, what does it advance this 
case, Mr. Bowden’s, or even the inquiry by our Privacy 
Commissioner to table those particular emails when the fact that 
they were provided to the public through the media are the 
reason we’re having this debate in the first place? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Quality of Patient Care 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Peter’s complaints were backed 
up by the CEO tour report. I think the only people in the 
province, Mr. Speaker, that believe the bizarre tale that the 
Premier now is telling about this are the nodding heads in the 

camera shot behind the Premier because no one buys what on 
earth he is saying. Mr. Speaker, as opposed to being on focused 
on what matters, they’re focused on leaks. 
 
I think of a woman named Florence Bork. And Florence Bork 
lives in Swift Current. She has bladder, bone, breast, and lung 
cancer. She’s speaking out today, Mr. Speaker, because of 
major concerns related to short-staffing and overcrowding at the 
Cypress Regional Hospital in Swift Current. 
 
Florence is clear that doctors and nurses and other front-line 
health care workers are doing their absolute best. This is what 
she has to say: “They’re on the run constantly, but they’re all 
caught under this lean machine thing.” And she says that she’s 
personally seen two lean consultants following nurses around 
with stopwatches “. . . measuring how much she walked.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, Florence has tried to raise these concerns with the 
Premier’s office, but she says they have refused to listen to her. 
Florence has an important perspective to hear. My question to 
the Premier: why doesn’t he want to hear it? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — I’m not sure of the specifics the member is 
referring to. I can assure the member that our office in Swift 
Current is always wanting to hear from constituents if they have 
concerns or questions to raise about the health care system 
that’s being provided, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Swift Current, the hospital there, the seniors’ care facilities that 
are there are part of a provincial health system that has received 
a huge influx in new dollars, Mr. Speaker, not just for capital 
but also for operating. We know in the case of acute care, there 
are literally over 1,000 more nurses now providing care. There 
are 400 more doctors providing care, Mr. Speaker, province 
wide. We know that with respect to seniors’ care there’s, in 
terms of seniors and integrated care, over 700 additional care 
aids, those people on the front lines providing care in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
This particular case is something that we should look into, if we 
have not already. And I’m certainly happy to look into the 
details on behalf of this constituent, just as every MLA on this 
side of the House is prepared to do for any of those that they 
have the honour of representing. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Florence had a transfusion on a 
Friday. She was in pain, she was bedridden afterwards and 
feeling horrible. The doctor came in on a Saturday and said that 
she had to leave. She didn’t feel that she could leave; in fact she 
says she couldn’t even make it to the washroom, Mr. Speaker. 
But the doctor said that she had to leave or pay $90 a day. 
 
Florence does not blame the doctor, she blames this government 
and its lean pet project that she says rushes people out of the 
hospital far too quickly. My question to the Premier: does he 
think it’s fair to push a senior with four types of cancer out of 
the hospital after a major transfusion? 
 



7048 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2015 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Obviously the answer to that question is no, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And if that’s been the case, we would 
want to investigate it. 
 
Members of the House will know that we have, obviously, not 
just the additional resources of the Health department and of 
MLAs, we even have financed and funded a health care 
Ombudsman, resources within the Provincial Ombudsman’s 
office to look into matters such as this. 
 
I would just say that this question of the $90 is something that 
would be a surprise to me, and I’d ask the member for more 
details on that if indeed this is the case. If he would provide 
that, I think that would be helpful. But we’re going to look into 
this, absolutely, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Florence is not the only Swift 
Current resident speaking out today. Richard Parr is also 
speaking out. He says, “It’s absolutely ridiculous what’s 
happening in Swift Current.” Richard and his wife Irene were 
both in the Cypress Regional Hospital being treated for 
pneumonia, and they too were rushed out before they were 
ready to go home. Richard says, “It doesn’t matter where you 
are in your healing. They’ve got to kick you out and let 
someone else in.” My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier. 
What does he have to say to Florence, Richard, and Irene — his 
constituents — today? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not our job certainly to 
make clinical decisions nor to second-guess clinical decisions 
that have been made, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know the specifics 
about these cases, but they’re certainly worth looking into, Mr. 
Speaker. We know we’ve established, within the health care 
system, quality care coordinators who can look into matters 
such as this. Our office can, my office can and will. But Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I mean, I can’t second-guess what some doctor 
may or may not have decided potentially or recommended. But 
we can look into the matter, and we’ll do that. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Richard Parr was also told that 
he’d be charged $90 a day if he didn’t leave, Mr. Speaker. The 
situation is so bad in Swift Current that Florence has been told 
she won’t be able to get palliative care in her home city of Swift 
Current. She’ll have to leave her home city and go to Maple 
Creek, Ponteix, or Gull Lake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government, we know that they’ve had untold 
millions of dollars for their lean pet project. We know that 
they’ve had empty warehouses that they’ve secured, Mr. 
Speaker. And we know that the Premier has paid a ton to have 
an American lobbyist. Yet Florence, yet Richard and Irene Parr 
report major problems of short-staffing and overcrowding at the 
Swift Current hospital. Florence won’t even be able to access 

palliative services in her home city. My question to the Premier: 
how on earth can he possibly justify these misplaced priorities 
and the neglect of what really matters? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just 
categorically reject the premise of the NDP [New Democratic 
Party] member’s question. We’ll look into these specific cases. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when we formed government, we found a 
health care system left behind by his party that was woefully 
lacking in human resources. We were short 1,000 nurses 
because of his party. They had 16 years in government, and the 
last few years, they had hundreds of millions of dollars sitting 
in a bank account. But, Mr. Speaker, there was this huge deficit 
in human resources in health care. We had a doctor shortage. 
We had a nursing shortage. We had a care aid shortage. They 
were closing long-term care beds, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And so as a government we have taken steps to redress, to 
address the deficit left behind. And there’s 2,600 nurses of 
every designation, more now than there were under the NDP. 
There are 400-plus doctors practising. We’re opening new 
long-term care beds instead of closing them as they did under 
the NDP. We went from the longest surgical wait times in the 
country under the democratic socialists to the shortest, shortest 
wait times in the country. Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We know there’s work to be done, we know that what happened 
over 16 years can’t be fixed over four or eight years, or 
overnight. But Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve made huge progress, 
no thanks to the rhetoric that we used to get from members 
opposite, and we still get. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what was 
lacking then was action. The province has it now. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this Premier’s so ill-informed 
about what’s happening on the front lines, he doesn’t know that 
his own constituents are being pushed out of the hospital, Mr. 
Speaker, or facing charges of $90 a day. Why doesn’t Florence, 
Mr. Speaker, have access to palliative services in Swift Current 
that she will need? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier can dismiss these concerns coming 
from his constituents if he wants to, Mr. Speaker, but these 
concerns are real and they deserve his attention, Mr. Speaker. 
They deserve them to be taken seriously. A senior with four 
types of cancer says she was rushed out of the hospital before 
she was ready. She says she’s seen the mess that lean has 
created in our health care system. She’s been told that she’ll 
have to leave her city to access palliative services. And Rich 
and Irene back up what Florence is saying. But, Mr. Speaker, 
this Premier doesn’t listen. He doesn’t show attention to this 
matter. 
 
Do you know where he shows attention? He shows attention 
tracking the one care aid, Mr. Speaker, who comes as a 
whistle-blower to this legislature, spends his energy, his time, 
his concern on leaking confidential information, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s where this Premier spends his time, his focus, and his 



April 29, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7049 

energy because he’s more consumed about the politics of his 
own self-interest, Mr. Speaker, as opposed to what works best 
for the people here in the province. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: how many Richards, 
how many Florences, how many Irenes need to come forward 
before this Premier will take this seriously? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, well certainly the Premier has indicated that this side 
of the House, he, as an MLA and as the Premier of the province 
representing his constituents, takes this very seriously. We’d be 
happy to look into the specifics of this situation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What I can say and tell the members of the public is that the 
funding for our regional health authorities under this 
government is up $1.2 billion from the time the members 
opposite left office, a 57 per cent increase in funding to our 
RHAs [regional health authority]. Funding for that particular 
health region, the Cypress Health Region, up 46 per cent, from 
$83 million under the NDP to $122 million in this year’s 
budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can also inform the members of the 
House the significant work that has been done all across this 
province when it comes to reducing the wait times that we have 
for surgery, when it comes to reducing the wait times that we 
have for diagnostic procedures because of the record investment 
that this side of the House has dedicated. We used to have a 
time in this country, in this province, the longest wait times for 
surgeries. In five, six years we have reduced that to the shortest 
wait times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had a government of the day, back under the 
NDP, that thought a wait time for MRIs [magnetic resonance 
imaging] of 22 months was okay. We don’t agree on this side of 
the House. That’s why we’ve invested record, significant 
dollars into health care to make improvements. There’s more 
work to be done, but after the mess we had to clean up from the 
members opposite, you bet there’s more work to be done. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the opposition Deputy 
Leader. 
 

Investment in Education Infrastructure 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, on Tuesday the Premier 
was asked why the government won’t release information about 
the $1.5 billion of school infrastructure needs. He replied, “The 
list in relation to education infrastructure has been supplied.” 
What did the Premier mean by that? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we have invested record 
amounts in capital in our school system, as opposed to the 
members opposite that chose to close 176 schools. Mr. Speaker, 
I could advise we’ve increased operating funding by 31 per 

cent. We’ve increased capital spending by 320 per cent. We’ve 
increased child care spaces by 53 per cent. We’ve increased 
pre-K [pre-kindergarten] spaces by 104 per cent. We’ve 
increased early child intervention funding by 40 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to do that kind of thing. 
We’re working with the school divisions to identify capital 
priorities. We’ve provided record amounts of money this year 
in this year’s budget for preventive maintenance and renewal. In 
fact, Mr. Speaker, this year it is over $30 million that goes 
directly to school divisions that they can allocate as they see fit 
for improvements in their school divisions. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The Premier said the list has been 
supplied. It certainly hasn’t been supplied, Mr. Speaker. In fact 
this government’s gone to great lengths to shut down freedom 
of information requests, saying that this is somehow some sort 
of cabinet secret. 
 
And in fact we also asked questions through freedom of 
information about the list as it relates to urgent repairs. And we 
know schools are propped right now with two-by-fours and 
two-by-sixes because they’re structurally unsound. We also 
received from government that they’re not going to provide that 
information, in fact not compliant with the law. You know, this 
is important to the families across Saskatchewan. The state of 
our kids’ schools is critically important. 
 
That Premier wants to pretend that he can leak information 
about a private citizen to discredit his story, and somehow that’s 
in the public’s interest. But, Mr. Speaker, why won’t the 
Premier release the information that’s directly relevant to the 
safety of the kids’ schools all across Saskatchewan? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting who’s taken to 
their feet to talk about being discredited or providing accurate 
information. Very interesting coming from that particular 
member there, the Deputy Leader of the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re happy to share the list. We’re happy to 
share the list, Mr. Speaker. It’s the top 10 major capital 
requests. It’s the top 10 major capital requests in education. We 
could provide it to members opposite. It probably represents 
over $1 billion investment, Mr. Speaker. These are projects that 
have not yet been undertaken. They have not yet been 
undertaken by the government, but here’s a good indicator that 
they will be undertaken, Mr. Speaker, because no government 
in the modern history of this province has invested more in 
education capital than this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For years and years — and, Mr. Speaker, here’s why we have to 
build new schools — for years and years under those members 
opposite, the economy underperformed. We had some of the 
highest . . . the worst job creation record in the country, Mr. 
Speaker. People were leaving. We didn’t need to build new 
schools. 
 
The bottom line, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is today we need new 



7050 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2015 

schools right across this province, and no government like our 
government is committed to building those schools and 
investing education capital. It’s why they sit where they sit, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and why they’ll be there for a long time. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee of the Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 159, 
The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act without amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I request leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and 
that the bill be now read the third time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Agriculture has 
requested leave to waive consideration of Committee of the 
Whole on Bill No. 159, The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act 
and that it be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 159 — The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that this 
bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister 
that Bill No. 159, The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on the Economy. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report Bill No. 161, 
The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2014. This is a bilingual bill with 
amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of the 
Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — I request leave to waive consideration in the 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill and its 
amendment be now read the third time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 
161, The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2014 and that the bill and its 
amendments be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read a 
first time? I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 

Bill No. 161 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 
2014 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune 

 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — I move that the amendments be now read a 
first and a second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister 
that the amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First and second 
reading of the amendments. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 161 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 
2014 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune 

 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — I move that this bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister 
that Bill No. 161, The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2014 be now 



April 29, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7051 

read the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee for Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 174, 
The Registered Teachers Act without amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole, and that this bill be 
now read the third time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 
174, The Registered Teachers Act and that it be now read the 
third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 174 — The Registered Teachers Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Education that Bill No. 174, The Registered Teachers Act be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 175, 
The Registered Teachers Consequential Amendments Act, a 
bilingual bill, without amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
the Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I request leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and 
the bill be now read the third time. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 175 — The Registered Teachers Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 portant modifications 
corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Registered Teachers Act 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 
175, The Registered Teachers Consequential Amendments Act 
and that it be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 163, 
The Education Amendment Act, 2014, a bilingual bill, without 
amendment. 
 



7052 Saskatchewan Hansard April 29, 2015 

The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I request leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and 
the bill be now read the third time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Education has 
requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 
Whole on Bill No. 163, The Education Amendment Act, 2014 
and that it be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister may proceed to third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 163 — The Education Amendment Act, 2014 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move this bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Education that Bill No. 163, The Education Amendment Act, 
2014 be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 178 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 178 — The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2015 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased 
to enter the debate here today on Bill No. 178, An Act to amend 

The Income Tax Act, 2000. This bill does a number of things, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, including responding to the Canada 
Revenue Agency requesting a few amendments to the 
provincial Act to conform to amendments that were made to the 
federal Act. So those are few of the . . . That’s part of this bill, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, but there are a few things in this bill that 
pertain to this government’s decisions to scrap or to cut 
programs in their most recent budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
[14:30] 
 
I think it’s important to talk about the graduate retention 
program savings. The change to this program, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, will have dramatic impact on citizens of Saskatchewan 
who entered into good faith, perhaps entered into university 
four years ago thinking . . . This program has been in place 
since 2008, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and people counted on . . . 
There are many people who count on programs when they enter 
school. They think about the long-term plan. Okay when I enter 
university, I will be paying this much tuition, and this is how 
much I can expect to earn when I get out. This is what I expect 
or hope for student loans. This is how I will pay my student 
loans back. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the reality is, moving this from a 
refundable tax credit to a non-refundable tax credit means it will 
have an impact on some of those who graduate, who aren’t 
graduating into high-paying positions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
positions that we need people in, Positions I can talk about 
myself as graduating with a Bachelor of Social Work degree. 
Most people don’t graduate with Bachelors of Social Work 
degrees because they think they’re going to be making tons and 
tons of money, Mr. Speaker. They graduate with those degrees 
because they want to make a difference in people’s lives, and 
they know that they’ll be working in professions that don’t pay, 
or in a profession that often doesn’t pay a lot of money. They’ll 
be working in the CBO [community-based organization] sector 
earning not a lot of money but doing incredibly fulfilling work. 
But they still need to pay their bills, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I think about myself who went back to school as a mature 
student. I’d been a reporter for many years and made a career 
change and decided to go back to school as a single parent at 
the start of the 2000s. I think I returned to school in 2001 or 
2002, Mr. Deputy Speaker, before this program existed. But I 
can tell you that when I went back to school, I thought about 
my earning potential. I thought about what I could afford to 
take on as a single parent, all those kinds of things. 
 
And the reality is this government had this program in place. I 
can tell you, in 2014, just this last year, I finally paid off my 
student loan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But there are people who 
counted on being able to get the refundable tax credit that they 
could apply directly to their student loans, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
If you take a single parent, if you take a single parent, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and the tax credits that they are eligible for 
because they’re single parents, because they have a child, 
because they fall under certain categories, they will not be able 
to get the full benefits of this tax credit which the government 
had committed to in their election platform, Mr. Speaker. This 
is a broken promise by this government in changing this 
particular tax credit, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 



April 29, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7053 

I would congratulate the government perhaps, well . . . Hey, 
you apparently liked the NDP tax credit better because this is 
exactly what was in place, slightly enhanced, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, under the NDP. 
 
So they’ve broken a promise and as well have impacted the 
lives of people who will have student loans to pay back. 
University isn’t getting any cheaper, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Cost 
of living isn’t getting any cheaper. We’ve got housing 
challenges that people face, child care challenges. All of those 
things impact you when you are attending school, particularly 
as a single parent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Another part of this particular bill is the cut to the active 
families benefit. So this program is now income-tested for 
families earning less than $60,000. There are many 
middle-class families who earn more than $60,000 but still 
struggle to make ends meet. Sixty thousand dollars, if you have 
children, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is not a lot of money. And you 
know the reality is there’s a lot of people earning, dual-income 
families earning $60,000 or more busting their butts, Mr. 
Speaker, working multiple jobs sometimes to be able to get to 
that threshold to pay for their mortgage, to pay for their rent. 
The food has gone up, utilities under this government, Mr. 
Speaker. This is a slap to all those very hard-working 
middle-class families, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So this bill is before us to make those changes, for this 
government to be able to enact the decisions that they made in 
this last budget that will directly impact families negatively here 
in Saskatchewan, hard-working middle-class families who are 
doing what they can to get ahead. 
 
I think about the active families benefit. It wasn’t a lot of 
money, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but it was $150 refundable tax 
credit to help support your kids in activities. Anybody who has 
ever raised a child knows that children are costly and making 
sure that children are connected to good physical activity costs 
a lot of money. I think about my own kids and the sports they 
play or the activities that they’re involved in, and it adds up, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. So $150 refundable credit was of great use 
to many folks and just because you’re over the $60,000 
threshold, which it’s now at right now, doesn’t mean it’s clear 
sailing and life is easy for you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Lots of 
people work incredibly hard and struggle to pay their bills even 
at that income. 
 
So I do know that I have colleagues who will also be speaking 
to Bill No. 178 and we’ll have an opportunity in committee to 
have this discussion as well. But with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
I would like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 178, The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2015. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. To facilitate the work of committees this 
afternoon, I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House does now adjourn. Is the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until 
tomorrow morning at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:36.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7041 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7041 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7041 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7041 
  The Deputy Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................... 7042 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7042 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7042 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7042 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7042 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7042 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7043 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 TheatreFest in Melfort  
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7043 
 Regina Police Service Half Marathon 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7043 
 Purple Blankets for Senior Auxiliary 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7043 
 Fundraiser for Musée Ukraina Museum 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7044 
 Skate4Smiles Supports Children’s Hospital 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7044 
 Children’s Hospital Jeans and Jewels Gala 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7044 
 Moosomin Emergency Services Spring Ball 
  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7044 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Release of Information Concerning Worker 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7045 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7045 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7046 
 Quality of Patient Care 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7047 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7047 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7049 
 Investment in Education Infrastructure 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7049 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7049 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7049 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 7050 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7051 
FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 Bill No. 161 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7050 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 159 — The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7050 
 Bill No. 161 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7050 
 Bill No. 174 — The Registered Teachers Act 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7051 
 Bill No. 175 — The Registered Teachers Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Registered Teachers Act 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7051 
 Bill No. 163 — The Education Amendment Act, 2014 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7052 
 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 178 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2015 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7052 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


