






















































Hansard: April 16, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 49A  THURSDAY, APRIL 16, 2015, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6925 
 April 16, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to table the report, in accordance with 
subsection 38(1) of The Ombudsman Act, 2012, the 2014 annual 
report. As well I’d like to take the opportunity to introduce to 
the House the Provincial Ombudsman, Mary McFadyen, sitting 
up in the Speaker’s gallery. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 
you in welcoming the Ombudsman to the Assembly today. 
 
But in addition to that, and also in your gallery, there are a 
couple of guests I’d like to introduce, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to members of the House, the first guest is Eric 
Olauson. He is currently serving on the city council in the city 
of Saskatoon. His involvement in that community has spanned 
the Saskatoon Regional Economic Development Authority, 
Knights of Columbus, Prairieland Park board, Mr. Speaker. 
He’s currently a customer service representative at Edge 
Transportation. He and his partner Donna have four kids. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re hoping that he is going to soon lose 
his employment at Edge Transportation because he is the 
Saskatchewan Party candidate in Saskatoon University. And 
we’re hoping he moves from that, from the gallery to the floor, 
after the next election. I’d like to ask members to welcome him 
to his Legislative Assembly today. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, joining Eric in the 
gallery is Lisa Lambert. She is a four-term Catholic school 
board trustee, had a 30-year career at CTV [Canadian 
Television Network Ltd.] in Saskatoon. She’s also a director for 
the Saskatoon Friendship Inn, and she plays a leading role in 
our largest city in the Heart and Stroke Foundation and the 
Canadian Cancer Society. Her and her husband, Jim, have three 
daughters and they also have two granddaughters, Mr. Speaker. 
And we’re also very hopeful that her career will transition soon, 
in about a year, to the floor of the Legislative Assembly as she 
is running in the constituency of Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood for the Saskatchewan Party. I’d ask all 
members to join me in welcoming these individuals who have 
stepped forward to get involved in the public life of the 
province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . oh sorry. I’m Saskatoon Centre. I know that. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate that. I’d like to 
welcome the guests from Saskatoon. But, Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to the rest of the House, there are three young 

activists I’d like to introduce in the east gallery: Matt Lensen, 
Kent Peterson, Paige Kezima. They’ve been in the House many 
times before. They’re strong activists, not only for labour but 
also for human rights. I ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming them to their legislature. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of this 
honourable Assembly, two visitors to Saskatchewan seated with 
my wife, Linda, in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, who are tireless 
advocates for people living with a rare disorder called — and 
now this is the hard part — phenylketonuria or simply, as we 
call it, PKU. 
 
PKU is a rare genetic disorder which is not life-threatening, but 
is a threat to the brain. Every bite of food and sip of liquid is 
potentially a threat if it contains protein. People living with 
PKU must maintain probably the strictest diet known to 
medicine and eliminate almost all forms of natural protein and 
frequently take a medical food substitute. Happily since the 
1960s, every baby born in our province is tested for PKU on the 
second day of life. We test 12,000 babies to find just one with 
PKU. We do this to prevent severe intellectual disabilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery are Mr. John Adams from 
Ontario, who is president of the Canadian PKU non-profit and 
has an adult son with PKU. Mr. Adams is also Chair of the 
board of the Canadian Organization for Rare Disorders. And 
Mrs. Nicole Pallone of British Columbia is vice-president of 
CanPKU [Canadian PKU and Allied Disorders Inc.] association 
and has a young daughter with PKU. 
 
Two other guests that were to join us today but were unable to 
attend are Heather Garton of Saskatoon, leader of Saskatchewan 
PKU network, and also Dr. Dawn Danielson, specialist in 
metabolic disorders such as PKU. Dr. Danielson was born in 
Saskatoon, left with her family at an early age, took her medical 
degree in Winnipeg and advanced training in Calgary. She’s 
returned to her birthplace recently, and we welcome her back 
especially as she is the first metabolic doctor to live in our 
province for 15 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know all members of this House will be 
interested to learn the outcome of our guests meeting with our 
Health minister later today, I believe. Let us all give a cordial 
Saskatchewan welcome to these distinguished patient 
advocates. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it’s with great pleasure I’d like to introduce a 
group of students sitting in the west gallery from the Huda 
School, and I’ve had many opportunities to go to the Huda 
School. Accompanying them today are Ms. Melissa Mah — just 
give a wave — and Ms. Sandra Jost, and Ms. Diane Szabo. 
 
Again, I’ve had many opportunities to visit with the students, 
and I’m looking forward to having an opportunity to spend 



6926 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2015 

some time with them and get stumped as I do every single year 
and again. So I’m looking forward to the questions, and I’d like 
all the members to join me in welcoming them to their 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you and to all members of the Assembly, I’d 
like to introduce to you Mr. Clayton Finnell from Moose Jaw, a 
fine young man of 1,000-good-deeds fame from our fair city of 
Moose Jaw. And in a few minutes I’ll have a few more words to 
say about him in a member’s statement. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I noticed in the west 
gallery a group of students have just joined us from Grenfell 
High. We have 20 grade 8 students. They are accompanied by 
their teacher, Ms. Ann Dusterbeck, and parent chaperone, Ms. 
Tatum Duryba. I welcome the students to this Legislative 
Assembly and invite the members to join me in extending that 
welcome. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition calling for support for better schools 
here in Saskatchewan. We know that far too many of our 
classrooms are overcrowded, under-resourced, and that the Sask 
Party have eliminated hundreds of educational assistant 
positions; and that the condition of many of our schools are 
rundown, unsafe, or uninspected, and this government refuses 
to release information on the $1.5 billion of known repairs that 
are needed in our schools; and that none of this is acceptable 
given the record revenues this government has had over the last 
eight years. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
call on this government to immediately stop ignoring 
schools and start prioritizing students by capping 
classroom sizes, increasing support for students, and 
developing a transparent plan to build and repair our 
schools. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you so much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 
again today to present petitions on behalf of concerned citizens 
as it relates to the unsafe conditions created by this government 
on Dewdney Avenue, and their failure to act to ensure safety, 
Mr. Speaker. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on 
Dewdney Avenue west of the city centre to ensure the 
safety and well-being of communities, families, residents, 
and users; and that those actions and plans should include 
rerouting the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial 
funding, and be developed through consultation with the 
city of Regina, communities, and residents. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 
Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present a petition again today in support of safe staffing levels 
in long-term care. The petitioners point out that many aspects of 
long-term care are deteriorating under this government. They 
point out that this government of Saskatchewan needs to 
actually recognize the need for safe staffing levels to provide 
hands-on care to residents. The petitioners also point out that 
this government has removed the regulations requiring a 
minimum standard of care for seniors, which has resulted in 
neglect. And they also point out that chronic understaffing in 
long-term care facilities results in unacceptable conditions, 
including unanswered calls for help, infrequent bathing, and a 
rise in physical violence amongst residents. I’d like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the government to 
commit to the creation of safe staffing levels for all valued 
members of the health care team and to reintroduce actual 
numbers of staff to match the level of care needs and the 
number of residents under their care in long-term care 
facilities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Saskatoon. I 
so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise to present a 
petition in support of retaining Yarrow Youth Farm. The 
individuals who have signed this petition want to point out the 
following: that Saskatchewan currently has a variety of options 
to house youth offenders according to the assessed level of risk 
to their communities. Saskatoon had Yarrow Youth Farm, a 
facility for low-risk teens who benefit from an open-custody 
home with a caring, supportive environment, with programs to 
help residents live more productive lives. Saskatoon also has 
Kilburn Hall, a secure custody unit for youth considered a 
greater risk to their communities. The government closed 
Yarrow Youth Farm and created an open custody wing in 



April 16, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6927 

Kilburn Hall to accommodate Yarrow’s residents. 
 
Now the provincial Advocate for Children and Youth has 
declared he cannot endorse such a rationalization, as low-risk 
teens could be influenced and pressured by close proximity to 
high-risk youth who may be involved in serious crimes or 
gangs. Kilburn Hall is a more institutional environment that 
could intimidate and alienate teens that have committed minor 
offences. Here’s the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

They respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 
government to keep Yarrow Youth Farm open to ensure a 
caring home environment for youth who have committed 
minor offences and provide support to help these young 
people redirect their lives by setting more positive goals. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by a number of individuals from 
Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — I inadvertently tabled two reports this 
morning, so I should comment that the Public Interest 
Disclosure Commissioner annual report 2014 was also tabled in 
accordance with section 23 of The Public Interest Disclosure 
Act. It’s on the flip side of the Ombudsman’s report, so you 
have it; you have received it already, just got to flip your book 
over. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Yom HaShoah 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, today is Yom HaZikaron laShoah 
ve-la G’vurah, which we recognize in Saskatchewan as 
Holocaust Memorial Day. Yom HaShoah is Hebrew for day of 
catastrophe, and it’s hard to imagine how there could have been 
any greater catastrophe than the Holocaust, with the senseless 
murder of 6 million Jews standing as one of the worst atrocities 
in human history. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, Gevurah, the Hebrew word for strength, is 
also an important part of this solemn occasion. It’s a reminder 
of those who did not go quietly but fought against the Nazis to 
protect their lives and the lives of their families. In the face of 
overwhelming odds, Jews in the Warsaw ghetto stood up to the 
Nazis and fought back. It was to in part commemorate that 
astonishing act of strength and heroism that the 27th day in the 
month of Nisan in the Hebrew calendar was chosen for Yom 
HaShoah. 
 
We remember those that perished. We remember those that 
resisted and those that survived. And on Yom HaShoah, we 
seek to honour them all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been my privilege to stand in silence and 
remembrance as the sirens wailed across the state of Israel to 
mark Yom HaShoah. I have stood in awe at the unbelievably 

powerful memorials at Yad va Shem and at Ha Beit Lohamei 
Haghetaot, at the Ghetto Fighters House Museum, and I always 
remember the sense of sadness and inspiration, of horror and 
courage that each of these memorials impart. 
 
I know that all members will join me today in reflecting upon 
the legacy of the Holocaust. May we all do our part to learn the 
lessons of Yom HaZikaron laShoah ve-la G’vurah. 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 

Documentary Commemorates Holocaust 
 
Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, along 
with other elected representatives, including the member from 
Nutana and Saskatoon city councillor Eric Olauson, I had the 
privilege last Sunday, a sobering honour really, of attending the 
screening of the Holocaust documentary Numbered at the Roxy 
Theatre in Saskatoon. 
 
This haunting documentary depicts how Auschwitz prisoners 
were tattooed with serial numbers. The screening was organized 
by members of Saskatoon’s Congregation Shir Chadash and its 
Holocaust committee and began with a memorial service to 
honour those who lost their lives in this terrible, horrific, brutal 
Nazi endeavour. Special recognition goes to the congregation’s 
president, Mary Melnychuk, who helped organize the event. 
 
All of those attending were noticeably moved by the disquieting 
story of those who experienced the horror of the Holocaust and 
how we must never forget those who perished and those who 
persist in demonstrating their courage, those who have endured, 
survived, and now have the courage to share their stories. Their 
stories resonate so powerfully today, this being Holocaust 
Remembrance Day. 
 
About 400,000 people were tattooed in the death camp of 
Auschwitz and its sub-camps. Today there remain only about 
4,000 with these sickening markings. As the population of these 
survivors declines with age, the film told of a movement in 
Israel and elsewhere that has the grandchildren of the Holocaust 
survivors tattooing their grandparents’ numbers so that their 
memories and stories live on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this documentary is important to mark and 
remember in history, especially in light of current 
circumstances around the world, to make sure that the world 
never experiences this type of horror again. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Equality Day 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Every individual is equal before and under the law and has 
the right to equal protection and equal benefit of the law 
without discrimination [and in particular without 
discrimination] based on race, national or ethnic origin, 



6928 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2015 

colour, religion, sex, age or mental or physical disability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the text of section 15 of the Charter of 
Rights and Freedoms, and tomorrow marks the 34th 
anniversary of this section coming into force. This anniversary 
is marked all across Canada as Equality Day. Numerous 
important cases have been fought and won all the way to the 
Supreme Court that has expanded these provisions to include 
the unemployed, pregnant women, and the LGBT [lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, and transgender] community. 
 
This section of the Charter is so important, Mr. Speaker, but 
there’s still so much more that needs to be done before we can 
have real equality for all people in our province. We know that 
women still earn less than men do in the workplace and are 
under-represented on our corporate boards and places like this 
Assembly. First Nations students still receive far less funding 
than their provincial counterparts, and newcomers all across our 
province still face racism and discrimination in many places. 
 
We’ve come a long way, Mr. Speaker, but we’ve got so much 
more to do to fight for equality in Saskatchewan. I ask all 
members to join me in recognizing this important milestone for 
human rights, but also to commit to making every day equality 
day and to fight for the right and dignity of all people in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

Moose Jaw Resident Performs Good Deeds 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure 
to rise today to recognize a truly outstanding citizen of Moose 
Jaw. Clayton Finnell has performed, so far, more than 300 acts 
of kindness in the past six months. In October of last year, 
Clayton set out on a mission to complete 1,000 good deeds as a 
way to try and bring back a sense of community which he sees 
slipping away. Mr. Speaker, in his own words, Clayton says 
that he is doing 1,000 good deeds “to show the world that no 
matter what, there is always something you can do to care for 
people you don’t even know.” 
 
Some of the smaller deeds he’s performed include placing 
flowers on the windshield of cars at a little boy’s funeral and 
dropping off bananas, apples, and oranges at seniors’ homes. 
One of the larger, more challenging deeds involved recruiting 
volunteers to help build a 30 by 15 rainbow out of snow for a 
little girl who suffers from a rare disease and collects rainbows. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people and businesses in Moose Jaw recently 
came together to surprise Clayton with a date night package for 
himself and his wife as a way to thank Clayton for his 
selflessness. Always thinking of others, Clayton, while he’s in 
Regina today, plans to do some good deeds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking Clayton 
for all he does for Moose Jaw and area. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
 

Realtors’ Quality of Life Gala 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, earlier this 
week I had the opportunity to bring greetings at the Association 
of Saskatchewan Realtors’ third annual Quality of Life Gala. 
Mr. Speaker, at this event I was joined by my colleagues from 
Regina Douglas Park, The Battlefords — a former realtor 
himself — and the member from Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Although this gala provides a great opportunity for realtors 
from across Saskatchewan to network, the main feature of this 
evening is the presentation of six $5,000 grants to a selected 
charity in each of the six regions across the province. This 
year’s recipients were Yorkton’s Women in Need, Shelwin 
House; the Moose Jaw Riverside Mission; The Battlefords and 
Area Sexual Assault Centre; Prince Albert Rose Garden 
Hospice Association; and Saskatoon’s Crisis Nursery and the 
Regina Sexual Assault Centre. 
 
The ASR [Association of Saskatchewan Realtors] also 
recognizes the contribution of their own members, as the 
Distinguished Realtor Award and the New Realtor of the Year 
were given out that evening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all monies donated were from the ASR Quality of 
Life Fund. The Association of Regina Realtors have what we all 
want. They want to have a province that is the best place to live, 
work, and raise a family. I would ask all members to join me in 
congratulating the Saskatchewan Association of Realtors for 
another successful gala as well as thank the Quality of Life 
recipients for the excellent work they do right within each one 
of their communities. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 
 

Emergency Telecommunicators Week 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to recognize that our government has proclaimed this 
week, April 12th to 18th, as Emergency Telecommunicators 
Week in Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan joins the rest of Canada 
to commend the work being done by all of our 911 operators 
and dispatchers. They are our unsung heroes. 
 
Last year in our province they took more than 300,000 calls, 
calls from people often facing the most difficult times of their 
lives. They not only have the technical skills and expertise but 
also the compassion and composure to do what it takes to stay 
with a caller online during a traumatic time, helping them stay 
calm, and to assure them that help is on the way all while 
dispatching lifesaving personnel and equipment. Their work 
with police, firefighting, rescue, and emergency medical 
services saves lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last evening I had the pleasure of attending the 
13th annual Telecommunicator of the Year Awards Banquet. I 
would like to extend our congratulations to this year’s 
honourees. The dedication of all emergency telecommunicators 
and emergency services personnel keeps Saskatchewan safe and 
strong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in thanking all of 
our emergency telecommunicators for the work they do each 



April 16, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6929 

day. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

Promoting Saskatchewan Outside of our Borders 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there was a time when the government in 
this province made no effort to promote Saskatchewan outside 
of our borders because they felt we had little to offer the rest of 
the world. Thankfully those days and that government are long 
gone. The editorial in today’s StarPhoenix states that the 
following, and I quote: 
 

Saskatchewan has come a long way from the days when a 
former premier refused to join a trade mission . . . because 
he considered the entire Asia region to hold little positive 
impact on this province or its economy. 

 
Mr. Speaker, last year Saskatchewan’s exports to India totalled 
nearly $1.2 billion, the largest in Canada by far, and now for the 
first time in 40 years we will be selling Saskatchewan uranium 
to India, $345 million worth over the next five years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The StarPhoenix editorial goes on to say that this 
historic deal, and I quote, “. . . marks the culmination of 
laudable efforts by Prime Minister Stephen Harper and Premier 
Brad Wall to restore uranium sales to India.” And I continue 
with the quote, Mr. Speaker: “Mr. Wall’s trade visits to the 
country in 2011 and 2014 . . . [without a doubt] had a great 
bearing on Wednesday's announcement . . .” 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve come a long way from the days when the 
government believed Saskatchewan had little to offer other 
parts of the world. It’s amazing what can happen when you 
have a province with so much to offer and a government, a 
Premier, and Saskatchewan exporters who believe in 
Saskatchewan. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Ambulance Service Fees 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Darrell Meck lives in Stockholm. 
He’s on a limited pension, and he’s had to deal with several big 
ambulance bills in the range of $1,200. Darrell writes this: “I 
have no choice but to refuse any future ambulance service 
because I flat out cannot afford it.” He also writes, “All I know 
is, should I require ambulance again, I definitely am refusing 
and will choose death over financial hardship.” What does the 
Premier have to say to Darrell today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all I 
would say that certainly we’d encourage anybody to use an 
ambulance regardless, Mr. Speaker, of what the bill would be 
after the ambulance has delivered services to the individual. Mr. 
Speaker, we want to ensure that people in this province have 
access to emergency services, to acute care services. What our 
health regions will do, what ambulance operators will do, they 

will work with each individual client, Mr. Speaker, based on the 
individual’s needs and circumstances. 
 
With respect to the inability to pay, Mr. Speaker, we do have 
supplementary health benefits that do provide some additional 
support for those people that are low income. I don’t know 
first-hand; I’m not familiar with this individual’s case. Certainly 
my office would be very happy to follow up to see whether or 
not this gentleman actually does apply for additional benefits. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, in past days we’ve heard from 
individuals who have contacted the minister’s office and not 
received the help that they needed. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, is 
that Darrell is not alone. He writes, “I’ve heard many other 
people talk about this and worry about ever needing an 
ambulance with their minimal income.” And we know, Mr. 
Speaker, from a recent investigation, almost half of 
Saskatchewan’s population would delay calling an ambulance 
because of the massive fees. Mr. Speaker, that is alarming. My 
question to the Premier: how can he possibly dismiss this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have this 
individual’s particular circumstances at hand, but my office 
would be happy to look into this particular case. If Darrell is an 
individual of low income, Mr. Speaker, there is the 
supplementary health and family health benefits that do provide 
support for individuals that are low income. I would certainly 
hope, Mr. Speaker, if the Leader of the Opposition has spoken 
or his staff has spoken to this individual, that they’d at least 
refer this individual to these programs to see whether or not his 
ambulance fees actually would be covered by the province 
through these types of programs, Mr. Speaker, rather than just 
let this individual think that the fees wouldn’t be covered. I 
don’t know the specifics of the case, Mr. Speaker, but we’d 
certainly be happy to reach out to Darrell if the Leader of the 
Opposition would provide that information. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we have seen the treatment that 
members of the public have received when they’ve come to the 
legislature with concerns around ambulance fees. And I just 
asked the Premier, Mr. Speaker, how it is not concerning that 
nearly half of the province’s population say they would delay 
calling an ambulance because of the fees associated with that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know Dave Carr came to the legislature 
because of the massive bills for his late wife, Catherine. Sara 
Bucsis-Gunn spoke out about the massive ambulance bills for 
her now-deceased daughter, Leandra. Calvin Vollet came to the 
legislature yesterday to raise concerns about the massive bills 
that he has had to deal with, and now Darrell Meck is speaking 
out about his massive ambulance fees. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan has the worst ambulance fees in the country, and 
that needs to change. 
 
My question to the Premier: how many people need to come 
forward with their concerns and with their stories of hardship 
before he will recognize that this is a major problem and it 



6930 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2015 

needs to be fixed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this year our government will pay $85 million towards 
the cost of providing ambulances for the people of this 
province, all across the province, Mr. Speaker. This represents 
about 71 per cent of the total cost of ambulance services, Mr. 
Speaker. As well, the money that we have budgeted in our 
regional health authorities to either contract through private 
operators or to provide a region-run service, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
up 50 per cent from the time that the members opposite were 
the government. Where they provided $49 million in funding 
for regions, we now provide, Mr. Speaker, just under $75 
million in those seven years increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure of the specifics of Darrell’s case. If 
the Leader of the Opposition though hasn’t referred Darrell to 
the Ministry of Health to determine whether or not Darrell is 
eligible for supplementary and family health benefits, Mr. 
Speaker, if he hasn’t done that, my office would be more than 
happy to offer that service to determine whether or not Darrell’s 
fees actually would be covered. 
 
[10:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Sara Bucsis-Gunn still owed 
$7,000 for ambulance service when her seven-year-old 
daughter, Leandra, died. Sara says, Mr. Speaker, that she spoke 
to the Rural Health minister by phone on March 25th, and that 
minister talked about how she could’ve perhaps followed other 
families’ examples and had some steak night fundraisers to 
cover the massive ambulance costs for her little girl. Mr. 
Speaker, she recorded that phone call and shared it with us 
because she was so horribly disappointed by that minister’s 
dismissive approach — steak night fundraisers. 
 
We have the worst ambulance fees in the country, Mr. Speaker, 
and this government’s response is to talk about steak night 
fundraisers and charity. Does the Premier understand why Sara 
is so horribly disappointed by that conversation? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Again, Mr. Speaker, we know that 
regional health authorities and operators will work with 
individuals, with their clients, Mr. Speaker, to make 
arrangements when it comes to paying these fees. We also 
know in this province, as other provinces have to make those 
decisions, Mr. Speaker, ambulance fees are not an insured 
benefit under the Canada Health Act, but we choose to heavily 
subsidize ambulance fees, as do other provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have to make decisions when it comes to 
other non-insured services under the Canada Health Act, and I 
spoke about that yesterday. For example, Saskatchewan has one 
of the best records when it comes to our drug plan, particularly 
our cancer drug plan, Mr. Speaker. This government has 
provided funding and approvals for over 40 new cancer drugs in 
the last seven years, Mr. Speaker. We also provide funding for 

things like anti-nausea medication for those people that are 
undergoing things like chemotherapy — not covered by every 
single province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These are the decisions that we have to make when it comes to 
the non-insured services, but we will continue to heavily 
subsidize road ambulances in this province. And we’ll also 
continue to provide over $10 million each and every year for 
STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] so that we have 
that emergency support, no matter where you live in this 
province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — No response from the Premier about whether or 
not it’s responsible and appropriate for the minister to address a 
grieving mother who lost her daughter, faced with a $7,000 
ambulance bill, Mr. Speaker, whether turning to charity is the 
solution.  
 
Clearly with the families and the individuals who have come 
forward, it’s clearly shown that this government’s approach to 
ambulance fees is not working, that the system is broken, and it 
needs to be fixed. This government needs to take it seriously. 
 
This government commissioned a review of the ambulance 
system a few years ago, but it has largely ignored those 
recommendations. We’ve heard repeatedly about the massive 
ambulance bills. We’ve heard about the sky-high interest fees, 
and we’ve heard about the practice of double billing for the 
same trip. Now we’ve heard from Darrell Meck, and Darrell 
says this: “I have no choice but to refuse any future ambulance 
service because I flat out cannot afford it.” And then the only 
tangible solutions that this government brings forward, Mr. 
Speaker, is to talk about steak night fundraisers and charities. 
That’s the type of response that people have experienced when 
they come to the legislature with their stories of hardship and 
their stories of suffering, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question to the Premier: can we expect any action from his 
government whatsoever on this issue of ambulance fees, or will 
the Premier, is he content to keep stubbornly dismissing the 
concerns that Saskatchewan patients are bringing to this 
legislature? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
tangible that we can offer Darrell, which apparently the Leader 
of the Opposition hasn’t offered him, is to see whether or not 
he’s actually a beneficiary under the supplementary health and 
family health benefits, Mr. Speaker. We will offer that service 
to Darrell, if the Leader of the Opposition wants to put us in 
contact or in fact, Mr. Speaker, I’ll offer the Leader of the 
Opposition the contact information that he could provide to 
Darrell to see whether or not he would be eligible for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we do know is that in some of the policies 
that have been put in place, there were regulations that were 
changed back in the late 1980s, regulations that in fact the 
members opposite campaigned on, the member from Lakeview, 
the member from Athabasca campaigned on to make changes in 
1999, Mr. Speaker. They never made those changes. 



April 16, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6931 

Mr. Speaker, we are reviewing some of those policies to 
determine whether or not the circumstances that were in place 
in 1988 and 1989 are applicable today, and we are undergoing 
that work right now. But what we’re going to continue to do, 
Mr. Speaker, is continue to invest record amounts into our 
infrastructure, into the services that we’re providing, the 
operational dollars that we’re providing, including the heavily 
subsidized ambulance services in this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Darrell had all of the information, 
and it was provided. My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the 
Premier. Is it his position that Saskatchewan families should 
have to rely on steak night fundraisers in order to cover 
ambulance fees, yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
as I said before, nearly 71 per cent of ambulance fees services, 
the cost to run ambulances in this province, are borne by the 
taxpayers of this province. Mr. Speaker, that equates to about 
$85 million this year, Mr. Speaker, of an overall total budget of 
$120 million to provide EMS [emergency medical services] 
services, ground EMS services. That doesn’t include the $10 
million, Mr. Speaker, that we provide for STARS each and 
every year. It doesn’t include the air ambulance as well that we 
provide as a service to the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we’re going to continue to do is ensure that 
we do continue heavily subsidized road ambulance service in 
this province. We’re going to also continue to provide record 
dollars to the regional health authorities, Mr. Speaker, to ensure 
that they provide the services, whether it be road ambulance, 
whether it be acute care, long-term care, primary health care, 
mental health and addition services. That’s the record on this 
side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The members opposite said a lot of things when they were in 
the government. They didn’t get a lot achieved, Mr. Speaker. I 
can understand why they’re frustrated at that, Mr. Speaker, but 
we’re making improvements each and every day in health care. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Design of Moose Jaw Hospital 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Can either of the Health ministers please 
explain why this government has cut the number of beds in the 
existing Moose Jaw Union Hospital? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the great 
news is that the new Moose Jaw Hospital is going to be open 
later this year after a long time of people in the Moose Jaw area 
and Five Hills Health Region wondering when they’re going to 
get a new hospital, Mr. Speaker. The members opposite had 
representation from Moose Jaw for many, many years in this 
House, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, when they had 
the opportunity to make some of those decisions and they never 

did, Mr. Speaker. So we’re getting that done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as members opposite will know, we’re moving 
toward a different type of layout in terms of that new hospital, 
Mr. Speaker. What they want to do is prepare to ensure that not 
only the staff but also the patients and the providers have an 
opportunity to make that transition as seamless as possible, Mr. 
Speaker. What the concept is is ensuring that we are being as 
efficient as possible, Mr. Speaker, in that hospital. And so they 
want to make that transition as seamless as possible, and that’s 
why they are making that move now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — We know that the new Moose Jaw Hospital is 
going to be smaller and have fewer beds, and it won’t even have 
the hyperbaric chamber, all because this government let its $40 
million American lean consultants shrink the size of the 
hospital. But many Moose Jaw residents don’t know that this 
government has already cut the number of beds in the existing 
Moose Jaw Hospital. How can the Health minister justify this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well as was 
announced when the Moose Jaw Hospital was announced in the 
design process, what we want to move to is, instead of having 
shuffling around, moving around our patients from one room to 
the next, Mr. Speaker, the design is so that we’re going to move 
the services to the patient instead of having the patient move all 
around the hospital. That’s going to ensure a more efficient 
design for that hospital, Mr. Speaker. And it makes sense in the 
months leading to the transition to that new hospital that we’re 
actually putting in place the processes in the existing hospital so 
that it’s a seamless transition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can say that this is what the concept has been 
met with: 
 

It’s a new concept with a lot of detail and discussion going 
into the layout and the flow of traffic through the hospital. 
What we’re seeing here is a renewal of health and the 
delivery of health to the citizens of Moose Jaw. It’s a 
pretty exciting time to see this new concept taking hold . . . 

 
That’s Deb Higgins, the mayor of Moose Jaw. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, this government has already cut 
the number of . . . [inaudible interjections] . . . Maybe they 
should listen to the question, Mr. Speaker. Maybe they should 
listen to the question. This government has already cut the 
number of medicine beds in the existing Moose Jaw Hospital by 
almost 40 per cent, and in the last eight months that are reported 
up until February, the medicine ward at Moose Jaw Hospital 
has been overcapacity. When you slash the number of beds and 
then have eight months in a row of being overcapacity, that 
sounds like poor planning and reckless decision making to me. 
We’ve even heard of seniors being placed in pediatric beds 
because that is the only space for them. To the minister: how 
does that make any sense? 



6932 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2015 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I can go on. It’s a quote: 
 

The “patient-friendly” hospital is being built using lean 
principles and will incorporate flexible care whereby 
required services will come to patients rather than having 
patients moved unnecessarily throughout the hospital . . . 

 
Again that was Deb Higgins, the mayor of Moose Jaw just last 
year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new hospital will feature a new 
patient-focused model of care where admitted patients remain in 
the same in-patient room throughout their time in the hospital. 
Instead of being shuffled around from room to room to room, 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to ensure that the services move to 
the patient, not the other way around. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new model of care, processes will be improved 
so that the nurses will actually be able to spend more time with 
the patients in the room. For example, all patient rooms will 
have supplies a nurse needs to care for the patients. Nurses will 
no longer have to walk away from their patients to get supplies, 
thus creating more time directly with the patient, Mr. Speaker. 
This is a more efficient way to deliver health services, and it 
makes sense to move, to transition in the existing hospital, so 
the staff and the patients and the providers are prepared for it on 
the day when the brand new hospital opens up later this year in 
Moose Jaw. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Is it the Health minister’s contention that 
being overcapacity and planning to be overcapacity is a good 
idea, Mr. Speaker? The Health minister should look at the 
numbers. The government has slashed the number of beds in the 
medicine ward in the existing Moose Jaw Hospital, and the 
medicine ward is now consistently overcapacity. 
 
This is all part of the government’s strategic plan for this 
hospital. The strategic plan talks about shrinking the existing 
hospital to fit into the new smaller hospital, and the government 
documents talk about a plan to discharge patients more quickly, 
to rush them out the door in order to make do with fewer beds 
and less staff. To the minister: How does this make any sense? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — If you want to talk about slashing health 
care, Mr. Speaker, if you want to talk about slashing health 
care, let’s go to 52 communities across this province that saw 
what that looked like under the NDP [New Democratic Party], 
or let’s jump in the Leader of the Opposition’s van and we’ll 
head down Wascana Parkway and we’ll see what it looks like to 
slash health care in the capital city. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of the new hospital in Moose Jaw, it’s 
going from 121 beds to 115 beds, but it’s going to put more 
focus on ensuring that we have outpatient service, that we have 
better primary health care in Moose Jaw. Moose Jaw is one of 
our primary health care innovation sites, Mr. Speaker, and 

they’re doing some great work around extending their hours and 
ensuring that they’re providing better services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new Moose Jaw Hospital . . . which members 
opposite, I know they don’t like this, but they had time, they 
had years to plan, to announce a new hospital in Moose Jaw 
when they had representation on this side of the House. It never 
happened, Mr. Speaker. But what it also is going to include is 
another fixed MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] for the people 
of southern Saskatchewan, for the people in Moose Jaw, thanks 
to the generosity of the foundation, Mr. Speaker, and people 
that want to see services like an MRI in that community. Mr. 
Speaker, this is a great project for the city, and you only have to 
ask the mayor about that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Canadian Wheat Board Ownership 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the federal government has 
handed the Canadian Wheat Board to a US [United States] 
agri-food giant and a state-owned company from Saudi Arabia. 
An incredible valuable organization that was publicly owned 
and farmer controlled is now foreign owned and Saudi 
controlled. Stewart Wells who is a farmer-elected Canadian 
Wheat Board director calls this the “ . . . biggest transfer of 
wealth away from farmers in the history of the country,” and 
farmers weren’t consulted about this deal at all. Was the 
Agriculture minister consulted? And what did he tell Minister 
Ritz on behalf of Saskatchewan producers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
member for that question. The Canadian Wheat Board and 
federal government announced the sale of 50.1 per cent interest 
in CWB [Canadian Wheat Board] to G3 Global Grain Group 
for $250 million yesterday, Mr. Speaker. The other 49.9 per 
cent will be kept in trust for farmers who deliver grain to the 
board. Any farmer who does deliver will get a $5 per tonne 
equity in the organization. In seven years, G3 Global Grain 
Group has the option to buy back the shares from farmers at 
market value. 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, we thank the minister for reading 
Mr. Ritz’s news release, but I asked him the question whether 
he was consulted or not by Mr. Ritz. The controlling shares, as 
the minister said, are valued at about $250 million, but no 
dollars are changing hands. This multinational is not paying a 
cent for this company. This is a handover to a US agri-food 
giant and a Saudi-owned, state-owned agricultural investment 
firm. 
 
That amount, by the way, is close to the amount that was left in 
the contingency fund which should have been distributed to 
farmers. But, Mr. Speaker, we can’t find out any details about 
that because Gerry Ritz has veiled the CWB books in a cloak of 



April 16, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6933 

secrecy. Does the Agriculture minister know anything about 
these books, and does he support this federal cloak of secrecy? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know where 
the member gets her information, and I discount it accordingly. 
This investment ensures the new company will be well 
capitalized and will be a competitive force in the grain industry 
globally. 
 
We appreciate that Canadian farmers will also have the 
opportunity to own equity in the new company through the 
farmer equity plan, Mr. Speaker. I think that this is generally a 
good thing for farmers in Western Canada, and it will increase 
the global penetration of our grain marketing system in Western 
Canada. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the minister should know the 
offer made to the farmers is shares in a trust fund. It’s not 
equity at all; it’s just shares in a trust fund. He should check his 
facts. 
 
The other night in committee, the minister said it made sense to 
sell the assets of Livestock Services of Saskatchewan 
Corporation to agricultural producers. The minister said: 
 

The assets were purchased by the industry through the 
revolving fund so, in the event of a default or 
abandonment of the contract, I think it would make sense 
that the assets go back to the industry. 

 
They’re public assets and their sales should benefit the 
producers who relied on them, end quote. They’re public assets 
and their sales should benefit the producers who relied on them. 
To the minister: why doesn’t the same logic apply to the 
Canadian Wheat Board assets? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know 
that the members on the opposite side of the floor live in the 
past, in a time when certain commodities from Western Canada 
were under the control of a federal government agency called 
the Canadian Wheat Board. Mr. Speaker, we’ve moved on. G3, 
the new company, is a joint venture between Bunge Canada and 
SALIC [Saudi Agricultural and Livestock Investment 
Company] Canada. 
 
Farmers will benefit from this deal by having another major 
company with global market penetration, Mr. Speaker, which 
cannot be said for the Canadian Wheat Board in its current 
form. Canadian farmers will also have the opportunity to own 
equity in the Wheat Board through the farmer equity plan and, 
Mr. Speaker, they will have an opportunity to capitalize that 
equity in seven years. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, this government can’t have it 
both ways. What part of his own position doesn’t he 
understand? In committee the minister said: 
 

The assets were purchased by the industry through the 
revolving fund so, in the event of a default or 
abandonment of the contract, I think it would make sense 
that the assets would go back to the industry. 

 
They’re public assets and their sales should benefit the 
producers who relied on them. So it’s one standard when it 
comes to livestock producers but a totally different approach 
when it comes to grain producers. To the minister: how can 
he possibly stand in his place and fully support the actions of 
Gerry Ritz? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Wheat 
Board debate is over. Now it’s about global penetration of 
markets for our commodities, Mr. Speaker, and this company 
will be an improvement over what existed before in Western 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Jim Wickett, Western Canadian Wheat Growers 
Association, had this to say. You know, he said in an answer to 
a question, to Jim Smalley, he said: 
 

You know, that is not a big concern for me. We live in a 
global economy now, and it doesn’t matter. You know, the 
same farmer that, you know, might be mad about that is 
going to drive a John Deere combine or a Case tractor, and 
they are not owned by Canadian . . . 

 
This is a global company, Mr. Speaker. It’s a global economy. 
We export the vast majority of what we produce in Western 
Canada in terms of commodities, and global market penetration 
is key to our success. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, we know that two years ago, in 
the second-last crop year, farmers lost $3.3 billion because of 
the grain companies. Last year, in the last crop year, they’re 
likely to lose $2 billion. And this is because of studies that have 
been done. The minister knows that’s the case. Adding one 
more multinational with a Saudi state-owned corporation who is 
only interested in their own country’s food sovereignty is not 
the answer. 
 
What we want to know and we asked earlier, Mr. Speaker, is 
this question: was this minister consulted by the Agriculture 
minister for Canada, and what did he say on behalf of 
Saskatchewan producers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, the preamble to that 
question is simply not true. It’s not true. It’s information that 
the members opposite don’t have enough agricultural 
background to refute. It’s absolutely ridiculous. It’s bad for 
business in Western Canada, Mr. Speaker, and it would be 



6934 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2015 

extremely bad for farming business in Western Canada if those 
members ever became the Government of Saskatchewan again. 
I predict that won’t happen. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 611 — The Student Bill of Rights Act, 2015 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 611, The 
Student Bill of Rights Act, be now introduced and read a first 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — The member for Saskatoon Centre has moved 
first reading of Bill No. 611, The Student Bill of Rights Act, 
2015. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the chairman of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 143, The 
Degree Authorization Amendment Act, 2014 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be heard in Committee of 
the Whole? No, just wait. I’m on the wrong page. When shall 
this bill be considered in Committee of the Whole? I recognize 
the Minister of Advanced Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Advanced Education has 
requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 
Whole on Bill No. 143, The Degree Authorization Amendment 
Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 143 — The Degree Authorization 
Amendment Act, 2014 

 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved that Bill No. 143, 
The Degree Authorization Amendment Act, 2014 be now read 
the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I ask for leave of the Assembly to introduce a motion 
regarding wheelchairs at the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 
leave to make a motion regarding wheelchairs in the Assembly. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Wheelchairs in the Assembly 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. By leave of the Assembly, I move: 
 

That the application of rule 49 and any other practice may 
be relaxed by the Speaker on the sitting day 52, April 
22nd, 2015, in order to permit the full participation in 
proceedings of any member seated in a wheelchair for the 
purpose of participating in Wheelchairs at the Assembly 
Day. 

 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved, 
by leave: 
 

That the application of rule 49 and any other practice may 
be relaxed by the Speaker on sitting day 52, April 22nd, 
2015, in order to permit the full participation in 
proceedings of any member seated in a wheelchair for the 
purpose of participating in Wheelchairs at the Assembly. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 



April 16, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6935 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Sutherland. 
 

Government Practices and the Income Tax System 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
very honoured to stand in the Assembly today to talk about the 
motion. I’ll read the motion at the beginning of my speech and 
then at the end of my speech, Mr. Speaker. And the motion 
reads: 
 

That this Assembly supports the government’s initiative to 
save Saskatchewan families an estimated $10.6 million in 
2015 through the indexation of the provincial income tax 
system, which keeps taxes low and brings young families 
to Saskatchewan by making life more affordable. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, I guess what I want to start off with is talking 
about families. As a father of four, obviously my children are 
the most important thing to me. And what I want to talk about, 
Mr. Speaker, is what had happened a little bit in the past and 
what is happening now. 
 
What has happened in the past is, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately 
myself, as well as many other colleagues on this House, saw 
people leaving Saskatchewan in droves. From 1999 right up 
until 2007, they were leaving in droves . . . or sorry, from 2003 
up till 2007. They were leaving in droves, Mr. Speaker. They 
were walking out the door. They were leaving Saskatchewan 
behind because of what we had talked about earlier here in the 
debate on the Assembly floor, is that the previous government 
didn’t want to have Saskatchewan expanded. They didn’t want 
to look at what Saskatchewan needed. They didn’t want to go 
over to countries like India and be able to talk about what we 
can do for them and how they can help us. 
 
So the people that were living in Saskatchewan at the time, Mr. 
Speaker, were leaving for other opportunities. And now because 
of some of the indexation that we’ve done within our tax system 
and because of our growing strong economy and the good side 
of this government to be able to work with businesses, and 
beside businesses as well as communities, to help Saskatchewan 
grow, that’s why people are choosing to stay in Saskatchewan 
right now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m very proud to say that I was one of those few people 
that chose to stick it out in Saskatchewan during the dark days 
of the NDP. Because, Mr. Speaker, it was very difficult, it was 
very difficult times for me and my family to be able to choose 
to stay here. But I saw the potential. As being an original 
resident of Ontario, Mr. Speaker, it was the opportunity to come 
out here and change a lifestyle and try something different, Mr. 
Speaker. So it was the opportunity to make sure that my family 
had a good lifestyle. Growing up in Toronto? We had a very 
good life in Toronto, but coming out to Saskatchewan for a few 
personal trips, we saw that this was the land of opportunity. 
And you know what? Now, Mr. Speaker, 25 years after I’ve 
moved to Saskatchewan, other people are starting to see the 
land of opportunity. 

I want to discuss some of the little breakdowns of exactly 
what’s happening within our tax system, Mr. Speaker. And 
what is critically important that allows this government to be 
able to provide these tax incentives and these tax breaks and the 
distribution of a 1 per cent PST [provincial sales tax] to the 
rural municipalities is because of our strong economy, Mr. 
Speaker. That is critical. 
 
[11:00] 
 
This government is not going to borrow money in order to give 
out tax incentives. We are going to make sure that our tax 
incentives are founded in a strong economy and that we can be 
able to pay off and be able to call on our tax system to be able 
to help out the people of Saskatchewan. The Premier has said it, 
as many colleagues on this side, they said, the reason for growth 
is to help people — all people in Saskatchewan, not just the 
select few people in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I can list off a long list of things that we’ve done within 
this province to be able to help out people in need. In 
Saskatoon, in my community alone, investments within the 
Lighthouse, the SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for 
disability] program, the seniors’ income plan. We have added 
things in, and the reason that we were able to do this is because 
of a strong economy. 
 
The government on the other side, what they would do is strip 
out all of the revenue from the Crown corporations. They would 
borrow money, and they would always unfortunately be running 
to Ottawa with their hand out, Mr. Speaker, saying please help 
us people in Saskatchewan. Please help us because we can’t 
help ourselves. 
 
The difference is this government, we see the potential in the 
people of Saskatchewan. And we can help ourselves. We are 
helping ourselves, and we’re doing that in order to make sure 
that all of the people of Saskatchewan benefit from our strong 
economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I just want to talk a little bit about some of the breakdown of 
what it is for a family. Now, unopposed to what the opposition 
presents in this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to talk about 
the facts, the actual facts that are documented. The fact is that a 
family and taxes, a family of four with a $50,000 annual income 
will pay a minimal amount, just $64 in provincial income tax. 
Sixty-four dollars on a household income of $50,000. Now 
compare that to, in 2007 when the members opposite were in 
government, that was $2,302. So it’s gone from $2,302 to $64. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, where do you think that that money is 
going? That money that people are saving — and I’ll talk about 
this throughout my debate here, Mr. Speaker — that money is 
going back into the pockets of the people of Saskatchewan. 
Which in turn, they’re spending that money in Saskatchewan to 
help out our economy. So it’s a great little cycle that we have 
going on here where we provide tax incentives to people and 
they’re able to invest that money back into Saskatchewan.  
 
And some of the investments that they’re doing within 
Saskatchewan is housing. A lot of people are because of the tax 
incentives. The first-time homeowners’ credit, which is eligible 
up to $1,100, we had over 7,000 people access that in 2013, Mr. 



6936 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2015 

Speaker. Now that means that there are over 7,000 people in 
Saskatchewan who couldn’t previously afford to own their 
home are now able to own their own home. Now that’s a huge 
movement of people that were renting, and I’ve always been of 
the philosophy that if you’re renting, you’re not creating an 
asset. Now we have 7,000 people that are on this homeowners’ 
tax credit that are actually creating assets for themselves and for 
the community. 
 
And we did see some difficult times, Mr. Speaker, with the 
rents going up. And a lot of people with those rents increases 
were seeing, you know what, it’s actually more affordable and 
more economical to be able to buy a house. So they access this. 
We’ve been putting more money back into their pockets, unlike 
the members opposite who were just continually pulling money 
out of the pockets. Every time that they got into a financial 
crisis they would just dip into everybody’s pockets, pull it out 
different ways. They would pull it out through the Crowns. 
They would pull it out through raising the PST. They would 
pull it out raising income tax and property taxes as well. And on 
top of that, because they were so mismanaged over there, Mr. 
Speaker, they started shutting everything down. They started 
shutting the hospitals down. They started shutting the schools 
down. 
 
This government has chose to invest in Saskatchewan and 
invest in the infrastructure of Saskatchewan. That’s why in our 
2015-16 budget, Mr. Speaker, we made sure that the 
infrastructure was still going forward. Because, Mr. Speaker, on 
programs when the opposition went into infrastructure and they 
got into some financial problems, all they did was just cancel 
the program or delay it. Well what kind of signal does that send 
to the people that are coming to Saskatchewan, when huge 
infrastructure programs are getting cancelled, Mr. Speaker? It’s 
a matter of sending the right signals to the people who want to 
come to Saskatchewan is first, and the other, the people that 
want to choose Saskatchewan, to stay home. They want to stay 
here. They want to be with their family. 
 
We look at our neighbours to the west in Alberta. They’re in a 
very difficult financial crisis right now. The difference between 
Saskatchewan and Alberta, other than the obvious in the 
government side of things, is we’ve diversified. We have the 
ability here, unlike Alberta cannot diversify their economy as 
much as we can, Mr. Speaker. We have huge agricultural 
revenue coming. We have huge exports. We have our 
manufacturing sector. We have uranium, which the huge deal 
that was just signed with the Premier and the Prime Minister 
and Mr. Gitzel from Cameco, as well as the Prime Minister of 
India investing in our resources. We have uranium, oil, and gas, 
Mr. Speaker. And again that hasn’t been the greatest, but I see 
in the markets lately that it is climbing back up. 
 
And all of those diversified portfolio that we have, Mr. Speaker, 
allow us to invest in the people of Saskatchewan. This allows us 
to put the money back into the pockets of the people of 
Saskatchewan and allows them in turn to invest in 
Saskatchewan by buying homes, by buying automobiles, by 
purchasing anything from a television to new carpet. Those are 
Saskatchewan people investing in Saskatchewan companies. 
And I’m very proud of the government’s tax incentives on this, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I want to touch a little bit about, we’ve put that 
number out, $5 billion. Now this number cannot be understated, 
Mr. Speaker. We have put $5 billion, we’ve allowed $5 billion 
in tax relief since 2007. Now that’s a huge amount of money, 
Mr. Speaker. Now that’s $5 billion that’s back into the people’s 
pockets, programs like our graduate retention program which is 
a huge program. These tax incentives that we’re allowing give 
us the opportunity to be able to keep our students here, to keep 
our children here, and for people to invest. Five billion dollars 
on, I think we’re in and around a $15 billion budget, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s a huge amount. 
 
We need to be able to make sure that the families of 
Saskatchewan are understanding the facts of what is going on 
with their government. We have a lot of accusations on the 
other side of the House on what they hear or somebody has said 
to them. But the facts are very clear on this, Mr. Speaker, is that 
we are having . . . we have a strong province. We have a strong 
government. We have strong business and we have strong 
communities. 
 
Now when all of those work together, Mr. Speaker, that creates 
an environment for investment: that is, investment from the 
government, investment from external sources. And to be able 
to make sure that we continue that investment, we have to send 
the right signals to the rest of the world. And our trade missions 
that we’ve been able to be a part of — that the opposition didn’t 
get part of, that they had nothing to do with; they didn’t even 
want to touch any international trade — this is allowing us, 
when we talk about the investment from India, that money is 
coming directly into Saskatchewan. We are the largest deposit 
of uranium in Canada, second largest in the world, Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pretty sure of that. But we want to make sure that those 
investments are available. 
 
The government’s job is not to block investment. The 
government’s job is to manage the investment, manage the 
resources for the best of our province. We want to make sure 
that our families and that the people that we . . . that the expats 
that have left . . . And we also have a huge immigrant 
community coming into the province. 
 
Now the immigrant community is not just coming into the 
province because they think it’s the land of opportunity and this 
is a one stop. They are coming here. I’ve talked to them on the 
doors . They are buying houses. They are investing in 
Saskatchewan. They want to make a life here, Mr. Speaker. 
They want to be able to choose to be able to do whatever they 
want as far as their religious freedoms, and they want to be able 
to do that in Saskatchewan. Because Saskatchewan, even 
though it is an economic engine within Canada, it’s also a 
lifestyle choice, Mr. Speaker. And we want to make sure that 
that lifestyle, that the people of Saskatchewan, the communities 
of Saskatchewan always have that lifestyle choice. 
 
Personally I get to travel, and with work sometimes get to travel 
to big cities. And there’s a lot to offer in the big cities, but 
there’s nothing like coming home to Saskatchewan where 
you’re able to enjoy the people that you meet, the people that 
you talk to. And everybody, everybody has the exact positive 
attitude that Saskatchewan is strong. We are not a flash in the 
pan, Mr. Speaker. This economy has been sitting stagnant for 
years, and now we’ve finally got a government that is able to 



April 16, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6937 

step out of the way and manage the resource base that we have 
and properly market it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s great if you have all the oil in the world underneath you, or 
all the agriculture in the world, but if you can’t get that product 
to market, then it’s absolutely useless. Now the government has 
stepped out of the way to make sure that there is people out 
there and businesses out there to make sure that we can get our 
product to market, Mr. Speaker. The difference is that we take 
that investment that people are putting within Saskatchewan 
and we turn it into tax incentives. We turn it into lowering taxes 
on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan to help out all the 
people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I think the opposition keeps talking about these special 
friendships and that we are going to the, we’re dealing with the 
1 per cent of the province. I don’t know how they can stand 
there and say that when we’ve done programs like the SAID 
program. We’ve increased the seniors’ income plan. We’ve 
done a lot for everybody in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and I 
am very proud that this government . . . That’s why I wanted to 
become part of this government and I was fortunate enough to 
be elected, Mr. Speaker, is to help all the people in 
Saskatchewan, not just a certain few. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’ll again put the motion forward on 
the floor. And the motion reads: 
 

That this Assembly supports the government’s initiative to 
save Saskatchewan’s families an estimated $10.6 million 
in 2015 through the indexation of the provincial income 
tax system, which keeps taxes low, bringing young 
families to Saskatchewan by making life more affordable. 
 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Sutherland: 
 

That this Assembly supports the government’s initiative to 
save Saskatchewan families an estimated 10.6 million in 
2015 through the indexation of the provincial income tax 
system, which keeps taxes low and brings young families 
to Saskatchewan by making life more affordable. 

 
I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to rise in this debate. And it is an interesting one, you know, 
because we often, we look at the other side and we look at their 
research, and we wonder sometimes where they get their facts 
from. And this is interesting. This is a very interesting motion 
here because in many ways this motion could have been written 
by us when we were in government. Because if they know this, 
they would know this fact, that it’s been a well-established 
practice of the government of the day to index personal income 
taxes. This is nothing new. 
 
Now these folks opposite kind of think that potash was 
discovered the day after the election on November 7th, and that 
oil all of a sudden came up from the ground the day after the 
election of November 7th. This was a well-established practice. 
The only reason I cannot support this motion, because we do 

think it’s the right thing, and it’s been an established practice — 
and Calvert did it; Calvert did it, indexed personal income taxes 
— is that these folks opposite then will bend their arms around 
and give themselves a good pat on the back. 
 
And some of the things, I have to say to the member opposite 
— I just want to clarify the record because I have said this — 
there are some good programs the government has done. And 
like I said, I think SAID is a good program. I think there should 
be recognition for that. And I just want to make sure that’s 
correct. SIP [Saskatchewan Income Plan] is another one that I 
think is good. Good to see its increase. The only concern I 
would have with SIP is I would like to see more research done 
on it so . . . make sure it hits the right senior citizens. But is it 
right to increase it? That is true. 
 
But I do have to say that we do have some concerns about 
whether or not we can say life is affordable here in 
Saskatchewan. I think the issue about whether indexing is good 
or bad, it’s a well-established practice. That is the right thing. 
We know also that when Calvert was in power, that we did as 
well — and you would know this, and members opposite would 
know that — that we undertook an extensive personal income 
tax reform that was headed by Eric Cline, a former Finance 
minister, was fully implemented in 2003. And when personal 
income tax was simplified, rates were lowered. Fifty-five 
thousand were removed from the tax rolls, and the savings to 
individuals and families at that time was over $1,000. And we 
know during that period of time the savings were about $260 
million. 
 
[11:15] 
 
So the idea of keeping taxes low is not a new one for 
government. It’s been by both sides of the House. But the idea 
of whether or not it’s more affordable here in Saskatchewan and 
is the government doing the right thing, I think that’s the matter 
for debate here today. 
 
And we think that this government really is out of touch when it 
comes to the kind of things that have happened in this budget, 
that happened where we saw cuts to programs that families 
truly needed. And I can think about the child care, parent child 
care subsidies that were actually cut and has had a record low 
for many years. I don’t even know how far back it goes back. 
But for this government, they are funding it at the lowest level 
since they’ve taken power. That’s a shame, Mr. Speaker. And 
we also know the family employment supplements are also 
being cut. That’s a real shame. 
 
And we know, we know that . . . And we’ve raised questions on 
this side of the House. And I know the member from Nutana 
will talk about Tara Hobbins and her experience with how 
affordable this province really is when it comes to finding 
affordable rental units and how Sask Housing is vacating that 
responsibility. And that’s a huge responsibility. And they did a 
good job on that in the past, but now they’ve left that field open 
and they’re not doing well there. But also daycare, what’s 
happening there? And we know that in fact that there’s lots of 
questions about the work that needs to be done. 
 
And we know, and the members opposite would know this, that 
in fact there was a report that came out last year about how one 



6938 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2015 

in four Saskatchewan kids now live in poverty. One in four 
Saskatchewan kids live in poverty. And we know the caseloads 
in social services have gone up 17 per cent since these folks 
took power. Now that’s something we have to tackle. We have 
to tackle that. 
 
I would have preferred much more today if we had a resolution 
from the government, from the other side, talking about their 
anti-poverty strategy. And I don’t think I heard the members 
opposite talk about the anti-poverty strategy. I hope that the 
folks, the next two speakers do reference that because I do think 
that’s a good thing. And I have said this on record, and we have 
called from this side of the House for a comprehensive 
anti-poverty strategy from the government. And I have said to 
the minister and in the media that it’s good to see this coming 
forward, and we are excited about who’s on the committee. We 
would have liked to have seen people with lived experience on 
that committee, but I think this is something we have to wrestle 
with. This is something we have to wrestle with. 
 
We know as well, Saskatchewan leads the provinces of Canada 
in food bank usage for children. And what the numbers are 
here, overall food bank usage is up more than 19 per cent from 
March 2013 to March 2014 — the biggest increase in Canada. 
That clearly isn’t something to be proud of. But the fact of the 
matter is we have a responsibility in this House, when we look 
across our province, to look at what needs attention. This needs 
attention. This really does need attention. 
 
And so we have challenges before us. And I hope that the 
government members who get up to speak talk more about 
these kind of things because I do think that the government is 
on the right track having this strategy. And they’re out 
consulting right now and I’m looking forward to hearing what 
they have to say. But the question will be, will they be in touch 
or out of touch with the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Families are having a tough time out there when it comes to 
affording rent, when it comes to affording child care, when it 
comes to affording food, and it’s the same with seniors. We saw 
that with the seniors in terms of rent, food, and for seniors 
particularly pharmacare. That’s a challenge. That is a real 
challenge. 
 
So we have high hopes and we have a lot of expectation. And 
we really hope the members opposite address this issue here. 
And so we are all . . . And I just feel, and you know, in my 
riding, Mr. Speaker, this is often something that is really a 
concern. 
 
And this government, leading up to the budget, really created a 
lot of angst in our communities around the price of oil and the 
impact it would have on our budget. But yet this budget 
continues to speak of record revenues, and that’s not a bad 
thing. That means our province is doing well in other areas, and 
that’s a good thing. 
 
But the question is, people are concerned. They’re concerned 
about jobs. They’re concerned about the economy. They are 
concerned about the price of oil. What does this mean for 
people in their communities and their families right across the 
province? 
 

And you know, when I think about Tara Hobbins, who had the 
courage to speak up and say, you know, things are not as they 
should be, she doesn’t have social issues. She is just a working 
mom with two kids, who are trying to get ahead, trying to get as 
many hours. She’s got a good job. She’s making . . . in a union 
setting, and so she has benefits. But the problem is that wages 
really haven’t kept up for too many people here in 
Saskatchewan. They really haven’t. 
 
And so while we can talk about the tax reductions, we have to 
know that that has been happening for many, many years here 
in this province, and we have to acknowledge that. But the 
problems are . . . The reality of the day is that we can’t sit back 
and pat ourselves on the back. We have to take a look at what 
people are telling us when we knock on the doors. They’re 
seeing their schools are not supported. They’re overcrowded. 
They’re waiting for these schools to be built. I don’t know how 
many years it’s been since the first announcement. This a 
problem. This is a real problem. And many people are just one 
step away from feeling the real hit of poverty. And if they were 
to lose their job, this is a stress that they feel really, really . . . 
They feel it too much. 
 
So we see the situation with the Crowns, and where the member 
from Sutherland talked about the Crowns but didn’t talk about 
how the utilities. The bundle of utilities that people have to pay 
has gone up, has gone up by over $400, that bundle, since 2007. 
That’s a reality of a real cost when those folks there moved 
away from guaranteeing the lowest cost bundles in Canada. 
They said they would let the market have its way, and it did. It 
did. And too many people are feeling that, especially the cost of 
power. And I know other . . . We can talk at length about why 
that is. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I definitely won’t be supporting this 
resolution. It’s almost good, but not quite. And so with that, I 
yield the floor. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 
Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Wow. What we heard 
from the member opposite from Saskatoon Centre is 
unbelievable, Mr. Speaker. I have some material here that we’ll 
be going over, some fact-checking, because we know, Mr. 
Speaker, that the fact is that things have been lately a little bit 
loose in this Assembly. 
 
There’s a couple of things that the member touched on I just 
want to correct for the record here. He talked about how it 
wasn’t this party being elected in 2007 that discovered oil. He 
said we didn’t discover potash. We didn’t discover uranium. 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker? He was correct. We didn’t. 
But there was something that was holding back those three 
industries. What was it, Mr. Speaker? Why would industry not 
be interested in investing in this province? It’s not because 
we’ve discovered those resources. It was the fact that the 
climate in this province was one of fear, a fear of the NDP 
coming in and taking over the industry, one of over-taxation. 
 
The NDP has a record of changing the rules in the game 
midstream, Mr. Speaker, and that scared industry. It scared 
investment in this province. And he was right. We didn’t 



April 16, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6939 

discover oil in this province, but what happened? Why 
everything did take off is that we started to talk about the 
positive aspects of work in Saskatchewan, the positive 
investment climate. We talked about what Saskatchewan could 
be, instead of the fear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even today they’re still selling fear. We had the 
member from Saskatoon Centre talk about how people were 
fearful, fearful of the economy and fearful of the price of oil. 
Mr. Speaker, he also talked about the growth of wages and not 
keeping up. We have the fastest wage growth in Canada, Mr. 
Speaker, one of the top five, back and forth for a number of 
years, which is helping offset those costs of living. 
 
He also talked about the cost of living in Saskatchewan and, 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve done things differently than the NDP. Mr. 
Speaker, we looked at the taxations of the province. He talked 
about low-income earners and, Mr. Speaker, they are the 
segment of the population that have enjoyed the largest 
decreases in provincial sales tax. That money that they’ve 
earned is now sitting in their pockets, not the government’s 
treasurer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just a quick example. A family of four earning 
around $50,000, these individuals roughly have an 85 per cent 
reduction in total provincial taxes. Mr. Speaker, their tax bill, 
the provincial tax bill went from . . . it used to be 3,382 in 2007 
so when the NDP . . . last full year of them as government, that 
family of four would have paid $3,382. That has been reduced 
to, this year, $489, Mr. Speaker. That’s a reduction in taxation 
of $2,893. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a number, and we hear a lot of numbers in the 
Assembly, and I just want to give a context of what $2,893 
would buy you. In our household we were lucky enough, we 
welcomed our second son into the world a couple of months 
ago, and James goes through a lot of diapers. And you know 
what, Mr. Speaker? If that family of four decided to spend their 
savings in tax, this year alone they would be able to, or I would 
be able to buy 18,000 diapers for baby James. Think about that. 
So that’s a lot of diapers, Mr. Speaker. That’s a lot of savings 
that families have to spend on diapers. They’re never going to 
spend that much on diapers hopefully but if they did . . .  
 
Now what about baby wipes? I know the member from Walsh 
Acres and I, we’ve changed a fair bit of our diapers in our two 
houses as we’ve been . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — Our diapers? 
 
Mr. Tochor: — No, it was . . . [inaudible] . . . So what would 
those savings account for, Mr. Speaker? Well you could also 
buy baby wipes. You could buy 111,000 baby wipes with the 
savings from this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of savings that low-income earners 
and families across Saskatchewan have received from the 
changes from this government. Other areas that they could save 
on or what they could spend their savings on is, you know, now 
our neighbourhoods are growing. It’s younger. There’s kids in 
the street. And maybe you’d like to take some kids out to a 
Rider game. Well you could buy 96 tickets for kids to the next 
Rider game because of the reductions in income tax. Say if you 

wanted to take the family for a drive, a quick little drive, you 
could go in a 2011 Dodge Caravan. You could go 23,713 
kilometres, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now those are a little bit comical, but let’s talk 
about real families. What could you also buy? Well food is a 
major part. Now I wouldn’t recommend this as a proper diet for 
a family, but you could buy 1,808 boxes of Kraft Dinner with 
the savings from the tax reductions from this government. And 
you know, having a young family you go through coffee, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s a lot of late nights and early mornings. You 
could buy . . . I’m talking about the 320 gram tin of coffee. You 
could buy 482 large tins of coffee. And, Mr. Speaker, mind you, 
this is per year, what you could spend your money on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition talks a lot about eggs 
and baskets and whatnot. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How many eggs can you buy? 
 
Mr. Tochor: — Guess how many eggs you could buy, Mr. 
Speaker? Well you could buy . . . It depends on where you buy 
them. I do a little bit of shopping so we . . . There’s Sobeys and 
Co-op, and sometimes Co-op does have a better price on them I 
find, but you’ve got to watch there. You could buy 9,918 eggs, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Here’s another one actually that, it’s good for looking at 
numbers and remembering facts, is carrots, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
good for your eyesight. And with the savings from tax 
decreases around this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, you could 
buy four thousand, eight, eighty-eight pounds of carrots. That’s 
incredible. Another one that the opposition love to invest in 
would be potatoes, Mr. Speaker. Guess how many potatoes that 
the average family of four would save because of the tax 
decreases introduced by this government. Well they could buy 
5,400 pounds of potatoes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know what? We’ve had some difficulties it seems in 
this House remembering facts and making sure that things are 
correct when presented. There’s been increased studies that 
antioxidants in bananas is great for memory and brain power 
and remembering details. And, Mr. Speaker, you could buy 
3,819 pounds of bananas with the savings from this government 
they introduced for a family of four. Mr. Speaker, that is 
significant savings for those families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition talked about what they did in 
government. Well, you know what? We know what they did in 
government. They raised taxes. They raised taxes 17 times, Mr. 
Speaker. They raised the PST three times. They raised income 
tax twice. They raised business taxes four times. Mr. Speaker, 
this is the climate that this province used to live under with the 
NDP government. I hope we never go back. 
 
[11:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, in their literature that they’ve mailed out, there’s 
some factually challenging statements in documents they’ve 
mailed out. They talk about health care. Mr. Speaker, this one’s, 
I would say for the people of Saskatchewan, an important topic. 
And I would ask the opposition, what would they do 
differently? Because since forming government, we’ve 



6940 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2015 

increased the health budget 49 per cent. That’s significant. So 
they’re saying you should spend more money in health care. 
How much? Where’s the plan? Where would that money come 
from? 
 
And this is what people of the province, when they receive a 
flyer in the mail and say, okay the NDP would like to spend 
more money on health care, where would the money come 
from, Mr. Speaker? From a growing economy. That is what 
we’re focused on, is because we can take those dividends’ 
growth and put back into the important social programs such as 
health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they also talked about education, and it’s farcical 
when we talk about what the NDP record on education was. I 
put on the record that they were actually in charge when my 
elementary school closed. They closed my elementary school, 
that along with, I believe, over 150 schools. And they criticize 
us for why there isn’t . . . the schools that we’re building right 
now are done already. That’s ridiculous, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Very shortly in, well less than a year, we’ll have the honour to 
go knock on those doors that the member opposite referenced. 
And I will proudly stand in front of the electorate and say this is 
our record for what we’ve done in the last four years. It would 
be interesting to see if they would, in the last 16 years when 
they were in government. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 
my honour to be able to rise and enter this debate here in the 
Legislative Assembly in Saskatchewan. It’s strange times we 
live in, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we have the government 
patting itself on the back for indexing a provincial income tax 
system which is something that many governments do and 
certainly the previous government did. 
 
It’s an unusual venue or a launch pad for these guys to pat 
themselves on the back about everything that they see has been 
accomplished by this government. But, Mr. Speaker, I think 
what’s really important in this debate and to consider it a real 
debate is to hear the other side. There is another side to the 
back-patting and the crowing and the boasting and the chest 
pumping, the thumping that we see these people do. 
 
And I think what I really want to get on the record in my 10 
minutes in the debate is a letter that I received from a 
constituent who’s had to leave my riding now because of 
housing issues and unaffordable issues. But here’s a letter I 
received. Her name’s Tara Hobbins and she wrote to me a 
couple weeks ago and she sent me this letter. And the heading 
of the letter is, life unfair. And it says: 
 

Dear Cathy Sproule, 
 
Hello, my name is Tara Hobbins. I’m a single mother of 
two girls currently both five. No they’re not twins, I just 
had them so close together that they share the same age for 
two months out the year. I have a few concerns I would 
like to discuss if you’re willing to take the time to listen. 
 

And she goes on to talk about her problems, first of all with day 
care, and those are huge issues, Mr. Speaker, that I’m afraid I 
won’t have the time to address in the debate today. But I want 
to talk a little bit about her housing situation. And this is 
something that is affecting a lot of women in her situation. 
 
Tara is working hard. She works hard. She has a full-time job 
and she’s trying to provide for her two children. And she says: 
 

Now for the biggest issue I am now facing. I am on the 
verge of homelessness. This upsets me due to the fact that 
I’m a hard . . . responsible employee and strive to maintain 
a good life. I don’t think that working $14 an hour, I 
should have this problem. I’ve applied to Terra Housing 
Co-operative, but was informed it could be another year to 
get in, and also Sask Housing. My roommate will be 
moved out at the end of the month, and I will be 
responsible for $1,249 rent a month, not including bills. 
I’m on rental and employment subsidy and have been 
informed I won’t be getting any extra help with my rent 
increase. 
 
With my living expenses and child care expenses, I’m 
worried I won’t have enough money for food nor a roof 
over my head. I’ve been applying for other jobs but am 
having a hard time finding anything with my daughter’s 
current school schedule. I’m at the end of my rope, and 
I’m unsure what to do. I’ve been looking for cheaper 
two-bedroom apartments or basement suites, but they are 
equivalent to the same price as my current place. I will 
continue to keep looking and will keep trying to make . . . 
but I think this is ridiculous. 
 
On Friday, family housing offered me a three-bedroom 
apartment on Avenue M with a possibility of a cockroach 
and bedbug infestation. I was revolted. How can a 
government property have such low standards? I would 
never subject my kids to a rundown apartment in the bad 
area of town that is infested with rodents. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s just a few quotes from one of my 
constituents. She’s now found a place to live, but it’s not with 
Sask Housing. But she did actually find a place to live and she 
informs me that she thinks she’ll be okay. But I think the thing 
about this is the fact that individuals have to come forward with 
these stories, and if we can’t believe these people that are telling 
us these stories . . . And this government likes to dismiss them 
and say that they’re all liars and that they’re all making it up, 
but that’s not the case, Mr. Speaker. These people are coming 
forward with real stories, with real issues, and there’s continual 
dismissal on the part of this government on those stories. 
 
Another story that we see just recently, April 8th in Estevan, 
The Estevan Mercury, is about more first-timers using the food 
bank. So we have the member from Eastview crowing about 
how many boxes of Kraft Dinner you could buy on the tax 
receipts. What he doesn’t realize is anything that they’ve done 
on that side has been completely wiped out by the cost of living 
on the part of individuals. 
 
So Estevan Mercury, we have the people . . . Here’s a quote 
from the article. This is by Alex Coop on April 8th: “Many 
people experiencing financial struggles for the first time are 



April 16, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6941 

turning to the Estevan Salvation Army’s food bank, which is 
experiencing struggles of its own.” And the article goes on to 
describe all the difficulties the actual Salvation Army food bank 
is having meeting the increased needs of folks in Estevan. 
 
Here’s another quote: “Bobolo said the shelter was open for 136 
nights since November, 2014. This is an eight per cent increase 
over last year’s numbers. Attendance has gone up 22 per cent as 
well, resulting from the 576 stays at the shelter.” 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, again we have the facts. We have the fact that 
the Estevan Food Bank is experiencing difficulty meeting the 
increasing needs of people in Estevan, of all places, Mr. 
Speaker. We have the fact that the shelter in Estevan has also 
seen a huge increase in the demand for space and shelter in 
Estevan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another article that was posted in November by the CBC 
[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] was about food bank use 
by children, Mr. Speaker. And there we see that food . . . This is 
a quote, a direct quote from the news article. They can deny this 
all they want: “Food bank usage in Saskatchewan went up by 
more than 50 per cent over the past six years, says Food Banks 
Canada.” Over the past six years, food bank usage by children 
has gone up over 50 per cent. If that isn’t concerning to this 
government, if they continue to pat themselves on the back 
about their tax arrangements, they aren’t paying attention to 
what’s going on. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to point out some numbers that 
actually come from the government’s budget documents. We 
have the budget document, Budget and Performance Plan 
Summary from 2007-08, and then we go on to the budget 
2015-16. So on page — just so they know where the facts are 
— page 36 of the 2007-2008 Budget and Performance Plan 
Summary, there’s a list of the 2007 intercity comparison of 
taxes and household charges, single person, $25,000 total 
income. And on page 65 of this year’s budget, we have the 
same intercity comparison. What I would like to do, Mr. 
Speaker, is compare between these two years, 2007-2008 and 
2015-2016, the difference in increase for the cost of living for 
all the cities that are itemized here. 
 
I will point out that for some reason they’ve switched from 
using Regina to Saskatoon. So the comparison I’m making here 
is Vancouver to Vancouver, Calgary to Calgary, but it’s Regina 
to Saskatoon. So that’s one distinction, and we’re not sure why 
the number, the city has changed. But the rest of the cities are 
the same. So I’ve totalled up the increase in taxes and 
household charges for individuals, single people at $25,000, and 
how much they’ve actually increased in the last — what would 
this be? — eight years since this government came into power. 
 
The lowest increase can be found in Saint John, which is 
$1,160; second up is Halifax, $1,242; third is Charlottetown, 
$2,266 increase. Then we go a little bit west. We go to 
Winnipeg for number four, and the increase in their taxes in 
household charges is $2,393. Then we go really far to the west, 
to British Columbia and Vancouver, where the increase is 
$2,650. Then we go back again to Toronto; Toronto’s increase 
is only $2,698. Then back east to St. John’s, $3,702. Number 
nine — so this is nine out of ten provinces — is Calgary. The 
increase there has been $3,807. And number 10, bottom of the 

list for the increase in taxes, or top of the list for increase in 
taxes and household charges across Canada in the last eight 
years, is Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we see an increase here of $4,378, and this is from 
the government’s budget document. So I don’t think they can 
dispute that this is a fact. The fact is, is that Saskatchewan 
people are paying way more than any other province in Canada 
for their taxes and their household charges. Mr. Speaker, that’s 
not something to pat yourself on the back about. That is 
something that this government has failed to pay attention to. 
And they continue just to crow about what they see as their 
advances, but they’re not dealing with the issues for people with 
. . . This is only the single person, at $25,000 total income, I 
haven’t done the comparison for . . . There’s another chart that 
the government provides for, I think it’s families at $75,000 
total income and $50,000. I haven’t had the time to compare 
that; maybe that tells a better story. 
 
But I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, for single people at $25,000 
total income, for people living in Saskatchewan, the increase 
since this government came into power has put it at the top of 
the heap. We pay more for these people to live, and these are 
the people like Tara Hobbins who are just trying to raise their 
family and they’re just trying to eke out a living and have a 
comfortable living. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this kind of motion is so self-serving for this 
government. It gives some of these back benchers an 
opportunity to get up and crow a little bit and do the math on 
macaroni. But, Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t help the people in 
their own budget document who are suffering at the highest rate 
of increase in Canada. So I will not be supporting this motion. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well 
I’m very pleased to stand in the House today and participate in 
this debate moved by the member from Saskatoon Sutherland. 
And it reads: 
 

That this Assembly supports the government’s initiative to 
save Saskatchewan families an estimated $10.6 million in 
2015 through the indexation of the provincial income tax 
system, which keeps taxes low and brings young families 
to Saskatchewan by making life more affordable. 

 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is the right thing to do, and this 
is why our government is doing it. This is wonderful news. 
Saskatchewan is striving forward and opportunities are endless. 
And we’re keeping in mind the needs of Saskatchewan people. 
These people are our friends and neighbours in our 
communities, the total of Saskatchewan’s province. 
 
Keeping Saskatchewan strong has kept Saskatchewan people 
here in the province. And this is what many of my colleagues 
are talking about today. Our next generation has decided that 
Saskatchewan is a great place to live and work and raise your 
families. And our government has invested in the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have incentives for 
new job creations, and we keep taxes low. Generally we have 
created the environment where people want to live. They go to 



6942 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2015 

school here. They open businesses. And perhaps we’ll even 
retire as we get older here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I have a very large family, so I can speak of them as an 
example. There are 17 of us now and counting. Our son 
Matthew and our daughter-in-law Katie are raising five children 
on the farm. He flies his Cessna to work. We have a wonderful 
life. We have the airstrip right on the farm, so he’s able to fly 
around to his different properties and farm and has some other 
business pursuits. And Matthew previously worked out of 
Saskatchewan, but as our business climate in Saskatchewan 
became more welcoming, well he came home. So he lives close 
by, and I’m the grandmother of his five children, which I get to 
see as often as I want when I’m home in Saskatchewan Rivers 
constituency. And Matthew’s children I think will probably be 
third-generation farmers, some of them. 
 
[11:45] 
 
So it is a very good climate that we are building here in 
Saskatchewan, and of course I would say through good 
leadership of our government. And we’ve made some great 
choices that people say, yes this is where I want to open 
businesses and live and work and raise a family. 
 
Now our second child Brigitt is a social worker and a nurse, and 
she’s married to a newcomer who happens to be a doctor. So 
they live close by, and they’re raising their two children right 
next to grandma and grandma as well. So I’m very blessed. I 
get to see all seven grandchildren often. I’m able to give advice 
and share in the everyday things that grandparents and 
grandchildren do share, the family celebrations, as well as very 
importantly, the community involvement for Saskatchewan. As 
they say, it takes a village to raise these children, so it’s nice to 
have all of us around. 
 
Now our youngest daughter Lacey completed her master’s in 
speech language pathology. She finished up in Oklahoma, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. She had a job opportunity in California or 
Yorkton, Saskatchewan where one of my colleagues is. So we 
were very pleased for her to come home to Saskatchewan. She 
chose Yorkton and . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — The province’s third-largest trading area. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Yes. So she is living in Saskatchewan 
and working, and we’re very proud of this. And perhaps this 
graduate retention program was one of the incentives, the 
20,000 over 10 years for graduates who choose to stay and live 
and work in Saskatchewan. That was something that our 
daughter was able to use. And in Saskatchewan today, speech 
language pathologists are up 24 per cent due to our 
government’s vision. So I’d also like to think our daughter 
came home because of mom and dad, but life is more affordable 
now in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now our youngest son Markus was going to school in the States 
as well, but then he was accepted to the College of Dentistry at 
the University of Saskatchewan. So he is now in the province, 
and he has prepared a yard site next to us as well, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. So he will be living close by with his brothers and 
sisters and his parents, and he will make his living working 
right here in the province of Saskatchewan. So I’m very proud 

to say that he’ll be coming home as well. 
 
And it’s no surprise to most of us that these young people are 
now staying and their suitcases are only packed to go on 
holidays. Saskatchewan is very affordable due to our 
government’s supports. We’ve got low taxes and our 
resource-based economy, and it’s the right thing to do, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Today, Saskatchewan is stronger than at any 
point in our history. 
 
Since 2007, working together we’ve built a foundation of 
economic strength and stability with one goal in mind, to 
provide a better quality of life for everyone: our youth, our 
seniors, urban and rural. We’ve reduced the provincial debt. 
We’ve cut taxes, invested in critical infrastructure in education, 
health care, and highways, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We are an 
economic leader in Canada. 
 
Yesterday we had a huge announcement for the economy. Our 
leader was part of a historic uranium energy deal signing with 
India, providing employment and the Saskatchewan 
communities and supports that it does support. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, why is Saskatchewan the best place to live 
and work and raise a family? Well I was listening intently to the 
members from Saskatoon Nutana and Saskatoon Centre, and I’d 
like to give them the reasons why there are changes, changes 
since 2007 to improve tax competitiveness. Because, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, over the past seven years our government has 
implemented the following measures to improve 
Saskatchewan’s tax competitiveness. We cut personal income 
taxes. Our government cut education property taxes which, 
being a rural landowner and a rural member in my constituency, 
this was very, very important. We’ve improved the provincial 
sales tax for families, and we’ve reduced the small business 
corporate income tax rate. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when people are asking us where has 
the money gone, we’ve talked about debt reduction. Since 2007 
we’ve saved nearly 1 billion in interest. The personal income 
tax reductions introduced since 2007 have removed almost 
112,000 Saskatchewan residents from the provincial income tax 
roll. And in total, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these reductions are 
providing approximately 490 million in income tax savings in 
Saskatchewan residents in 2015. 
 
So it is no surprise when all these people are returning to 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our friends and neighbours 
and relatives. This is the place to be from. And I’m very proud 
to be representing Saskatchewan Rivers constituency and seeing 
the influx of young people come back. And in our small towns 
of Choiceland and Meath Park and Love and Debden, 
Saskatchewan, I am seeing more retirees come back as well and 
embracing what Saskatchewan has to offer. And our little towns 
are growing with the retirees. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be supporting this motion, of 
course. And I will read it again: 
 

That the Assembly supports the government’s initiative to 
save Saskatchewan families an estimated 10.6 million in 
2015 through the indexation of the provincial income tax 
system, which keeps taxes low and brings young families 



April 16, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6943 

to Saskatchewan by making life more affordable. 
 
This is a good thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and this is the right 
thing to do. This is what the people of Saskatchewan have 
asked us to do, and I do believe we are listening. 
 
And with that, I know there’s more people who would like to 
talk about why Saskatchewan is the best place to live and raise 
a family, and with that I will sit. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, people often wonder what 
the 75-minute debate on Thursdays is about. Why do we have 
this format? And, Mr. Speaker, I would have to say that the 
answer to the ordinary viewing public and others is that this is 
the most political part of what happens in the legislature. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this motion today which talks about, you 
know, basically a standard practice in government about 
indexing these rates — and it’s been going on for many, many 
years — is really answering or trying to answer or obscuring I 
think would be the better way to put it, the answer to the 
question, where did all the money go? And, Mr. Speaker, 
people across the province are asking themselves that question, 
and they’re looking at how and what’s happening in their own 
household. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that one of the things that the 
government is trying to obscure with this particular motion 
today and this discussion today is the fact that it costs a lot more 
money for everybody in the province to live. And practically 
there’s quite a number of our citizens who are getting left 
behind or being pushed out to various places. We’re hearing a 
lot about that. But I think even more so, the members opposite 
are hearing that when people are saying, well where did the 
money go? What has happened with the money? Why am I not 
feeling as if everything is benefiting me? 
 
I can look around and I can see some people in our community 
are doing very, very well. But there’s a whole bunch of other 
people who are starting to worry about how they’re going to 
afford things as they move forward. What we know is that there 
are people across the province who have moved out of the cities 
because they can’t afford to live there anymore, and they’re 
living in a lot of smaller communities. Now that’s not 
necessarily a bad thing, but the transportation services to get 
people back into the city for medical appointments, social 
service appointments, all those things, are being diminished. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that the question here for the Premier 
is, what’s happened in this province as far as the ordinary 
people that are here in the province and the question about the 
fair distribution of the benefits for all the people of the 
province? And that’s that fundamental political question that is 
being raised today. It’s why the government has put this motion 
forward because they are concerned and they’re hearing on the 
doorstep, they’re hearing right across the province, is that you 
better tell us what happened to this money because we’re not 
feeling it. And, Mr. Speaker, when that question comes home to 
roost, the Premier will be quickly off to some other place. 
 
Now I was very curious today to hear the next step in the 

Premier’s plan for his next career. I think he wants to get an 
ambassadorship somewhere in the Far East. I mean he’s lost out 
on the one in the US. We know that. But now he’s got a whole 
plan ahead to figure out how he can go to India, Vietnam, 
China, who knows where. And, Mr. Speaker, unfortunately for 
us who are going to stay here in Saskatchewan, we’re going to 
have to pick up the pieces. We’re going to have to answer this 
question: where did all the money go? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that this motion today, and especially 
the speech from the mover of this motion, was an attempt to tell 
a big story, to tell a big, big, big explanation that just doesn’t 
hang true. 
 
Now so many of the notes that the members opposite have been 
using will say, you know, 2007 everything’s been roses. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, we know that it was the taxation discussion which 
all members of the House, both sides, were part of in various 
ways when Mr. Vicq and his team looked at taxation in the 
province, and that made a difference in the longer term 
economic possibilities that are here. And, Mr. Speaker, I think 
there needs to be an acknowledgement that even this particular 
motion today is just a continuation of some of the taxation 
policies of the previous government or governments. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that is where so much of what’s happening this year 
and in motions like this today is an attempt to obscure what’s 
happened before. 
 
Now we know that they have a communications plan, for 
example, to talk about the fact that the infrastructure in the 
province has lots of needs for repair, whether it’s the highways, 
schools, all those other things, and we can point those out. 
That’s what people are pointing out to us. And they’re asking 
us, well where did all the money go? We’ve had the best years 
in the history of the province. None of us will deny that. But 
where has that money gone? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s the fundamental question that has to 
be asked. You know, $10 million on this kind of an indexation 
kind of question really is about the whole plan that the 
government doesn’t have for making sure that the people, all of 
the people of the province, benefit. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when the government comes forward with a 
budget that effectively pushes the costs of things and the things 
that they are actually doing out over 10, 20, 30, sometimes even 
40 years, we know that we’re all going to be paying for that 
later. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re uneasy with that because we’ve 
seen that scenario before. And unfortunately the Premier and 
number of the others on that side actually were working in a 
government that did that once before, which took us a long time 
to sort out. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when they come forward again with this big 
illusion, this big myth about how things are all fine, and they 
don’t ask the fundamental question of how have they spent the 
money to benefit the people, all the people of Saskatchewan, 
then that’s where we have a problem. 
 
[12:00] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when this particular question has been 
brought forward in the whole number of areas, we have people 



6944 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2015 

who will come to us and say, well we’re quite uneasy about 
raising some of these concerns, but we’re seeing it in our own 
families. We know that more of our young people will end up 
having to stay living with their parents longer because they 
can’t afford to find a new place to live. We know that seniors 
are looking at their rising utility bills and saying, well how can I 
afford to live, not just in their home, but in the condominium or 
some kind of housing where they are paying some of these 
utility bills as well or just in the general overall cost. But, Mr. 
Speaker, those are questions that go right through every person 
in the province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we know that the government doesn’t appear 
to have a plan that will include everybody, and that is I think 
the fundamental question. And so practically, when the Premier 
goes and does the same kind of work that Premier Calvert did 
and Premier Romanow did in promoting the province around 
the world, he’d be best reminded to build on the good 
relationships that they built across the world rather than have 
members come up in the House like they did today and 
basically say, oh this never happened before. It’s just our 
Premier that’s some kind of a star out there. Because that goes 
right again, right to this fundamental question: where did all the 
money go? What’s our Premier up to? Why isn’t he dealing 
with ambulance costs? Why isn’t he dealing with the things that 
affect people day to day? Why isn’t he dealing with the 
low-cost housing issues that are there? Because that is the 
fundamental question as you move forward toward a next 
election. Now what we know is that all political campaigns 
seem to revolve around leaders, and I think this one’s going to 
revolve right around that leader himself. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The time for debate has expired. 
Questions. I recognize the member from Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, a key part of affordability is really about food 
security, and we know the usage of food banks has gone up 
incredibly here in Saskatchewan. But yet we hear the member 
from Eastview wax on about Kraft Dinner. Now I, like 
everybody, can enjoy a good box of Kraft Dinner, but I don’t 
know about 1,800 boxes of Kraft Dinner. He may buy them at 
the Co-op, and I’m glad to hear that. But 1,800 boxes of Kraft 
Dinner, that’s five boxes a day. Is he really serious that families 
in Saskatchewan should be looking at five boxes of Kraft 
Dinner a day? Is that this government’s response to 
affordability here in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Mr. Tochor: — Mr. Speaker, that’s comical, but yet the 
question that the member poses isn’t . . . We talked about the 
savings from taxation and what you could spend that money on, 
just to give an example of what the ridiculous amount of money 
that has been saved, what you can buy, a ridiculous amount of 
money, of Kraft Dinner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but I just want to clarify. The member from 
Lakeview talked about the recent announcement with uranium 
at the federal level and how that he questioned on the facts that 
we brought up in a member’s statement. And, Mr. Speaker, it 
was talking about the editorial from The StarPhoenix. It wasn’t 

our words, what they thought about the announcement and what 
our government was doing to improve the economy in this 
province. It was the editorial board of The StarPhoenix. Thank 
you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, since 2007 our 
government has provided $5 billion in tax relief with some of 
the largest tax cuts in Saskatchewan’s history. Since our 
government was elected, Saskatchewan residents have saved 
approximately $490 million a year in personal income tax 
reductions. This has made life more affordable for 
Saskatchewan citizens. To the member from Saskatoon Nutana: 
with some of the largest tax cuts in Saskatchewan’s history, the 
NDP seem to like nothing more than to go on a spending spree 
with Saskatchewan taxpayer dollars. Would you roll back the 
tax cuts, back to help pay for this, further burdening 
Saskatchewan residents? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to thank the 
member for the question because what I’d like to talk about is 
tax reductions, but these are tax reductions that were done by 
the previous government. For example, as a result of personal 
income tax reforms that began in 2000-2001 and fully 
implemented in 2003, provincial income tax was simplified. 
Rates were lowered. Fifty-five thousand people were removed 
from the tax rolls, and individuals and families realized a 
savings averaging over $1,000. The total annual benefit was 
$620 million. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could go on and on, but again I think the 
mover of this motion thinks that the sun only was created in 
2007 and he doesn’t realize that there was actual history in this 
province of good, solid tax reform prior to this government 
coming into power. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the member 
from Saskatchewan Rivers. The government had a proposal put 
forward where they worked to get some affordable housing here 
in the city of Regina. When the whole deal seemed to be costing 
slightly more, rather than thinking about the people who might, 
the ability to deal with the affordable housing, does the member 
from Saskatchewan Rivers agree with the fact that this 
government has fallen down on the wayside as it deals with 
social housing, with this one proposal here in Regina being a 
good example of where they’ve blinked and not done their job? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
thank you for the question. Our government supports families 
saving money. We’ve saved approximately 10.6 million 
through the provincial income tax system, and that’s what this 
motion is about. It’s about keeping taxes low and bringing 
young families to Saskatchewan to make life more affordable. 



April 16, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6945 

We’re very proud of our record, and the changes since 2007 to 
improve tax competitiveness is what this motion is about. 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’ve 
heard time and time again about all the things that were not 
possible and what the former NDP leader, Lorne Calvert, had to 
say about our “so-called plan.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, maybe the reason why the NDP don’t want 
to talk about the plan is because the NDP’s own Harry Van 
Mulligen said: 
 

Why don’t parties want to talk about tax hikes during 
elections? I don’t know. I suspect anyone who talks about 
tax hikes is not likely to be very popular during the course 
of an election campaign. 

 
The facts today is that the NDP have no plan and love to 
haphazardly tax and spend until someone else comes to clean 
up their mess that they’ve left. 
 
To the member from Saskatoon Centre: when can we expect to 
hear your manifesto on tax . . . I mean plans that you have for 
Saskatchewan residents? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I find 
it just passing strange that that member would ask a question 
about cleaning up messes, because we know what happened in 
the ’80s and who had to clean up the mess from the ’80s and the 
’90s. And people out there . . . You all know it. They all know 
it. They all know it. 
 
But you know what I find very strange, Mr. Speaker? We had 
three speakers from the other side talk about affordable living in 
Saskatchewan, but not one of them mentioned the anti-poverty 
strategy that was such a big deal for this government in the 
Throne Speech. But we heard nothing from it from the Premier 
in his speech. We hadn’t heard nothing about that from the 
Minister of Finance and from any of those folks over there 
during their budget speeches, not a word about poverty in this 
province. What’s the plan from them on that? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, if this government was serious 
about making life more affordable, it wouldn’t have shut down 
the affordable housing program. If this government was serious 
about making life more affordable, it would have enforced the 
terms of its contract with Deveraux instead of letting them off 
the hook and giving away an affordable housing project. 
 
And the member for Saskatoon Eastview has said he doesn’t 
think the government should have anything to do with housing. 
How can the member for Eastview defend this government’s 
record on affordable housing? 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Mr. Tochor: — Mr. Speaker, I find it unfortunate that the NDP 
continue to run down local businesses in this province. 
 
They want to talk about social services, Mr. Speaker? Overall 
spending has increased by 34 per cent in social services, from 
900 million to $1.2 billion, Mr. Speaker. That would be more, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is dedicated on making life 
affordable for families. That’s why you’ve seen us continually 
to decrease taxes and to index. And this is what the debate’s 
about, is proper indexing of our taxation, income tax. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
South. 
 
Mr. Hutchinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve heard a lot from the 
members opposite in recent months about new programs that 
they would like to fund if they were in fact in government. This 
includes funding new programs for Crown corporations, health 
care, education, the creation of a heritage fund, and much, much 
more. Now, Mr. Speaker, while we might not agree with all 
their initiatives, certainly some of them may well have merit. 
The problem, Mr. Speaker, is that they haven’t proposed a plan, 
even a shred of a plan, for how they would like to pay for these 
things. 
 
To the member from Saskatoon Nutana: other than taking 
money away from municipalities and farmers, as proposed by 
your colleague from Regina Lakeview, how do you propose to 
pay for these promises and programs? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the issue that’s in 
discussion here is this government’s performance. And what I 
want to talk about is how they have failed people, particularly 
in the category of the poorest of the poor. We hear all this talk 
in the Throne Speech about poverty reduction strategy. What do 
we see in the budget? Nothing. We see the costs for a single 
person at $25,000 total income have exploded here in 
Saskatchewan since this government came into power, and we 
don’t see anything where we’re advancing programs like 
affordable housing. In fact, what have they done to affordable 
housing? They’ve got rid of it, Mr. Speaker. They don’t even 
have the program anymore. 
 
We’re seeing poor people that are contacting my office and 
telling me, working poor, Mr. Speaker, who are suffering and 
really having trouble making a go of it, and the kind of 
sympathy they get from this government is less than 
heartwarming, shall I say. 
 
So I think these people like to brag. They like to pat themselves 
on the back. They like to, you know, rabble-rouse the back 
benchers. But, Mr. Speaker, they’re not doing their job for 
Saskatchewan people. 



6946 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2015 

The Deputy Speaker: — Time for the 75-minute debate has 
expired. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 609 — The Residents-in-Care Bill of Rights Act 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s actually 
with a great deal of frustration today that I rise in the Assembly 
once again to call for this government to take action to ensure 
that seniors and other residents in care facilities are treated with 
the dignity and respect that they deserve. It’s frustrating 
because we still shouldn’t have to fight for this. 
 
Family after family after family have come to the legislature 
with heartbreaking stories of an unacceptable quality of care, of 
chronic short-staffing, and of premature deaths. The public has 
heard of at least seven premature deaths in care facilities. We 
have Margaret Warholm, Jesse Sellwood, Lorne Rowell, Fern 
Chingos, Irene Hohne, Lois Rein, and the elderly gentleman we 
heard about last week with dementia in Moose Jaw. And we’ve 
heard many other stories that haven’t been made public. 
 
I don’t know how the Premier and his two Health ministers and 
all of those government MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] can sit here and hear those tragic stories and still 
refuse to take the seniors’ care crisis seriously. 
 
We know that families have spoken up publicly. They’re just a 
small portion of the families that have come forward to us with 
very real concerns. At last report, the Ombudsman had received 
79 complaints about the quality of seniors’ care in our province, 
79 formal complaints. That means the Ombudsman’s last 
update at the end of January, her office has received an 
additional 44 complaints. 
 
And it’s not exactly like this Ombudsman’s investigation is 
widely advertised. The reality is that most families with loved 
ones in care will have no idea that an investigation is even 
going on. The Ombudsman says these complaints come from all 
over the province and focus on “poor quality of care, low 
staff-to-resident ratios, a poor organizational culture within 
facilities, lack of communications with family and residents, 
and a long-term care system lacking in accountability.” 
 
So that is why this is so frustrating. Despite so many problems 
in seniors’ care, this government is still refusing to listen to 
residents, to their families, and to front-line staff. That has to 
stop, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This government scrapped the minimum care standards in 
special care home regulations. These regulations used to require 
a minimum of two hours per day of nursing and personal care 
for residents, but this government quietly got rid of that 
minimum care standard. That two-hour standard wasn’t even 
close to good enough, so this government should have 
strengthened and improved the minimum care standard, but 
instead it chose to scrap them entirely. The government’s 

excuse for doing away with minimum quality of care standards 
is that it didn’t want to limit the care that is provided to seniors. 
But that doesn’t make any sense. Minimum care standards 
simply act as a floor. A minimum wage doesn’t serve as a 
maximum wage. We want people to make more than minimum 
wage. That is a good thing. 
 
[12:15] 
 
The government’s other excuse for doing away with minimum 
quality of care standards is that it claims it wants to deliver 
more personalized care instead. Well that also doesn’t make an 
ounce of sense. There should be personalized care for everyone 
in a care facility, but in no way does that preclude the need for 
basic guarantees. But the Sask Party government, using 
absolutely bizarre logic, got rid of minimum care standards, and 
the Premier and his two Health ministers keep hiding behind the 
program guidelines for special care homes they claim are 
sufficient. 
 
But we’ve obtained and released internal emails from the main 
Health minister’s own office that shows his former chief of staff 
wrote to the Health ministry officials and said, “Is there any 
further policy development or requirements under each of these 
items, under section 1.4 for care standards? These are good but 
extremely general.” And a senior ministry official wrote back 
saying, “I do not believe there are more specifics . . .” 
Extremely general guidelines are not good enough. And what 
this means is that we have a quality of care that is horribly 
uneven across the province and terribly inadequate. 
 
We know that from the 250 pages of urgent requests submitted 
by care facilities last year that the level of care is very different, 
depending upon where you live in this province. The urgent 
request documents show that if you’re a senior in the Heartland 
Health Region, you get about three hours less care per week 
than you do if you’re in the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region. 
It’s unacceptable for the standard of seniors’ care to be so 
uneven and so inadequate. 
 
That’s one of the reasons why the NDP chose to introduce this 
legislation in the first place last year and to reintroduce it again 
this session. The legislation would establish a residents-in-care 
bill of rights, and it would require the government to regulate 
province-wide minimum care standards. A legislated bill of 
rights is a step that the government’s own Law Reform 
Commission said would help address problems in seniors’ care. 
 
The Law Reform’s final report, Civil Rights in Saskatchewan 
Long-term Care Facilities, said this: 
 

Responses to the Consultation Paper overwhelmingly 
supported a mandatory residents’ bill of rights for all 
long-term care homes. Only one response suggested that a 
bill of rights may not be necessary, as other avenues, such 
as regional or provincial policy guidelines, may give 
residents the same protection and respect. The 
Commission believes that the accessibility of a residents’ 
bill of rights is a benefit over the already existing avenues. 

 
And that’s on page 9, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of that report. 
 
Here’s what else this government’s own Law Reform 



April 16, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6947 

Commission has to say about this: 
 

A residents’ bill of rights can be given legal recognition in 
several ways. The most straightforward is the approach 
adopted in Ontario and British Columbia: legislating a 
uniform bill of rights applicable to all long-term care 
facilities. Manitoba, however, requires each long-term care 
home to develop a bill of rights in consultations with its 
residents and sets out a minimum standard. 
 

That’s page 9, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It goes on: 
 

The Commission prefers the Manitoba approach because it 
actively engages the facilities and the residents in 
designing protections for civil rights. Engaging these 
parties will assist in furthering the education function of 
the bill of rights. This approach also has the benefit of 
addressing several concerns expressed in response to the 
Consultation Paper. A minimum core content of rights 
prescribed by law ensures a baseline of equal civil rights in 
long-term care homes while, at the same time, allowing 
individual homes a role to play in enunciating these rights. 
For example, this would allow each facility to set its own 
visiting hours to conform to a legislated guideline stating 
that residents must be allowed to receive visitors at 
reasonable hours, instead of simply imposing exact hours 
upon facilities through legislation. 

 
And that is on page 10, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So one of the very clear recommendations from this 
government’s own Law Reform Commission is this: 
“Legislation should set out a minimum standard for a residents’ 
bill of rights, with each long-term care home drafting its own 
document.” And that is on page 10. 
 
Another one of the very clear recommendations from this 
government’s own Law Reform Commission is this: “Each 
long-term care home should be required to prominently post its 
residents’ bill of rights.” 
 
So faced with repeated stories, faced with this government’s 
refusal to listen to the concerns and act, faced with this 
government’s decision to actually scrap minimum care 
standards, and faced with the recommendations of this 
government’s own Law Reform Commission, we decided to 
introduce our own bill. This Bill 606, The Residents-in-Care 
Bill of Rights Act guarantees respect, dignity, and safety for 
seniors in Saskatchewan care homes. 
 
Our proposed legislation goes further than the government’s 
current guidelines. For example, our proposed legislation 
requires care plans to comply with minimum quality of care 
standards which the government would have to set out in 
regulations, not in guidelines. It requires that the bill of rights 
be posted in prominent locations and easily accessible to 
residents and staff. It is more specific in the enumeration of 
rights, including the right of seniors to choose their recreational 
activities and select the clothing to be worn each day, whereas 
the government guidelines are very broad. It also spells out the 
specific rights of residents or their supporters to transparency 
and accountability, including how to make a complaint to an 
authority outside the facility. 

So, Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 609, The Residents-in-Care 
Bill of Rights Act be now read a second time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale has moved that Bill No. 609, The Residents-in-Care 
Bill of Rights Act be now read a second time. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Just very briefly to join the debate, certainly the member from 
Riversdale has moved a very important piece of legislation that 
should improve the care that is given to residents in long-term 
care and improve the lot of seniors across the province 
generally. 
 
Pursuant to agreement between the sides, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
we’re going to wrap it up a bit early. So at this point I would 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 609 in order that preparations might 
be undertaken for committee which comes along very shortly. 
But with that, I’d move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 609. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
609, The Residents-in-Care Bill of Rights Act. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. To facilitate the work of committees this afternoon, I 
move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that the House adjourns. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House now stands 
adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:23.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker ................................................................................................................................................................... 6925, 6927 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6925 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6925 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6925 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6925 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6926 
  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6926 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6926 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6926 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6926 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6926 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Yom HaShoah 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6927 
 Documentary Commemorates Holocaust 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6927 
 Equality Day 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6927 
 Moose Jaw Resident Performs Good Deeds 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6928 
 Realtors’ Quality of Life Gala 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6928 
 Emergency Telecommunicators Week 
  Huyghebaert ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6928 
 Promoting Saskatchewan Outside of our Borders 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6929 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Ambulance Service Fees 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6929 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6929 
 Design of Moose Jaw Hospital 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6931 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6931 
 Canadian Wheat Board Ownership 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6932 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6932 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 611 — The Student Bill of Rights Act, 2015 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6934 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6934 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 143 — The Degree Authorization Amendment Act, 2014 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6934 
MOTIONS 
 Wheelchairs in the Assembly 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6934 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Government Practices and the Income Tax System 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6935 
  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6937, 6944 
  Tochor ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6938, 6944 
  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6940, 6944 
  Wilson ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6941, 6944 
  Nilson ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6943, 6944 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6944 
 



 

  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6945 
  Hutchinson .............................................................................................................................................................................. 6945 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 609 — The Residents-in-Care Bill of Rights Act 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6946 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6947 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


	PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS
	SECOND READINGS
	PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS
	SECOND READINGS

