






















































Hansard: April 28, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 55A  TUESDAY, APRIL 28, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7027 
 April 28, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
Clerk: — Members of the Assembly, I wish to advise you that 
Mr. Speaker is not present to open today’s sitting. 
 
[Prayers] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Workplace Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would ask 
for extended leave for a National Day of Mourning condolence 
statement. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has asked for extended 
leave. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 

COMMEMORATIVE STATEMENTS 
 

National Day of Mourning 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is the 
National Day of Mourning for workers killed or injured on the 
job. At the Legislative Building our flags are flying at half-mast 
to recognize these people. Today Canadians will be mourning 
the loss and remembering those who have died as a result of 
work-related injury. It is a day to reflect, but also express 
sympathy to the loved ones who have lost someone. 
 
Saskatchewan continues to have an unacceptably high injury 
rate. This year unfortunately is no exception. The 39 
Saskatchewan workers who passed away in 2014 are more than 
just statistics. These people are parents, brothers and sisters, 
children, spouses, grandparents, aunts, uncles, and friends. 
There are families who will never again get a chance to see their 
loved ones. Kids won’t have a parent to take them to hockey 
practice, watch them graduate, or walk down the aisle on their 
wedding day. Spouses whose lives were cut short, and parents 
who have had their worst nightmare in losing one of their own 
children. 
 
This is why we have Mission: Zero, to end workplace injuries 
and suffering. It is not about statistics; it’s about people. It’s 
about remembering these individuals and admitting we can do 
better and we will do better. We honour these individuals by 
ensuring every worker in this province arrives home safely 
every night. Their memory deserves nothing less. We must 
never forget the women and men and the people around them 
whose lives have been forever changed. 
 
The names of those we honour today are being read into the 
official record and will be inscribed in the national registry at 
the Canadian Labour Congress in Ottawa. 
 
I would ask that all members please rise while we read the 
names of those who have lost their lives in the past year. 
 
 

Kleon Swahn Randy Yanoshewski 
Claybourne Ursu Wayne Hardman 
Ian Stewart Wayne Clark 
Kenneth Kotylak William McIntyre 
Clifford Grimes Edward Habetler 
Daryl Phillip Bernard Gilmour 
Dakota Holloway Raafat Yalda 
Kelly Rolston Joseph Zerr 
Michael Faryna Michael Bunz 
Jonathan Kohn Sarah Severson 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite will read the remaining 
names. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — 
 
Clayton Stushnoff Richard Eberts 
Egon Erickson Clifford Gunness 
Noel Gervais Lawrence Lozinski 
Bryan Goddard Justin Unruh 
Daniel Leblanc Gary Bailey 
Tobias Friesen Jean Moffatt 
David Soltys Donald Yates 
Kenneth Bjornson Murray Johnson 
Jason Shulist Arnold Gessner 
Roger Nemeth  
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Not included among these names are the 
additional deaths that occur each year from farming and 
ranching work-related incidents. Today we honour their 
memories as well. 
 
On behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, I’d like to pass 
our sincerest condolences to the loved ones of those who have 
lost someone this past year. To remember their lives and 
commemorate the Day of Mourning, I would ask all members 
to take a moment of silence. 
 
[The Assembly observed a moment of silence.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Please be seated. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure today to rise to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the legislature, 12 grade 11 and 12 students from 
the Law 30 class at Sheldon-Williams Collegiate. They’re 
sitting in the east gallery and they’re accompanied by their 
teacher, Mrs. Lindsay Vindevoghel. This class makes an annual 
trip here to the legislature, and I ask all members to welcome 
them here. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also have another group of 
students, I will call them, but these are well-experienced 
students. They’re part of a program called Tour, Talk and Tea, a 
program for seniors which is, this program’s hosted by visitor 



7028 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2015 

services here in the legislature. It includes a very extensive tour 
of the building, time to observe proceedings, and then afternoon 
tea, and a chance to visit with the MLA [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly]. And today the group we have with us is 
from Parliament Community Church, the Heritage Builders 
retiree group. They’re sitting in the Speaker’s gallery. There are 
26 retirees accompanied by their social program coordinator, 
Janice Parker, who is the chairperson of the Heritage Builders. 
 
Also included in this group is Allen and Joyce Engel. Allen 
Engel is behind the bar as a former member for Assiniboia, and 
we welcome Allen and Joyce who are obviously very familiar 
with this building and are probably helping give the guided 
tour. 
 
Anyway I would ask all members to welcome this group to the 
legislature. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education 
and Minister of Workplace Safety and Workers’ Compensation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce Mr. Gord Dobrowolsky, chairperson of the Workers’ 
Compensation Board, and Peter Federko, chief executive officer 
of Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
Gord is from Prince Albert. He brings with him a wealth of 
experience and knowledge to the board. He has served in many 
executive roles on boards, operated a business, and was a 
teacher and feels free to give me advice on that portfolio as 
well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Peter has been with the Saskatchewan Workers’ 
Compensation Board since 1994. He became the first CEO 
[chief executive officer] of the Saskatchewan Workers’ 
Compensation Board in June 1996 and is the longest serving 
CEO among Canadian workers’ compensation boards today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members in the House today 
join me in welcoming Gordon and Peter to their legislature 
today. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
would like to join with the minister in welcoming Peter Federko 
and Gord Dobrowolsky to the legislature, a pretty special day 
today. And I know this is a day that . . . Every day these folks 
work hard to make sure people are safe in their workplaces, and 
this is an issue I know both gentlemen take to heart, very much 
so. So I’d ask all members of the House to welcome them to 
their legislature. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central 
Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, I would like to introduce four individuals seated in 
your gallery from the Saskatchewan Masonry Institute. If you 
could just give a wave when I call your name: Mr. Rob 
Walchuk, Mr. Ryan Leech, Mr. Darrell Kennedy, and Mr. 

Sasha Kisin. 
 
Rob is the owner of Walchuk Masonry Ltd., which has been 
serving southern Saskatchewan for 29 years. He is also the 
president of the Saskatchewan Masonry Institute. Ryan is the 
Saskatchewan operations manager for Brxton Construction and 
has been involved with this company for 17 years. He serves as 
the vice-president of Saskatchewan Masonry Institute. 
 
Darrell is the owner of Timberstone Distribution, which has its 
head office here in Regina as well as a subsidiary in Winnipeg. 
He serves as director of the Saskatchewan Masonry Institute. 
Sasha is the masonry design coordinator at the Canada Masonry 
Design Centre, Saskatchewan office, and he is a member of the 
Saskatchewan Masonry Institute. 
 
The Saskatchewan Masonry Institute is the official voice of our 
masonry industry in this province. It is comprised of 
professional masonry contractors and suppliers who are 
dedicated to the promotion of quality masonry and, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, they have proven to be very dedicated to furthering the 
craft of masonry in Saskatchewan. I ask all members to join me 
in welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to introduce 
my niece, Trinity Campeau, who is in the west gallery. She’s 
here from Watson. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to 
join with the minister opposite and welcome these 
entrepreneurs and business leaders to their Assembly here today 
with the masonry industry and the construction industry here in 
Saskatchewan. Certainly we appreciate their work within our 
province in helping drive our economy and helping build 
Saskatchewan. So it’s my pleasure to join with the minister and 
welcome these community leaders and economic leaders here 
today. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to you and through you to all members of the 
Legislative Assembly, I would like to introduce you to 24 
students from grades 7, 8, and 9 from the Watson School in my 
constituency. 
 
It’s a great community that has this huge Santa Claus, looking 
like Santa Claus most of the time, except in October or so when 
it wears a green Rider jersey, as we all know. They are 
accompanied today by Mrs. Yvonne Gueguen, Mr. Curtis Buhs, 
and Mr. Darwin Riendeau, so if all members could join with me 
in welcoming these people to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I too would 
like to extend a very warm welcome to Mr. Allen Engel and his 
wife, Joyce. Mr. Engel was my first MLA when I first cast my 



April 28, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7029 

vote just after I graduated from high school in Lafleche. And I 
think back then it was Notukeu-Willow Bunch might have been 
the name of the riding at the time. But anyways I just remember 
Mr. Engel as being someone that I admired and certainly looked 
up to as a community leader and was a friend of our family as 
well. So on behalf of the official opposition and again the whole 
Legislative Assembly, I’d like to extend a very warm welcome 
to Mr. Engel and his wife Joyce. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Government Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To you 
and through you to this Assembly, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
a couple of municipal officials from the great town of Wilkie. 
We have in your gallery, Mr. Deputy Speaker, His Worship 
Mayor David Ziegler, and with him is the administrator, Lana 
Gerein. They’re here for some meetings later today, and they 
came in early to watch the proceedings. We’re delighted to have 
them. And I’d ask all the members to please give them a warm 
welcome to their Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If 
I just may join with members on both sides of the House and 
welcome those that have joined us from the masonry institute 
and acknowledge their contribution to the province, as the 
Deputy Leader for the opposition has done. 
 
As entrepreneurs, Mr. Speaker, I welcome them all, but I 
specifically want to introduce someone who’s become a very 
good friend of mine in Darrell Kennedy. Here in Regina, here 
we have someone, like his colleagues, who has really 
boot-strapped his own business. He’s employing others here 
and in other provinces, and helping to create what we’re calling 
the Saskatchewan advantage. He is, I think fair to say, an 
effervescent personality, and it’s always great to see Darrell in 
the legislature. I think he’s the reigning champion at the Royal 
Regina golf course this year, I think so, proving that even a 
blind squirrel can find a nut every now and then, Mr. Speaker. 
I’d ask all members to join me in specifically welcoming D.K. 
to his Legislative Assembly today. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition in support of better schools here in 
Saskatchewan. We know that far too many of our classrooms 
are overcrowded and under-resourced, and the condition of 
many of our schools are rundown, unsafe, and uninspected, and 
this government refuses to release information on the $1.5 
billion of known repairs that are needed in our schools. The 
government’s plan to rent schools from private corporations is 
expensive and reckless, and none of this is acceptable given the 
record revenues this government has had over the last eight 
years. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

call on this government to immediately stop ignoring 
schools and start prioritizing students by capping 
classroom sizes, increasing supports for students, and 
developing a transparent plan to build and repair our 
schools. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am 
pleased to rise today to present a petition once again in support 
of maintaining hyperbaric services at the Moose Jaw Hospital. 
The petitioners point out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the people 
of Moose Jaw worked hard for many years through fundraising 
and community activism in order to procure a hyperbaric 
chamber for the Moose Jaw Hospital. They point out that 
hyperbaric treatments are essential for the proper treatment for 
many people living with diabetes, cancer, and other conditions. 
The petitioners point out that the existing hyperbaric chamber is 
the only unit of its kind currently in operation between 
Edmonton and Toronto. They also talk about hyperbaric 
services no longer being offered in the new design for the 
Moose Jaw Hospital because of the changes to the hospital 
design initiated through the John Black version of lean. I’d like 
to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly require the Sask 
Party government to reverse its decision to scrap the 
hyperbaric chamber and to instead ensure that this service 
continues to be provided in the new Moose Jaw Hospital. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of 
Moose Jaw. I so submit. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
rise to present a petition in support of safe staffing levels in 
long-term care. In the prayer that reads as follows, the 
petitioners: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 
government to commit to the creation of safe staffing 
levels for all valued members of the health care team, and 
to reintroduce actual numbers of staff to match the level of 
care needs and the number of residents under their care in 
long-term care facilities. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this particular petition is signed by 
individuals from Swift Current and Elrose. I so present. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 



7030 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2015 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition in support of retaining Yarrow Youth Farm. 
The government has closed Yarrow Youth Farm and created an 
open-custody wing in Kilburn Hall, which is a secure custody 
unit for youth considered a greater risk to their communities. 
The provincial Advocate for Children and Youth has declared 
he can’t endorse such a rationalization, as low-risk teens could 
be influenced and pressured by close proximity to high-risk 
youth who may be involved in serious crimes or gangs, also 
that Kilburn Hall has a more institutional environment that 
could intimidate and alienate teens that have committed minor 
offences. And so I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the government to keep 
Yarrow Youth Farm open, to ensure a caring home 
environment for youth who have committed minor 
offences and provide support to help these young people 
redirect their lives by setting more positive goals. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from 
Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 

International Day of Mourning 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, every year since 1985, the 
members of this Assembly have taken the time to mark today, 
April 28th, as the International Day of Mourning for workers 
injured or killed on the job. It’s an important time to remember 
the workers who have lost their lives, but it’s also a time for us 
as lawmakers to ensure that we’re doing everything we can to 
make Saskatchewan a place where there are no work-related 
deaths or injuries. A private member’s bill in the House of 
Commons made April 28th the official Day of Mourning all 
across Canada in 1991, and we’re quickly approaching the 25th 
year when our whole nation stands with workers around the 
world to remember those who were killed or injured at work. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we know that here in Saskatchewan 
there’s still a lot of work that needs to be done to make sure all 
of our working men and women make it home safe at the end of 
each shift. Too many workers are hurt on the job each year, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and the numbers are even more alarming for 
young workers and for new workers. Since we marked the Day 
of Mourning last year, another 39 workers have lost their lives. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in 
recognizing this year’s International Day of Mourning and to 
keep working and to keep making progress that will bring an 
end to work-related injuries and deaths in Saskatchewan. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 
Jaw North. 
 

Anniversary of Liberation of the Netherlands 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Last 
Friday in Moose Jaw, the member from Wood River and I 
attended the 70th anniversary of the campaign to liberate the 
Netherlands from Nazi occupation. 
 
From September 1944 to April 1945, the First Canadian Army 
fought German forces on the Scheldt estuary, opening the port 
of Antwerp for Allied use and eventually clearing the northern 
and western Netherlands of Nazi occupation. During the 
German occupation, the Dutch people were suffering terrible 
hardships and starvation. The First Canadian Army played a 
major role in liberating the Netherlands and allowed food and 
other relief to reach millions of desperate people. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the fight did not come without a price. 
Over 7,600 Canadian soldiers, sailors, and airmen died fighting 
for freedom of the Netherlands. Today Canada is still fondly 
remembered by the Dutch people for aiding them at such a 
desperate time. 
 
In the years following the war, the Netherlands sent thousands 
of tulips to Ottawa in appreciation for Canada’s sacrifice and 
providing safe lodging to the Dutch royal family which lived in 
exile here in Canada during the war. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in recognizing the 
70th anniversary of the liberation of the Netherlands and to 
remember all the Canadian Armed Forces who gave their lives 
to end the suffering and ensure that freedom goes on in the 
Netherland people. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Rosemont. 
 

Ban on Heavy-Haul Trucks 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, last night Regina City 
Council showed leadership and took action and showed that 
they’re listening to the residents of our city. Regina City 
Council voted to ban heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of Lewvan. They did so to address the 
unacceptable safety concerns, damage, and disturbance on 
Dewdney Avenue caused by the province failing to ensure a 
safe, appropriate route for the heavy-haul truck traffic to a 
provincial project. 
 
I’m truly thankful for the action of council and for all the 
people and residents within our community that spoke up on 
this urgent matter of safety. I valued working with constituents 
and community on this important project by shining a spotlight 
on the danger, organizing our community-wide petition drive, 
addressing it and calling for action in the legislature, working 
with city councillors, proposing solutions to the provincial 
government, and hosting media on Dewdney to witness the 
problem first-hand. 
 
While I remain frustrated with the provincial government on 
this matter and their failure to address a problem they created, 
I’m pleased to see the action by city council. So I ask members 
to join with me to thank Regina City Council for acting to 
ensure safety on Dewdney and also to thank so many in our 



April 28, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7031 

community for their involvement and their advocacy. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose 
Jaw Wakamow. 
 

Funding for Moose Jaw Community 
Service Organizations 

 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I am pleased to rise in the House today to 
share that the Government of Saskatchewan has reaffirmed its 
commitment to vulnerable individuals and families in Moose 
Jaw. As part of the province’s 2015-16 budget commitment, 
Moose Jaw Family Services will receive $621,000 in funding 
and the Moose Jaw Association for Community Living will be 
allocated $104,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is proud to support these 
community-based organizations in their support of individuals 
in need in the Moose Jaw community. Throughout the month 
we are celebrating the work of many CBOs [community-based 
organization] across the province such as Moose Jaw Family 
Services and the Moose Jaw Association for Community 
Living. 
 
These organizations are dedicated to providing effective, 
efficient programs and services that will maintain the safety and 
well-being of the people that they serve. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
we’re pleased to continue these partnerships as we work 
together with hundreds of CBOs across the province to keep 
Saskatchewan strong. 
 
We are extremely grateful to all the community-based 
organizations for helping to respond to the needs of citizens in 
this growing province and their contribution which has a huge 
impact on the lives of those in needs. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of 
Innovation and Trade. 
 

Funding for Friendship Centre in Meadow Lake 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m pleased to rise in the House to talk about a wonderful 
funding announcement in Meadow Lake last Friday. Our 
government announced $393,000 in funding this year to help 
the North West Friendship Centre support vulnerable Meadow 
Lake families. 
 
Of this funding, the Ministry of Social Services is providing 
$307,000 for in-home support and education for parents whose 
children are at risk of coming into the care of the ministry. The 
Ministry of Justice will continue to support the victims of 
interpersonal violence and abuse in Meadow Lake with funding 
of over $86,000 for family violence outreach services, and to 
help build awareness and education about interpersonal 
violence and abuse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the North West Friendship Centre is a great 
partner and I want to thank them for their selfless dedication to 
Meadow Lake families. The work they do isn’t easy. It can be 

very challenging to meet people during some of the darkest and 
most difficult times of their lives, but it is during those times 
that they are a light to those people. We truly believe in the 
important work this organization is doing and are proud to be a 
small part of the difference they make each and every day. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 

Lieutenant Governor Bestows Literacy Awards 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Last 
Wednesday the Minister of Education, the Minister of Central 
Services, the member from Lloydminster, and I had the pleasure 
of attending the 2015 Literacy Awards of Merit held at 
Government House. Each year the Lieutenant Governor 
honours remarkable volunteers, learners, professionals, and 
organizations who have dedicated their time and efforts towards 
building literacy here in Saskatchewan. Literacy plays an 
important role in providing a good quality of life for people in 
our province. Literacy skills are essential to pursuing career 
options, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This year KPMG was recognized with the Business Leadership 
in Literacy Award for its long-standing support of Read 
Saskatoon. Mark Williment was recognized for his work as the 
superintendent of Northern Lights School Division and 
improving literacy in northern communities. 
 
Dr. Helen Christiansen received the Voluntary Service Award 
for 11 years of voluntary tutoring at the Regina Public Library. 
And Lucinda Nielson received the Cameco Literacy Learner 
Award along with a $1,000 bursary. Lucinda was pretty excited 
about that. In fact she said, “I get to go and spend this.” 
 
Lucinda had a remarkable journey, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Lucinda left school when she was in grade 3 to help at home. 
Through Read Saskatoon, Lucinda was able to obtain her GED 
[general equivalency diploma] at the age of 79, and today at the 
age of 80, Lucinda is taking part in post-secondary classes. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
this year’s winners. Thank you very much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Eastview. 
 

Saskatoon Bowling Alley Produces Champions 
 
Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Deputy Speaker. I rise in the 
House today to recognize a staple in the Saskatoon Eastview 
community, as well as congratulate some of the players that 
make this bowling alley their second home. 
 
Recently Eastview Bowl was home to the gold medal winners 
of the Rising Stars provincial championships. The team 
consisted of Nathan Missens, Allison Rayburn, Jay Crawford, 
Deb Holfeld, and coach, Lloyd Wiens. 
 
Saskatoon also took home the gold in the Great Western Fun 
Bowl, with team members Derek Molnar, Alicia Morin, Clint 
Friesen, Raina Dauvin, and coach, Karin Kirkland. Both teams 
qualified to go to the Rising Star and Fun Bowl national 



7032 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2015 

championships in Gatineau, Quebec this past weekend. 
 
Eastview Bowl teams have also qualified to go to the YBC 
[Youth Bowling Canada] national championships in Oshawa, 
Ontario next week with the senior girls’ teams of Brooke 
Arnold, Kaitlyn Giesbrecht, Kailee Leffler, Sarah Oulette, and 
coach, Rick Elvin. 
 
And finally I’d like to wish best of luck to the team from 
Eastview going to the Canadian open championships in June, 
also in Oshawa, Ontario. Members of this team are: Danielle 
Leffler, Alysa Rak, Julie Bayne, John Rayner, Colton Caister, 
Dennis Zacher, Michael Wist, and coach, Dale Holfeld. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly Eastview Bowl is becoming a spot not 
only for the social bowler, but also some competitive athletes as 
well. I would ask all members to join with me in congratulating 
the bowlers in their performance so far and wish them all the 
best in upcoming competition. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the opposition Deputy 
Leader. 
 

Release of Information Concerning Worker 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve now learned 
through media reports that the Premier’s chief of 
communications and operations actually sent several emails to 
reporters when she leaked confidential information about a care 
aid. And contrary to everything the Premier has said, those 
emails contain very specific information. In fact, the Premier 
leaked more specific information to reporters than the care aid 
had even received himself from the health region. So why has 
the Premier been saying it was just general information when 
that’s clearly not the case? 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Member, for the question. I 
think it’s important to revisit this whole situation. It started 
when the Leader of the Opposition asked questions on behalf of 
Mr. Bowden in the Assembly, stated certain things as fact with 
respect to care at Oliver Lodge. We’ve learned since then, by 
the way, that this information was incorrect that was presented 
by his Leader of the New Democratic Party about what was 
going on at Oliver Lodge. And I’m sure the Health minister will 
have more information on that in a moment. 
 
On that occasion, the Deputy Leader of the Opposition asked 
me for promises on three occasions that the person in question 
who was raising these concerns shouldn’t fear for their job 
because they were raising them. And of course the answer was 
yes every time. It’s a promise we’ve made then. It’s a promise 
we’ve made every time the NDP [New Democratic Party] have 
said, oh, the health care workers are too afraid to come forward, 
Mr. Speaker, and it’s a promise we intended to keep. And so 
shortly after question period, I said to officials, if there is any 
change in this individual’s status, we need to make sure that it is 
not a violation of a promise that was made in this House. 

We’ve since learned that there is a suspension with pay under 
way, that there’s an investigation under way. I think the person 
in question yesterday in the media said at that at least some of 
the allegations are true. He said that yesterday in the media. 
 
But the process needs to happen. In the meantime, we need to 
make sure health care workers know they can come forward. 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to specifics about what was in the 
emails, I haven’t seen the specifics. I would say to the member, 
if there is in fact an inquiry with the Privacy Commissioner, we 
ought to let that individual do his work. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the opposition Deputy 
Leader. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, another day, another 
question to that Premier about his leak of private information, 
and no answer but more spin from the Premier. Mr. Speaker, I 
think any reasonable person would agree that an employment 
record is never general information. So we didn’t believe the 
Premier’s argument one bit from the get-go, but he said it over 
and over and over. In fact he said it at least 17 times over the 
past several days. 
 
Now we know that that’s simply not the case. The Premier’s 
chief of communications and operations leaked specific details, 
and she even followed up with other emails which contained 
more specifics. Will the Premier just admit he was wrong when 
he said over and over that this was simply general information? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve said over and over again 
that it’s my view that the information was of a general nature. 
Mr. Speaker, the employment file was not provided to anybody. 
The member will know that, unless, as they tweeted out last 
week, as his leader said, unless they have the file. 
 
Well I have just answered the question, and now here’s a 
question for the member to think about. His party has said, his 
party has said they completely agree that Mr. Bowden is facing 
some discipline, potential discipline because he came forward 
with a concern in this legislature. By the way, we know now 
that the concerns expressed by the Leader of the Opposition on 
his behalf are not based on fact, but still they say they believe 
this is the only reason that he’s facing a discipline. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now, now Mr. Bowden himself yesterday on the 
radio said some of the allegations being made by his staff 
colleagues at Oliver Lodge are true, some of the allegations that 
formed the basis for this disciplinary decision by the Saskatoon 
Health Region. So here is a chance for the Deputy Leader of the 
NDP to do something that his leader has failed to do. Will he, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, confirm that the NDP now accept that Mr. 
Bowden is not facing any disciplinary action because he came 
forward but because of the stated complaints by colleagues in 
the workplace at Oliver Lodge? Will he admit that? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this is about due process. 
This is about that breach of information — private, confidential 



April 28, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7033 

information — of that Premier, Mr. Speaker. And every time 
that Premier seems to open his mouth, Mr. Speaker, our 
suspicions grow as it relates to this file, and we’re left with 
more questions certainly than answers. And his story just 
simply hasn’t added up. 
 
On one hand, the Premier says the leak was simply to provide 
background information to reporters, and he essentially blamed 
the newspapers for reporting it. But on the other hand, the 
Premier was adamant that he wanted the story out there, that he 
pretended that this was somehow in the public’s greater interest. 
Well you can’t have it both ways, Mr. Premier, so maybe the 
Premier will finally provide a straight answer here today. When 
he ordered the leak of confidential information about a private 
citizen, did he want this information reported publicly? Yes or 
no? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I think it’s important to go back to March 30th 
when this individual appeared at the Legislative Assembly and 
made some concerns known in terms of what he thought were 
concerns as it relates to Oliver Lodge and the operation of 
Oliver Lodge, at which point he requested from the Leader of 
the Opposition protection from bringing forward those 
concerns. Well here were the concerns, Mr. Speaker: that 
staffing ratios were 1, himself, to 32 residents in a dementia 
unit. Mr. Speaker, that is not accurate. It has not happened at 
Oliver Lodge. There are always additional staff available, Mr. 
Speaker, whether it is an evening, a day, or a night shift. 
 
He also brought up the concern, Mr. Speaker, of being directed 
to not change a resident who had soiled themselves more than 
on one occasion. Mr. Speaker, there is a long-standing policy 
that if a resident, particularly one in a dementia unit, is sound 
asleep during the night, that they are not to be woken up to be 
changed, that that would take place once they do wake up in the 
morning. So this relates directly to the accusations that were 
made by the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker, and they 
again are not accurate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, another question to the 
Premier, no answer whatsoever. The fact of the matter is the 
Premier can’t have it both ways. He said that he was only 
providing background information when he leaked this 
information to reporters, and in fact the newspapers chose to 
cover it — sort of blaming them. Then he says, Mr. Speaker, 
that he provided it to somehow provide a greater good to the 
public at large. The Premier can’t have it both ways. When he 
chose to leak this private, confidential information of a private 
citizen in Saskatchewan to the media, did he want it reported? 
Yes or no? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I would also draw the members’ attention to the fact 
that on March 30th, when this individual appeared at the 
legislature and through the Leader of the Opposition requested 

assurances that his employment would not be in jeopardy 
because of coming forward with concerns, which it turned out 
the concerns were not accurate that were raised by the Leader of 
the Opposition, that the Premier provided an assurance, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What was not known at that time by either, I would assume if 
they didn’t ask the question, by the Leader of the Opposition, 
certainly by the Premier and myself and members on this side 
of the House, Mr. Speaker, was not directly related to those 
concerns but in general the employment record of this 
individual. In good faith, the Premier provided that assurance, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what has come to light by the health region 
and in particular by the CEO, was that concerns had been raised 
even prior to March 30th as it relates to this gentleman’s 
employment. That is why, Mr. Speaker, we wanted to clarify 
with the public that this individual’s suspension with pay was 
not in any way directly related to his attendance at the 
legislature on March 30th because in fact some of the 
complaints predated his attendance at the legislature. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I ask the question again. 
There wasn’t a single answer from the Premier who continues 
to shirk responsibility and who’s failing to act like a Premier, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s pretty clear to most people about what’s going 
on. The Premier was given confidential information about the 
care aid who came to the legislature as a whistle-blower, and 
the Premier saw a political opportunity to discredit the aid, to 
cast doubt on very serious concerns brought forward by that aid, 
and to cast a big chill on health care workers across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
My question would be: has the Premier even bothered to talk to 
the CEO of the Saskatoon Health Region about the concerns 
this care aid brought forward, and investigated those in a 
thorough way, Mr. Speaker, in a way not just to discredit a 
claim or two? Or is the Premier only interested in information 
that he can use to tarnish this whistle-blower? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t have to have a conversation with the CEO of the 
Saskatoon Health Region. I only have to listen to what he said 
to the Leader-Post on April 23 and I quote — this is the CEO of 
Saskatoon Health Region: “I have zero concerns about this 
being in any way connected to his right to go forward and raise 
concerns about the workplace.” He went on and said: 
 

There are many examples in the past where our employees 
have written letters to the editor, issued complaints, been 
on talk shows, and have been very vocal about the 
experience that they’ve had, and they have never been 
sanctioned for doing such. 

 
Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the concerns that were raised by the 
individual on March 30th, I will again repeat for the Deputy 
Leader of the Opposition, the staffing ratios of 1 to 32 that were 



7034 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2015 

raised by this individual on March 30th are not accurate at this 
facility. Whether we’re talking about days, evenings, or nights, 
there are always multiple staff members. And with respect to 
being required by the facility not to change a resident that had 
soiled himself, Mr. Speaker, on an evening shift, we have a 
policy, and it is long-standing, that if the resident is sound 
asleep, we don’t wake them in the middle of the night to 
change. The staff will wait until the next morning. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this care aid that spoke out 
was clear that what’s stated on paper isn’t the reality in this 
facility. Mr. Speaker, this care aid, we have to remember, was 
the very first front-line health care worker to come forward to 
the legislature and publicly speak out about concerns, and the 
concerns he raised were serious: about staffing levels, about 
minimum care standards, about the quality of care for 
vulnerable seniors being far from adequate. 
 
This Premier should have taken those concerns seriously, 
especially because of the overwhelming evidence that these 
problems are widespread. But it’s apparent this Premier isn’t 
really that interested in improving seniors’ care, so when he saw 
an opportunity to discredit this care aid, to cast out on the 
concerns he raised, he ordered this leak, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So my question to the Premier: why won’t he simply own up 
finally, here today admit that he made a big mistake by ordering 
the leak of confidential information about a private citizen? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’ve already said twice in the House in terms of the direct 
concerns that were raised by this individual on March 30th that 
they’re not accurate as were described by the Leader of the 
Opposition. Unfortunately the Leader of the Opposition once 
again didn’t do his homework before he came to the floor of the 
Assembly and raised concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to note though, for the 
record, that Oliver Lodge funding has increased by over 103 per 
cent in the last seven years under this government. I correct 
myself: 134 per cent, Mr. Speaker, in the last seven years. 
Staffing levels have increased 103 per cent, Mr. Speaker, under 
this government. Yes, the beds did go up in that facility based 
on an expansion a couple of years ago, but the number of 
full-time staff equivalents in that facility greatly exceeded the 
number of additional residents in that facility, Mr. Speaker. 
That is just one more example of the work that this government 
is doing. 
 
We inherited a system that was neglected for many years, where 
members opposite closed over 1,000 long-term care beds, Mr. 
Speaker, over a dozen long-term care facilities in this province, 
Mr. Speaker. We now have more than nearly 800 additional 
full-time staff working in long-term care for the same number 
of residents, Mr. Speaker, and that doesn’t even say what we’re 
doing about addressing the issues of seniors that don’t live in 
long-term care. That’s the dedication that we’ve provided in 
this . . . [inaudible]. 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Youth Companion Program 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve heard several 
reasons, different reasons for this government’s decision to end 
the youth companion program, but Samantha Neill says this 
decision, and I quote, “. . . is nothing more than taking money 
and resources from one of the most vulnerable groups in this 
province, persons with disabilities.” How can the Premier 
possibly justify this cut of vital services to youth with cognitive 
disabilities? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social 
Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I said 
before in this House, we did a review of our CBOs, and we 
want to have measurable results on the work that they do. 
We’re taking a look at the different contracts to see the mandate 
of the contracts, and some of them, there is some mandate drift 
from what the contract was originally meant for. Mr. Speaker, 
we want to see if the service is vital or if there’s duplication or 
it can be provided by other CBOs, and we have duplication. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a tight budget. Everyone in Saskatchewan 
knows that. We have said that we need to review our programs 
and make them effective and efficient. There is not very many 
families served by the $64,000 cut that we made, and we’ll be 
working with those families individually to try to get them the 
services that they need. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, Samantha wrote a letter to 
our office in which she fact checks everything this government 
has said. Her son is a participant in this program, so she knows 
what she’s talking about. 
 
The minister says it’s a duplication of service. Samantha says 
that’s not true. The government said, community living 
provides this service. Again Samantha says that’s not true. The 
minister said that not enough of the youth involved in this 
program are clients of Social Services, but Samantha says 
nearly all of the participants in this program are clients of Social 
Services. 
 
To the Premier: how many wrong answers will he tolerate from 
this minister before he makes the right decision to save this 
program? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social 
Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the funding came from 
the child and family file, and the member opposite is well aware 
of that, as is Samantha. These are not children that are at risk 
that we’re discussing here. We’ll work with these individual 
families but we cannot . . . What it did was this particular 



April 28, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7035 

program was linking the families to workers that could help 
take their child for the summer in essence — and these are adult 
children — and to different activities and help them. We will 
try and help them find those same workers going forward. We 
will work with these families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The organization in question also receives over half a million 
dollars from this government for skills training. Mr. Speaker, it 
isn’t that the organization had its funding completely 
eliminated. It was the $64,000 for this one program. It’s a very 
small program, and we will help those families to find the 
services that they need. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, Samantha writes, and I 
quote: 
 

Even on their fourth or fifth attempt to explain the cut, it 
remains clear that the ministry and the minister had no real 
idea that they were cutting a unique program offering an 
important service. Perhaps now that the nature of the 
youth companion program has become clear, they will use 
this as an opportunity to find the appropriate and 
sustainable source of funds for this program. 

 
This is a cut of about $64,000 a year, which is pocket change 
for this government but so vital for these youth and these 
families, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now the Premier knows that his 
minister did not do her homework. Why won’t he step in and 
save this important program? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social 
Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, again we’re going to . . . 
And although the member opposite just throws it off as pocket 
change, Mr. Speaker, we need to be mindful of each and every 
dollar that we spend. We need to make sure that we’re 
maximizing those dollars and we’re using them in a very 
effective way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no government in the history of this 
province that has dedicated more dollars to individuals with 
disabilities than this government. Year over year we have 
increased funding. We have increased housing for individuals 
with disabilities. We introduced the SAID [Saskatchewan 
assured income for disability] program, which is an income 
assistance program for people with disabilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we took the people with disabilities off of a 
wait-list that languished there year over year over year under 
the NDP government when that member opposite was sitting at 
the cabinet table and absolutely ignoring the file. Mr. Speaker, 
these were families that were desperate for places for their 
loved ones to live and for day programming for their loved 
ones, and those members opposite and that member opposite 
when he sat at the cabinet table didn’t care. Mr. Speaker, this 
government is totally committed to programming for 
individuals with disabilities like no other before it. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, last week the Social 
Services minister promised to speak with Samantha, but she 
never bothered to do that. Perhaps if that minister had taken the 
time to speak with Samantha, she would have actually got her 
facts straight and she would have understood the importance of 
this program for youth with cognitive disabilities. Will the 
Premier instruct his Social Services minister to finally follow 
through on her commitment from last week to call Samantha 
and to hear directly from her about how vital this program is? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social 
Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, my chief of staff did 
speak with Samantha, and he offered to connect her with an 
official to help her with the services. Perhaps the member 
opposite isn’t interested in having someone work directly with 
Samantha to help her get the services that she’s needed. She has 
said that she wants someone to help her find someone to look 
after her son or help her son through the summer months and, 
Mr. Speaker, we can get someone that will do that. We were 
offering that to Samantha. My chief of staff, immediately 
following question period when he brought these questions up 
before, did contact Samantha, and they did have that 
conversation. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 

Leasing of Warehouse Space 
 
Ms. Chartier: — This government is cutting a program that 
helps youth with a cognitive disability just to save $64,000. 
Meanwhile it has spent millions leasing warehouses for its John 
Black lean program. Talk about misplaced priorities. How can 
the Health minister justify wasting taxpayers’ dollars on empty 
warehouses? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, the Cancer Agency 
recognized a number of years ago that they were going to need 
additional space as it relates to increasing the number of 
services that they’re providing to the people of, in this case, 
Saskatoon and northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at that time, when they looked at a renovation to 
the existing Cancer Agency in Saskatoon, at that time they had 
estimated that they would need to add an additional floor to the 
existing facility which would have cost probably in the 
neighbourhood of $100 million to add a fourth floor to the 
existing facility. Going through some process to redesign their 
workspace to make it more efficient, they have determined that 
they do not need to add an additional floor at a cost of $100 
million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So in fact despite the fact that yes, they have leased some 
warehouse space to help plan not only a new facility or an 
expansion of a facility but redesign their processes to make it 
more patient friendly, Mr. Speaker, they will, through this 
process, they will have a cost avoidance for the taxpayers of 



7036 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2015 

this province in the tens of millions of dollars. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — The Saskatchewan Cancer Agency leased an 
empty warehouse space because it was required to do so by the 
John Black lean program. 3sHealth [Health Shared Services 
Saskatchewan] and eHealth leased a warehouse. Four health 
regions leased warehouses, and two health regions actually 
purchased warehouses. That’s eight lean warehouses. The 
Cancer Agency used its warehouse for lean events just 47 days 
since 2013. Ninety-two per cent of the time that warehouse just 
sat empty. To the minister: did all these other lean warehouses 
sit empty 92 per cent of the time as well? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, as I’ve indicated before, while the warehouse wasn’t 
used every single day, it did allow for the creation of some 
different types of models for treatment rooms that would see . . . 
Rather than what we do now, essentially have the patient go 
from one area to another, it’ll allow us to look at different 
designs that will have the services come to the patients. So it’s 
much more effective in terms of the patient. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said before though, under the old way that we 
used to plan facilities and renovations and new facilities, in this 
case the Cancer Agency had an estimate that it would be well in 
excess of $100 million to add an additional floor onto the 
existing Cancer Agency in Saskatoon. Through this process, 
they don’t need to add that additional floor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they know that in the future that they’ll have to do 
some renovations. They’ve also secured some off-site locations 
for some day operations, Mr. Speaker. But I can tell you this, 
that they will not have to spend over $100 million to add an 
additional floor to the existing space because of the work that 
was done in the warehouse. Mr. Speaker, this will have saved 
the taxpayers of this province tens upon tens of millions of 
dollars. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — At least eight lean warehouses, that’s what 
this government is wasting money on. Saskatchewan people 
deserve to know exactly how much money this government has 
wasted on these warehouses, warehouses which have sat empty 
most of the time. To the minister: how much did these lean 
warehouses cost Saskatchewan taxpayers? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I can tell you that through just the Cancer Agency 
alone, they were leasing space at Innovation Place at a cost of 
$35 a square foot. They’ve been able to secure a place at 
McOrmond Drive at $22 per square foot, which is 41 per cent 
less per square foot than the Innovation Place, Mr. Speaker. 
That also allows them the potential to expand because it does 
include additional square footage than what they were currently 

using at Innovation Place, so a 40 per cent reduction in the cost 
of that one facility. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of the costs of these 
warehouses, this one alone will have saved the dollars that it 
took to lease or buy those eight facilities. As I said before, the 
estimate at the time, back in 2010, was over $100 million to add 
an additional floor to the existing space. That’s not going to be 
needed. We’re going to save through this one process alone by 
the Cancer Agency, tens upon tens of millions of dollars. That 
is prudent, Mr. Speaker, in the name of taxpayers’ dollars, as 
opposed to the members opposite who obviously believe it was 
a better idea to spend $100 million to add a fourth floor to the 
existing facility. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Human 
Services Committee. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 148, The Vital 
Statistics Amendment Act, 2014, a bilingual bill, without 
amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I request leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and 
that the bill be now read the third time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Health has requested 
leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 
No. 148, The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2014 and that the 
bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 148 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2014/Loi 
de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 2009 sur les services de l’état civil 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that this 
bill now be read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Health that Bill No. 148, The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 
2013 be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 



April 28, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7037 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 151, The 
Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014 without amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I request leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and 
that the bill be now read the third time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 
151, The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014 and that the bill be 
now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 151 — The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014 
 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that this 
bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Health that Bill No. 151, The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014 
be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 

Committee on Human Services. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 157, 
The Human Tissue Gift Act, 2014 without amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I request leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and 
that the bill be now read the third time. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 
157, The Human Tissue Gift Act, 2014 and that the bill be now 
read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 157 — The Human Tissue Gift Act, 2014 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — I move that this bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It has been moved that the bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its . . . It has been 
moved by the minister that Bill No. 157, The Human Tissue Gift 
Act, 2014 be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 
[14:30] 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy 
Whip. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 930 through 932. 
 
 



7038 Saskatchewan Hansard April 28, 2015 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 178 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 178 — The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2015 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, joining in 
on Bill 178, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2015. I guess 
looking at overall, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we see some of the 
changes that government is proposing with this legislation and 
introducing this Act. And I know that I’ve had a number of 
people talk about, and it’s interesting about the challenges that 
families are facing. And talk about affordability, cost of living, 
some of these will impact some of the families dearly. 
 
And I want to talk about the middle class. And you know, you 
talk about a wage where there was a grant, a credit to help 
families who wanted to get their children and keep them active 
in sports, recreation. And you know, at the time a great thing to 
help out families and give individuals, you know, a family that 
are struggling with the cost of living, whether it’s rents, whether 
it’s utility bills, food, everything — clothing, you name it — is 
going up to make ends meet in the province. 
 
And I know this government likes to brag about when it has 
record revenue, you know. When we look at the record revenue 
this government had over years, eight years, and those 
challenges that you see for families out there, the middle class 
and many families who are left behind by this government, for 
the choices that this government has picked, when you look at, 
you know, those that are struggling, whether it’s a two-family 
income earner and maybe they’re making a little more than 
60,000, trying to make ends meet, they’re struggling.  
 
And what does this government do? There was a program that 
assisted them. And when you look at the amount of money, it’s 
about 6 million that they’re cutting from those individuals, 
those families that are trying to do their best to make ends meet 
and provide for their family and also to provide recreation and 
activities for the family. 
 
So when we see a government wasting the money that it has 
wasted on its priorities, whether it’s lean, we have seen many 
issues we have raised in this House about the issues that are 
affecting families — you know, their tax dollars. And I remind 
that government at the end of the day, you know, you’re taking 
the people for granted. And when you do that . . . I know they 
have a huge minority over there, huge. Everybody says that. It’s 
almost, this legislature is almost unbalanced, that when you talk 
to people back out on the street, they’re saying it just isn’t right. 
Government does whatever it wants.  
 
So again, this is just another case of the government doing what 

it wants to do. It has such a huge majority, it can do whatever it 
wants to do. But these are impacting families. Middle-class 
families are struggling. And you want to give supports to those 
families, and unfortunately this bill will be taking away, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, from those families, giving them opportunities 
to provide services and recreation and different activities for 
their family members. So that in itself is sad and we see that it 
. . . [inaudible]. 
 
When you look at the actual, the . . . You’re going from a cut. 
And you know, when we talk about research and development, 
that’s another area that this bill addresses. When you look at 
this, it goes from, it used to be 15 per cent credit. Now it’s 
dropped to 10 per cent. It’s giving individuals an opportunity? 
We’re saying, why would you do that? You’re turning research 
and investment in this province . . . And if there are individuals 
that are looking at this and they’re comparing other provinces, 
well maybe they’re going to say, you know I’m going to take, 
now with the cuts, I’m going to go somewhere else to do my 
research and developing. And that in itself, we should be 
encouraging. 
 
We talk about the booming economy, and we talk about 
Saskatchewan doing so great. Well let’s make sure that we keep 
that investment moving by not cutting and taking away from 
business that are willing to do the research and development in 
our province. And that’s important. 
 
The other area we see, the graduate retention program. We’ve 
heard quite a bit about that from students, individuals that are 
out there. They use this program. It gave them . . . Yes, they got 
their education. There’s many, whether they were, you know, 
RNs [registered nurse], nurses, whatever, even the trades, so 
many individuals that did the commitment to school. We 
commend a program like that. There’s nothing wrong with 
saying that it helped to address and retain. And that’s what we 
want. It’s good. When you’re economy’s going, you want those 
workers to stay in the province. You want them to stay in their 
home communities, and this encourages them. 
 
So now we see a government that’s going to do it on the sense 
of taking it away. Individuals who came out and finished 
school, went to work, would get those cheques, get that money 
coming back in, and it helped them with that. And we’re going 
to talk about some of the most vulnerable, that maybe they . . . 
You know, at the end of the day, they’re not making the 60, 
$70,000, and maybe this is not good enough. But, 
unfortunately, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we’re seeing is there 
might be individuals who finish their schooling, whether it’s 
four years, how many, and when they’re done that, they want to 
apply, and they’re finished in their program. At the end of the 
day, whether it’s the trades, like I say, whether it’s nursing 
programs, whether they’re university, at the end of the day, they 
want to have an opportunity, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to get these 
dollars to help them, assist them. 
 
And we have many people in northern Saskatchewan, rural 
Saskatchewan, the urban that are taking programs. And those 
programs and university, at the end of the day, they want to 
have an opportunity, and this helped them greatly. This helped 
them greatly. And here we have a government . . . And we’ve 
heard a lot of concern from graduates that are out there are not 
happy with this, that are not happy at all with this government’s 



April 28, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7039 

changing. 
 
And you know, when you think about it, I mean government’s 
going to say, then they look at it, and they’re saying they’re 
taking $30 million away. That’s what this cut is doing. This cut 
is going to affect them. So it’s greatly . . . Obviously there’s 
going to be many challenges out there facing our graduates, and 
this was an incentive that would keep them, to retain them.  
 
And you know what? The way they’re changing it, it is not 
something they’ve asked for. It’s not going to help them. And 
you know, sure there might be a credit there for 10 years. At the 
end of the day, if they make a certain amount of money, a 
certain amount of dollars when they’re employed, they may 
qualify right away, but they may not for some time. But the 
government is saying oh, don’t worry about it. We’ll keep those 
credits there for 10 years and you’ll get the credit. And that in 
itself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is why they’ve been speaking out. 
They’re talking about they’re unhappy with it. They are not 
accepting it, and I think at the end of the day this government’s 
going to pay a price for the decisions that it’s making. 
 
Again like I talked about the most vulnerable are out there. 
We’re talking about that. We see today in question period about 
some of the challenges facing people most vulnerable. This 
government wants to cut 64,000 when it has record revenue 
year after year. And they can heckle all they want from across 
the floor. It is reality facing many families. That’s the problem, 
Mr. Speaker. They don’t hear that Saskatchewan families are 
struggling. This government does not understand it. They don’t 
understand what Saskatchewan families, seniors, most 
vulnerable are going through in this province. The cost of living 
is too much for them and they’re struggling to make ends meet. 
 
And these guys can heckle all they want, but at the end of the 
day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it will be the individuals. The 
individuals will send the message to this government. They will 
get a message. And they can sit there; we’ve watched time and 
time again how they take people for granted. We’ve seen the 
bullying and everything else that they do. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that my colleagues have more 
to talk about on this bill. Well we raised some of the issues and 
concerns facing these individuals, and the changes in this Act 
will impact many families, will impact many students, 
graduates that have done the job, whether they’re in the trades. 
So there you go. At the end of the day we’ll see what’s going to 
happen. The people will speak, and they’ll send this 
government a message — enough’s enough. You’re not 
listening. You don’t consult. You don’t talk. 
 
So at that point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m prepared to adjourn 
debate on 178. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 178, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2015. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of 
Innovation and Trade. 
 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To 
facilitate the work of committee this afternoon and this evening, 
I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has moved that this 
House adjourns. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:39.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

COMMEMORATIVE STATEMENTS 
 National Day of Mourning 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7027 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7027 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7027 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7028 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7028 
  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7028 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7028 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7028 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7028 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7029 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7029 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7029 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7029 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7029 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7030 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 International Day of Mourning 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7030 
 Anniversary of Liberation of the Netherlands 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7030 
 Ban on Heavy-Haul Trucks 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7030 
 Funding for Moose Jaw Community Service Organizations 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7031 
 Funding for Friendship Centre in Meadow Lake 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7031 
 Lieutenant Governor Bestows Literacy Awards 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7031 
 Saskatoon Bowling Alley Produces Champions 
  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7031 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Release of Information Concerning Worker 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7032 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7032 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7033 
 Youth Companion Program 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7034 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7034 
 Leasing of Warehouse Space 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7035 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7035 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7036 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 148 — The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 2009 sur les services de l’état civil 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7036 
 Bill No. 151 — The Pharmacy Amendment Act, 2014 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7037 
 Bill No. 157 — The Human Tissue Gift Act, 2014 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7037 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7037 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 



 

SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 178 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2015 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7038 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


