






















































Hansard: October 14, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 67A  WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 14, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Hon. Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7299 
 October 14, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — At this time I would like to introduce to the 
House seated in the Speaker’s gallery, the Hon. Linda Reid, 
Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of British Columbia. She 
is a Saskatchewan girl. With her today is her husband, Sheldon, 
and her mother, Cathy Reid of Wishart, Saskatchewan, and I 
ask everyone to welcome them here today. 
 
I recognize the member for Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
honour and I’d like to join with you today with welcoming the 
Speaker from British Columbia. I had the pleasure of meeting 
Linda over 20 years ago when we attended our caucus meeting 
in BC [British Columbia]. If she would have stayed in 
Saskatchewan, she would actually have been a constituent of 
mine. Mr. Speaker, I am proud that Linda is one of . . . the only 
female Speaker in Canada at this time and I am delighted to 
welcome her to the Saskatchewan legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 
like to join the member opposite and yourself, the Speaker, in 
welcoming Linda Reid, the Speaker of BC, and her husband, 
Sheldon, and her mother. I just want to thank the Speaker from 
BC for the wonderful conference we had out in Victoria this 
summer. It was a fantastic experience and lots of interesting 
things we did, including the tour on the HMCS [Her Majesty’s 
Canadian Ship] Vancouver, which was really memorable. That 
was wonderful. But she’s such an activist in the CPA 
[Commonwealth Parliamentary Association] I know, meeting 
her in Quebec City, doing a presentation and that type of thing. 
So I want to welcome her and her family to the legislature here 
in Saskatchewan. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Policing and 
Corrections. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you and to all members of this Assembly, I would like 
to introduce to you 28 grade 3 and 4 students from W.S. 
Hawrylak, seated in the west gallery. They are accompanied by 
their teacher, Ms. Meaghan DaCosta, and the parent chaperones 
are Ms. Tara Talbot and Ms. Vijaya Agasthian. Welcome to 
your Assembly, and I’ll look forward to meeting you later on 
today. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members of the House it’s my pleasure once again to 
introduce Andrew McFadyen who is in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, today. Andrew is an advocate for those living with 

MPS [mucopolysaccharidosis]. And I’m wondering why they’re 
heckling me while I’m doing an introduction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Andrew McFadyen is an advocate for those living, 
those individuals living with MPS, and his own son Isaac lives 
with this condition and has been able to get the medication that 
he needs. And Mr. McFadyen is advocating for three children 
here in Saskatchewan who are in dire need. Their only hope is 
to get a particular medication. So he is here and showing his 
support for the Akhter family and would like the minister to 
overturn his unjust decision to not support these kids when 
they’re supporting another child under five where there’s far 
less evidence, Mr. Speaker. So with that I would like to ask all 
my colleagues to join me in welcoming Mr. Andrew McFadyen 
to the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Pages 
 
The Speaker: — At this time I wish to inform the Assembly 
that Caitlin Smith will be returning as Page for this session. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate the opportunity to present this petition on behalf of 
many people here in Saskatchewan. And we know that this 
province lags behind others in securing the rights of 
gender- and sexually diverse students, and this government is 
not doing enough to create safe spaces in our schools for 
sexually diverse students or students who are bullied because of 
their sexual identity or sexual orientation. 
 
And we know that gender- and sexually diverse students are 
four times more likely than their heterosexual peers to attempt 
suicide. And we know that gender and sexual alliances offer 
opportunities to improve attendance and retention rates, 
generate meaningful relationships at school, and reduce 
homophobic and transphobic bullying. And we know that this 
government must act so that students have simple, 
easy-to-understand information about gender and sexuality 
alliances in their schools and how to form GSAs [gender and 
sexuality alliance] and who they should talk to in order to form 
GSAs. And we know this government must act so that under no 
circumstance are gender- and sexually diverse students denied 
the right to form gender and sexual alliances within their 
school. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
call on this government to take immediate and meaningful 
action to pass The Respect for Diversity — Student Bill of 
Rights Act and enshrine in legislation the right of 
Saskatchewan students to form GSAs within their schools 
in order to foster caring, accepting, inclusive environments 
and deliver equal opportunities for all students to reach 
their full potential. 



7300 Saskatchewan Hansard October 14, 2015 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the city 
of Saskatoon. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present a petition today for a residents-in-care bill of rights. The 
petitioners point out that residents in care have the right to 
dignity, respect, and safety; that they deserve the basic 
guarantees of the quality of care they ought to receive; that they 
have the right to individualized care that meets or exceeds 
minimum quality of care standards; and that it is the 
responsibility of the provincial government to ensure consistent 
standards of care in facilities throughout Saskatchewan. The 
petitioners also point out that requiring each care home to post a 
residents-in-care bill of rights will guarantee that seniors, 
residents have individualized care plans and minimum quality 
of care standards. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan adopt 
Bill 609, The Residents-in-care Bill of Rights Act, which 
would provide Saskatchewan seniors with the right to 
quality, high-level standards of care in seniors’ care 
homes. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by some citizens of White 
City, Regina, and Macdowall. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
great second day of the sitting, and I’m very pleased to stand 
and present a petition from students that are concerned about 
the cost of post-secondary education, particularly as it relates to 
university tuition. 
 
The petitioners point out that a report released by Statistics 
Canada has labelled Saskatchewan as the province with the 
highest increase in tuition, with tuition for the 2014-15 year 
having increased by 4 per cent in the province for 
undergraduate students and over 5 per cent for graduate 
students. They also point out that the average Canadian student 
in 2014 graduated with debt of over $27,000, not including 
credit card and other private debt. Mr. Speaker, in the prayer 
that reads as follows the petitioners respectfully request: 
 

That the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the provincial government to 
immediately increase the funding for post-secondary 
education in this province, with a legislative provision that 
this increase in funding be used to lower tuition fees. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals throughout 
the city of Regina, all the way out to Regina Beach. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition in support of better schools. The undersigned residents 

wish to bring to the attention of the legislature the following: 
that far too many of our classrooms are overcrowded and 
under-resourced; that the Sask Party government eliminated 
hundreds of educational assistant positions; that students often 
do not get one-on-one attention they need; that the condition of 
many of our schools is rundown, unsafe, or uninspected, and 
this government refuses to release information on the $1.5 
billion of known repairs that are needed in our schools; that the 
government’s plan to rent schools from private corporations is 
expensive and reckless; and that none of this is acceptable given 
the record of revenues this government has had over the last 
eight years. 
 
So we in the prayer that reads as follows: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan call on this government to immediately stop 
ignoring schools and start prioritizing students by capping 
classroom sizes, increasing support for students, and 
developing a transparent plan to build and repair our 
schools. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these people who have signed this petition come 
from a number of places across Saskatchewan including 
Mossbank, Assiniboia, Aneroid, Regina, and Regina Beach. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
again to present a petition in support of affordable housing not 
just in northern Saskatchewan but throughout all the province. 
And this particular petition certainly impacts northern 
Saskatchewan as a whole. 
 
And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To cause the provincial government to restore the 
rent-to-own option for responsible renters of the social 
housing program and to reinstate the remote housing 
program, Mr. Speaker. 

 
And the people that have signed this petition come from all 
throughout Saskatchewan. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Under the rules and proceedings, rule 16(3): 
 

(b) No debate on any matter on or in . . . [relationship] to 
the petitions is permitted. 
 
(e) The Member may read the prayer, provide a general 
explanation of the subject matter and location of the 
petitioners. 

 
Some of the verbatim was over a minute long. And I don’t need 
interjections from the other side of the House. That will not 
continue. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 



October 14, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7301 

Saskatoon Engineer of the Year Award 
 
Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege to rise in our Assembly today to recognize a 
constituent of Saskatoon Greystone and a noteworthy 
Saskatchewan citizen, Rick Kullman. 
 
Rick has had a distinguished and successful engineering career 
in this province. To start, he earned his Bachelor of Science in 
civil engineering and his Masters of Science from the 
University of Saskatchewan. Following his graduate studies, he 
became an associate of MacPhedran & Robb Engineering in 
Saskatoon. The firm eventually was renamed Robb Kullman. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to highlight only a few of Rick’s achievements: he 
served as the director of Engineers Canada, the president of 
APEGS [Association of Professional Engineers and 
Geoscientists of Saskatchewan], and the distinguished Chair of 
numerous professional and community-oriented boards and 
committees. He was awarded the designation of fellow by the 
Canadian Society for Civil Engineering in 2004. In 2009 he 
earned the distinction of fellow from Engineers Canada, and in 
2013 he was awarded an honorary fellowship by the 
geoscientists of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Rick is this year’s recipient of the Saskatoon 
Engineering Society’s Engineer of the Year award, and it goes 
without saying that this citation is especially well deserved. 
This commendation reflects Rick’s tremendous 
accomplishments in engineering, his service to the profession, 
and his many contributions to Saskatoon and to people across 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of this Legislative Assembly, I want to 
offer my sincere thanks to Rick, our congratulations, and wish 
him all the best in his well-deserved retirement. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Orange Shirt Day 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
Assembly today to recognize the second annual Orange Shirt 
Day held on September 30th, 2015. This day, orange shirts are 
worn to honour survivors of Indian residential school system 
and to remember those who never made it home. 
 
Through a commemoration project, Phyllis Webstad shared her 
story outlining her first day of residential school. Phyllis spoke 
of her excitement to wear her new orange shirt from her granny 
for the first day of school. Phyllis’s excitement quickly faded as 
she arrived at residential school and was stripped of her clothes. 
Phyllis says the colour orange has always reminded her of how 
her feelings didn’t matter, how no one cared, and how she felt 
that she was worth nothing. 
 
Phyllis’s story and Orange Shirt Day is a sombre reminder of 
many First Nations and Métis students who were denied the 
right to education and instead were subjected to cultural 
genocide. On September 30th, I joined with students, staff, and 
community members from Connaught School, who like many 
other students were wearing orange to remember and honour 

those students who walked through the doors of a residential 
school. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is through this remembrance, awareness, 
empathy, and honour that our nations together strive for 
reconciliation and healing. Thank you. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 

Self-Esteem Workshop for Girls 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
Assembly today to speak about an issue that’s really important 
to me. Research shows that six in ten girls are so concerned by 
the way they look, they avoid participating in various activities. 
It is important that young girls who struggle with self-esteem 
are offered support from strong female role models, be it their 
moms, their big sisters, their aunties, or their friends. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on October the 4th, the member from Regina 
Wascana Plains and I hosted our 5th annual self-esteem 
workshop for girls and their mentors at the RCMP [Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police] Heritage Centre. We collaborated 
with Dr. June Zimmer and Girls in the Game to help young girls 
explore the very important issue of self-esteem. It was a fun, 
interactive workshop that helped give young girls the tools they 
need to build self-esteem. Our goal is to help the next 
generation gain self-confidence so they can be happy and 
confident while they reach their full potential. 
 
We had a great turnout, and of course we could not have done it 
without our great sponsors: Girls in the Game, Trademark 
Homes, Anytime Fitness, Sweet Ambrosia Bakeshoppe, 
Deloitte, Tim Hortons, and Western Litho. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to thank the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains and Dr. June Zimmer for their dedication to this 
issue. I sincerely hope and we plan to continue this wonderful 
event for years to come. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

World Mental Health Day 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to recognize World Mental Health Day, which is 
observed every year on October 10th. The objective of this day 
is to raise global awareness of mental health issues and 
advocate for the necessary supports to promote mental wellness. 
This year’s theme of Dignity in Mental Health is both relevant 
and required. 
 
We know that many people with mental health conditions are 
marginalized, stigmatized, and do not often receive the care and 
services that they need. We also know that at least 20 per cent 
of Canadians will experience a mental illness throughout their 
lifetime, and still, Mr. Speaker, this issue is not given the 
attention and the support it needs. 
 



7302 Saskatchewan Hansard October 14, 2015 

Mr. Speaker, as you and the other members well know, this 
government commissioned a mental health and addictions 
action plan, and recommendations were put forward in 
December 2014. Unfortunately we have yet to see how the 
government will commit to following through and 
implementing those recommendations. Mr. Speaker, this limited 
commitment to action is particularly worrisome, as we know 
one of our major urban health regions is not meeting the triage 
benchmarks for any children and youth with severe psychiatric 
conditions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provision of mental health services can be a 
matter of life or death, as I know all too well in my own family. 
It is with this sentiment that I urge the members of this house to 
commit to action on the report’s recommendations and ensure 
that people living with mental health conditions have the 
opportunity to live with dignity. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Poverty Awareness Week 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today to acknowledge that this is Poverty Awareness Week. In 
light of recalling how much we have to be thankful for over the 
past weekend, it is very important that we remember those less 
fortunate and acknowledge our efforts to fight poverty. Mr. 
Speaker, our government has helped bring thousands of 
Saskatchewan children, seniors, at-risk youth, and others out of 
poverty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we take this issue very seriously and know the 
best solution is a strong economy. On top of our record 
economic growth, we invested $675 million to repair and 
develop 14,000 housing units across the province. 2.7 billion 
has gone to support those with disabilities. And we have 
delivered a record tax cut, taking 112,000 of the lowest income 
earners entirely off the tax rolls. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud of the actions that we have taken to 
combat poverty, and the numbers that show our initiatives are 
working. Saskatchewan has the third-lowest incidence of 
poverty in the country, including the lowest level of seniors’ 
poverty in Canada. Although these numbers show that we’re on 
the right track, we know the job is not done, and we will 
continue to work to fight poverty in Saskatchewan. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, I want take a moment and thank 
those organizations across the province that are helping to 
alleviate poverty. From the not-for-profits to churches, food 
banks, we acknowledge and thank them for working hard to 
fight poverty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of this House join me in 
recognizing Poverty Awareness Week. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 

Dr. Shadd Celebrated in Melfort 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On September 27, I 
had the opportunity to take part in the dedication of Dr. Shadd’s 

office, the latest addition to the Melfort Museum grounds. 
 
Dr. Alfred Shadd was a prominent and well-respected figure in 
the Melfort and Kinistino area. Mr. Speaker, Shadd first came 
to Kinistino from Ontario in 1896 to work as a teacher. A year 
later he returned to the University of Toronto to continue 
studying medicine, and in 1898, Dr. Shadd graduated and 
returned to Kinistino where he opened a medical practice which 
he later moved to Melfort in 1904. The doctor was very well 
regarded for his dedication and his endless travel to care for 
patients, but he also opened a pharmacy in Melfort. He started 
and operated the Carrot River Valley journal newspaper and 
was one of the province’s first coroners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dr. Shadd was also active politically and had a 
reputation as a powerful and persuasive orator. Shadd served on 
Melfort town council and school board, and in 1905 he came 
within 52 votes of becoming a member of Saskatchewan’s first 
Legislative Assembly. In 1915 Dr. Shadd died suddenly of 
appendicitis at the age of 45. 
 
I ask all members to join me in celebrating the life of this early 
African-Canadian settler and the addition of his office to the 
Melfort & District Museum. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

University of Regina Reaches Record Enrolment 
 
Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 
University of Regina released its fall census data figures, and 
I’m proud to report that the University of Regina has reached a 
record enrolment of 14,360 students — a long way up from 
student no. 941, Mr. Speaker. This breaks down to over 12,000 
undergraduate students and almost 2,000 graduate students. 
 
Even more important, Mr. Speaker, data shows a 5.8 per cent 
increase in Aboriginal enrolment over the last year and an 
increase of 63 per cent over the past five years. Aboriginal 
students now make up 11.6 per cent of the student population at 
the U of R [University of Regina]. Congratulations. 
 
Additionally 13.7 per cent of the university population are 
registered international students, which is an 8.5 per cent 
increase over last year and a 90 per cent increase over the past 
five years. Mr. Speaker, these students are coming from more 
than 90 countries around the world and choosing to study and 
hopefully live and work in this great province of ours after 
completion of their studies. 
 
Saskatchewan is continuing to grow and it’s exciting for us to 
see the diverse mix of students who will one day be vital 
members of our society. The University of Regina is continuing 
to do great things. It’s no wonder that this is the seventh year of 
consecutive student growth. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
congratulate the University of Regina on another year of high 
enrolment numbers. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 



October 14, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7303 

Provision of Out-of-Province Medical Treatments 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Kayden Kot is just 
four years old but he’s already been through far more health 
challenges and medical procedures than most people ever 
endure in an entire lifetime. Because of the complexity of his 
health challenges, which were complicated by a serious medical 
error, he’s had to go out of province more than 12 times for 
treatment. The government provided some help with just two of 
those trips. 
 
His mom, Sylvie, reached out to me and this is what she had to 
say, “It is with great frustration, lengthy wait lists, and a 
continued failure within our health care system that I feel the 
importance that Kayden’s story be told.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, Sylvie and Peter have dealt with the Health 
minister’s office for a long time and they’ve gotten nowhere. So 
will the Premier agree to meet with Sylvie and Peter today so he 
can hear first-hand how the government is still letting little 
Kayden down? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I thank 
the member for the question, and I thank the Kot family for 
joining us here today. Certainly as a parent it’s easy to 
sympathize with what they must be going through with respect 
to the amount of out-of-province care that has been required for 
Kayden and still obviously with more care that is needed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have talked to the Health minister about this 
particular issue. I think it’s true that the minister has also been 
able, at least via telephone, to discuss the matter with Mr. Kot. 
Mr. Speaker, we know that there has been support from the 
government for some out-of-province care. There have been 
some applications for additional care that have gone through the 
out-of-province approval process that we’ve set up, Mr. 
Speaker, a process that we’ve sought to improve since the 2007 
election by adding an appeal function for those that wish to 
appeal the decision by the group. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know the Minister of Health will certainly be 
happy to meet with the family again here today to talk about 
what might be able to be done further. Mr. Speaker, I 
understand that some of this is still in process, and we are very 
much aware of the challenges the Kot family is facing. I would 
also note, Mr. Speaker, that I believe officials within the system 
have sought to ensure that some of the treatment that is required 
can be actually delivered here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Kot family doesn’t simply 
need our sympathies. What they need is the right, immediate 
care for their son, Mr. Speaker. The Premier would be very well 
served to find some time this afternoon to sit down with Sylvie 
and Peter and hear first-hand from them. And he will meet a set 
of parents that love their children more than anything and have 
gone to extraordinary lengths to make sure that the right care is 
there. 
 
But this system, Mr. Speaker, the government’s decisions have 

let this family and this boy down. The fact is this government 
and the minister’s office has known about this for a long time. 
Here’s what Kayden’s mom wrote to the Health minister’s 
office: 
 

The bottom line is the current government does not 
provide enough funding to children that urgently need 
therapies, which again is a political question. Children in 
this province are suffering. Wait times are ridiculous. Kids 
with needs get wrapped up in red tape and delayed with 
therapies when they need it now. Children don’t have wait 
times. Parents have nowhere to turn. The wait-lists are 
lengthy and unreasonable. 

 
Due to his extremely complex health challenges, Kayden has 
never had a positive feeding experience, so he’s been tube-fed 
since six weeks old. He needs intensive intervention now, and 
that is not available here. So to the Premier: why won’t the 
government cover the prescribed treatment for this little boy? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would point out to all members of the House and those viewing 
proceedings that the government has provided some support for 
out-of-province travel, though I freely and readily admit that the 
family has made applications for additional support and have 
gone through a bit of a process. 
 
But also, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to note that 
officials within the system have sought to be able to provide 
some of the important therapy right here in the province at the 
Alvin Buckwold child development clinic in Saskatoon, 
recognizing that all of this travel, it’s obviously not, it’s not 
good for Kayden. It’s not good for the family, and it’s not the 
preference. The preference is that where we can in this 
province’s health care system, the preference is to provide the 
care, the therapy that’s required right here at home, at least 
within the province if not in community where the families are 
facing the health challenges, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so the minister is very well aware of the case, and the 
process, I understand, is ongoing with respect to applications on 
out-of-province support, Mr. Speaker. And I have no doubt the 
minister will want to meet with the family to learn anything 
additional that we may not know to this point and to canvass 
potential solutions, Mr. Speaker, going forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, to pretend, pretend that the 
government doesn’t . . . This response is making no sense, Mr. 
Speaker, to the family that is sitting here today. This is a family 
that has gone through tons and tons of correspondence, working 
within the channels that are there, Mr. Speaker, but it is clear 
that the care provided here in Saskatchewan is not what Kayden 
needs. That’s recognized, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is why the Premier needs to find time to sit down with the 
Kot family and hear about what is available here and what 
Kayden actually needs. Here’s what his mom wrote: 
 

We unfortunately keep hitting the same roadblock. There 



7304 Saskatchewan Hansard October 14, 2015 

are no allocated funds and very limited resources and 
access for therapies for chronically ill children in this 
province, specifically any type of intensive therapy. The 
wait-lists and services are deplorable. Once again, after 
finally getting the support from the Saskatoon Health 
Region, we have been denied funding for out-of-country 
feeding therapy at the STAR Center in Denver that my son 
desperately needs immediately. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon Health Region agrees that Kayden 
needs to go to Denver for treatment because they can’t meet his 
needs here in Saskatchewan, but the government has overruled 
that. My question to the Premier: why? 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, first of all I want to as well join with the Leader of the 
Opposition in welcoming Sylvie and Pete to their Legislative 
Assembly. I know that it’s not an easy decision for them to 
come here today. 
 
We have had a significant amount of correspondence between 
my office and the ministry, as well now including officials from 
Saskatoon Health Region, and I believe as well the CEO [chief 
executive officer] of the Saskatoon Health Region that has met 
with them. 
 
We certainly know that Kayden has experienced a number of 
health challenges over the last number of years. That’s why 
initially there was some support provided, before we had some 
capacity in the province, to go out of country. We have also 
looked to see what types of services could be provided within 
the province, and there has been some work through the Alvin 
Buckwold to provide some of that support, I believe, even 
within their own home, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But again, Mr. Speaker, I’d be pleased to meet with Sylvie and 
Pete after question period. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if the Premier would sit down 
with the Kot family, if the minister would open his ears, he 
would hear that the reality on the ground, Mr. Speaker, that 
families are experiencing, that young children are experiencing 
is very different than the lines that we’re hearing from this 
government. Kayden needs intensive feeding therapy, speech 
therapy, and occupational therapy. He needs these services that 
are not available here. 
 
And now here’s a quote from the Saskatoon Health Region 
which contradicts the lines that this government just gave, Mr. 
Speaker, about the services that are available here. The director 
of children’s health services of the Saskatoon Health Region 
says, “We cannot match the intensity of therapy that Kayden 
would receive at the STAR Center. For this reason, we are 
recommending that Kayden go back to the STAR Center.” 

 
So again to the Premier: why on earth would the government 
deny this coverage that the Saskatoon Health Region agrees is 

necessary, when the health region admits, Mr. Speaker, that 
they cannot provide these services here and the health region is 
saying that Kayden should be going to Denver? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we certainly do take children’s rehabilitation therapy 
seriously in this province and as a government. And that’s why 
over the last number of years, for example, in Saskatoon, 
occupational therapists working in that health region is up 32 
per cent. Speech language pathology in Saskatoon is up 31 per 
cent, as well as we’ve seen a 50 per cent increase in 
pediatricians in this province, including 12 positions that have 
been provided to the province and to Saskatoon Health Region 
for additional pediatric subspecialties. 
 
We know that in some of these cases though that they are very 
complex cases. That’s why we have put in place a review 
process to ensure that families that do perhaps not like the 
answer that they first receive from either the ministry or the 
health region have a way to appeal that process. I know that the 
family has availed themselves of that avenue on one occasion. 
There is the opportunity for further, if it is additional services 
that they’re requesting, and I believe that that is working its 
way through the process as we speak. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, again the Saskatoon Health 
Region states, “We cannot match the intensity of therapy that 
Kayden would receive at the STAR Center. For this reason, we 
are recommending that Kayden go back to the STAR Center.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s puzzling because he did receive, Kayden did 
receive some funding for a treatment at the STAR Center. Then 
Kayden experienced a serious medical error which set him back 
immensely, Mr. Speaker. And now the government is changing 
its course, changing its tune about providing this funding to 
Kayden. 
 
A Ministry of Health official told Kayden’s mom that the 
government denied coverage because of cutbacks. Because of 
cutbacks — that’s what Kayden’s mom was told. Well the cost 
of this desperately needed treatment in Denver is just over 
$14,000. Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s two travel scouts spend 
way more than that. On average, Mr. Speaker, these travel 
scouts spend almost $20,000 per trip. So even if the Premier 
would send just one travel scout instead of two, he could easily, 
easily find the money to cover this treatment for Kayden. 
 
Fourteen thousand dollars, Mr. Speaker, is a tiny amount of 
money for this government, but it’s not affordable to Kayden’s 
parents after they have already had to pay for over 12 
out-of-country medical trips for their little boy. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they have had several fundraisers to support the 
medical care for their son. 
 
My question to the Premier: how can’t this government possibly 
find $14,000 for this desperately needed treatment for Kayden? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 



October 14, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7305 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
oftentimes what takes place in terms of out-of-country approval 
is that approval will be granted if that type of service, we don’t 
have the capacity within the province. I believe that that was the 
case back three or four years ago when Kayden first went out of 
the province, that we didn’t have the capacity. Since that time 
we have built capacity in this specific area, Mr. Speaker, to be 
able to provide that service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, certainly our budget is up this year in the health 
budget to be able to provide services, whether they be in the 
province or out of the province. We really look to see, in terms 
of the policies that the ministry adheres to, whether or not this 
service can be provided within the publicly funded system, not 
unlike what was in place when the members opposite were the 
government. What is different though is that when the 
government does reject an application, we do now have an 
appeal process that is arm’s length from the government. This 
family, I believe, is availing themselves of this once again. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the services, the care, the 
treatment that Kayden needs is not available here in 
Saskatchewan. You don’t have to take my word for it, Mr. 
Speaker. There is a letter here from the Saskatoon Health 
Region dated July 17, 2015. So the minister’s remarks that he 
just made about the things that they’ve done, the services that 
are available here, Mr. Speaker, ring hollow when the 
Saskatoon Health Region writes to the parents and says at this 
point “We cannot match the intensity of therapy that Kayden 
would receive at the STAR Center. For this reason, we are 
recommending that Kayden go back to the STAR Center.” 
That’s from July of 2015, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question to the Premier: why is his government pretending 
that the right services are here for Kayden when very clearly, 
from the health region’s very own mouth, they’re saying they 
cannot meet his needs here in Saskatchewan? Why these two 
stories? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again 
obviously we take the advice of the health region as well as the 
ministry to determine whether or not the services are available, 
leaving aside the intensity that the individual patient would 
require. In this case prior to, in the last couple of years when 
Kayden was first approved for out of province, we didn’t have 
the services available in the province. We currently do have 
them available in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again we look to see the policy that is in place as it was in 
place before. Is it available in the publicly funded system? If it 
is, then that is the first course of action and that is the basis for 
the decision that the ministry made. What again is different 
though is that if the family disagrees with that decision that’s 
made by the ministry, they can now go to an arm’s-length 
appeal process, which wasn’t in place when the members 
opposite were the government of the day, and I would 
encourage the family to avail them of that service. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, when Sylvie, Kayden’s mom, 
talks about children being tied up in red tape, I think we have a 
very clear demonstration example of that through the minister’s 
remarks right here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Very clearly we have the health region stating from this 
summer that they cannot meet the intensity of the needs 
required for Kayden. That’s stated in a letter this summer. We 
have the minister here and this Premier trying to pretend that 
the services that Kayden needs are available here in 
Saskatchewan when that clearly is not the case. We have the 
government at one occasion providing funding for Kayden to go 
to Denver for this intensive treatment which is necessary in 
order to make the gains. There was a serious medical error 
which set him far back in his progress and now, as Sylvie was 
told by a health official, Mr. Speaker, that because of cutbacks 
they will not cover this treatment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s very clear to me that the Premier needs to sit 
down with Sylvie and Peter and hear first-hand about what the 
reality is on the ground because the lines from the Premier and 
the lines from the Health minister are out of sync with what 
their experience has been and out of sync with what so many 
families and young children are experiencing here in the 
province. 
 
Once again to the Premier: will he find time in his afternoon 
schedule to sit down with the Kot family and hear their story 
first-hand? Yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve had a chance . . . My office has had numerous 
conversations especially with, I believe, with Sylvie has been 
the main point of contact. I spoke with Peter over the phone a 
number of months ago. I would be happy to meet with them 
again with respect to Kayden’s care. 
 
I do want to just ensure that the public and that the House 
knows that in terms of the out-of-province budget that we have 
for out-of-province care, if it was communicated to the family 
that care is being denied because of a perceived lack of dollars, 
that’s not the perception or that’s not the case anyways with the 
Ministry of Health. It is based on looking at our policies, as 
were in place before when the members opposite were the 
government. Are services available within the publicly funded 
system? If they are, then that is our first course of action. I 
know that there’s a disagreement in terms of the intensity and 
whether or not we can match with that, and that is why we have 
the arm’s-length approval process that the family can avail 
themselves to. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this is a family that’s gone to 
incredible lengths to care for Kayden, spending incredible 
dollars to make sure that their son has the care that he needs. 
Any parent, Mr. Speaker, should be able to understand the 
position that they’re in. They’ve gone through the channels. The 
minister is right; they have stacks of emails and 
correspondence, Mr. Speaker, but they continue to have a 
minister and a government with closed ears when it comes to 



7306 Saskatchewan Hansard October 14, 2015 

listening to this family. 
 
The type of care, Mr. Speaker, the type of treatment that 
Kayden needs is not available here in Saskatchewan. Saskatoon 
Health Region, from a letter in the summer, clearly states that, 
Mr. Speaker. Sitting down with Sylvie at her house, Mr. 
Speaker, she told me about her experience in meeting with the 
services currently provided, going once a week, packing up all 
her supplies, going to the KCC [Kinsmen Children’s Centre], 
Mr. Speaker. She’s following and doing everything locally but, 
Mr. Speaker, the experts recognize that what is needed to 
continue the gains that Kayden was once experiencing is the 
intensive supports that can be provided in Denver. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re talking at an estimate of $14,000 for this 
treatment in Denver. We’re not talking about an amount, Mr. 
Speaker, that would break this budget. We’re talking about 
adjustments that could be made if this government took this 
seriously to find $14,000 for Kayden. Last week, Mr. Speaker, 
we had the Health minister use an excuse for denying treatment 
to the Akhter children for life-saving medication that was 
completely wrong. So the Sask Party says the treatment for 
Kayden needs to be available here, but the health region and 
Kayden’s parents know that is not true. 
 
Here are the questions that Sylvie has for the Premier and why 
she wants to sit down with him. Why are there no dedicated 
funds for therapies for chronically ill children in this province? 
Why are there so few supports for these children, and what will 
it take for this government to take this seriously? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I think the member opposite will know that we provide 
global funded budgets to the regional health authorities. We 
have, as I indicated, have seen a significant increase, for 
example in the number of physicians in this province over the 
last eight years, over 500 more physicians practising in 
Saskatchewan. A substantial number of specialists have been 
increased over that time in most of our specialist categories, 
including pediatricians, that are up 50 per cent; 12 funded 
positions in Saskatoon alone for pediatric subspecialties; a 
significant increase, greater than the overall general population 
growth of this province, in occupational therapists, in 
physiotherapists, in speech language pathologists in this 
province, compared to the issues that we were facing when we 
formed government and took over from the NDP [New 
Democratic Party], Mr. Speaker, as well as over 3,000 
additional nurses practising in this province. 
 
So this government takes the issues of health human resources 
very seriously in this province, and we’re especially mindful of 
very, very complex cases that we either have to look outside of 
our borders for some additional help, but more importantly try 
to find that help here within the province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, schools in Prince Albert 
and area have about 250 new students this year, and those 

schools haven’t received an extra nickel from the Sask Party 
government to meet the needs of those new students. That will 
mean that schools will have to make cuts because the Sask 
Party keeps forcing them to do more with less. How can the 
Premier justify this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
answered questions like this yesterday and I pointed out to 
members opposite that no school division saw a decrease in 
operating funding this year. Mr. Speaker, the enrolment growth 
is something that the divisions are dealing with, and we 
commend them and we thank them for their work. 
 
I want to put the enrolment growth in perspective. The 
enrolment growth overall was 1.6 per cent, about 170,000 
students provincially, so the divisions are relatively well 
capable of handling some of the increases that are there. While 
we were able to provide for the largest education budget in the 
history of our province at approximately $2 billion, we were not 
able to commit to projected enrolment funding increase. We’ve 
asked the divisions to work for this within their enrolments. 
They have done so, and we commend them for doing that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1993 and 1994, the NDP actually reduced the 
operating grant for the province. In 1995 they gave zero per 
cent. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Those answers 
are pathetic, Mr. Speaker, and you know, Saskatchewan people 
have no interest in hearing about what happened 20 years ago. 
What they care about is what this government’s doing today 
with unprecedented, an unprecedented period of revenues, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
You know, Saskatchewan people are increasingly realizing that 
the rhetoric of that government just can’t be trusted. Just 
yesterday, the Education minister bragged about how much 
funding they’re giving to Prairie Valley School Division. Well 
Prairie Valley School Division says that they’ve lost $8.5 
million of its base funding since 2012-13. Different story than 
what we hear from the minister. As a result, Prairie Valley is 
laying off more staff. They’re making big cuts to transportation 
and technology, and they’re increasing the number of students 
in each class. What does the Premier have to say about this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, Prairie Spirit has not 
sustained a decrease ever under this government. Mr. Speaker, 
our government has provided over $90 million in school capital 
for Prairie Spirit alone since we have formed government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have received in last year’s budget $1.3 
million for preventative maintenance, over $3 million in the 
past three years. We provided emergent funding for a variety of 
different projects: Valley Manor school, 205,000; Delisle 
school, 227,000; Aberdeen, 950,000; Langham, 396,000; 



October 14, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7307 

Hanley, 237,000; Hague, 300,000; Osler, 487. All those are 
within Prairie Spirit School Division. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the difference between this government and the 
members opposite when they were in government is they 
planned for enrolment decline. They prepared and submitted 
budgets based on fewer school students than they had before. 
That was the method that they used. We’re planning for growth 
and increased numbers of students. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s not even 
talking about the right school division here today, Mr. Speaker. 
Yesterday, the Premier was bragging about the dollars that his 
government had provided Prairie Valley. Well Prairie Valley’s 
own records and the documents show that they’ve had an $8.5 
million cut to base funding since 2012-13. We hear tired 
rhetoric around the wrong school division here today, Mr. 
Speaker, and we see a complete disconnect on what’s going on 
the ground, Mr. Speaker. And I’ll take the school division’s 
word any day of the week over that government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Parents, students, and educators know the reality. Educational 
assistants are being cut. School lunch programs are being cut. 
Busing is being cut. English as an additional language programs 
are being cut. School divisions say they can’t even replace 
furniture and computers, Mr. Speaker, that are broken down. 
After nearly a decade of record revenues, how can the Premier 
justify this record? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, if I was wrong, I’ll stand 
corrected on which school division we were talking about. 
Prairie Spirit enrolment up 18 per cent, operating funding up 31 
per cent. Prairie Valley enrolment up zero per cent, operating 
funding up 22 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite talk about what we’ve done 
and what we haven’t done. Mr. Speaker, these are some more 
numbers the members opposite . . . Since we formed 
government, we have added 614 more teachers. We’ve added 
200 more student support teachers. We’ve increased the number 
of psychologists by 45 per cent, speech language pathologists 
up 24 per cent, occupational therapists up 53 per cent, social 
workers up 14 per cent, English as an additional language 
support up 8 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we heard loud and clear that that’s what the 
teachers have wanted, was more money in the classroom. And, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what we’ve done, and that’s what we’re 
going to continue to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of the House 
Services Committee. 
 

Standing Committee on House Services 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on House Services to 
report that the committee has considered revisions to the Code 
of Ethical Conduct for members of the Legislative Assembly 
contained within the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan and is presenting its 14th report. 
And I so move: 
 

That the 14th report of the Standing Committee on House 
Services be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — The Deputy Chair of the House Services 
Committee has moved: 
 

That the 14th report of the Standing Committee on House 
Services be adopted and presented to the Assembly. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Revisions to the Code of Ethical Conduct for 
Members of the Legislative Assembly 

 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’ll move the motion: 
 

That the revisions to the Code of Ethical Conduct for 
members of the Legislative Assembly as presented in the 
14th report of the Standing Committee on House Services 
be adopted and brought into force effective immediately; 
and further 
 
That upon adoption of this motion, the Clerk of the 
Legislative Assembly shall ensure the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan is 
revised accordingly and republished as soon as 
practicable. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader: 
 

That the revisions to the Code of Ethical Conduct for 
members of the Legislative Assembly as presented in the 
14th report of the Standing Committee on House Services 
be adopted and brought into force immediately; and 
further 
 
That upon adoption of this motion, the Clerk of the 
Legislative Assembly shall ensure the Rules And 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan is 
revised accordingly and republished as soon as 
practicable. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 



7308 Saskatchewan Hansard October 14, 2015 

motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I ask 
for leave to move an humble address. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave to move an 
humble address. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 

Congratulations to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 
thank my colleagues for the leave to move this humble address. 
Mr. Speaker, last month Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth became 
the longest reigning monarch of the United Kingdom, more 
than 63 years on the throne, surpassing Queen Victoria, her 
great, great-grandmother. 
 
Queen Elizabeth is now 89 years old and from all reports, Mr. 
Speaker, and the Legislative Assembly today is pleased to hear 
this and to report this, in remarkably good health. She ascended 
to the throne on the 6th of February, 1952. Winston Churchill 
was the British prime minister, the first of 12 prime ministers to 
serve under Queen Elizabeth. Louis St. Laurent was the prime 
minister of Canada, one of 11 Canadian prime ministers to 
serve during the Queen’s reign, and Tommy Douglas was the 
premier of the province of Saskatchewan, the first of eight 
Saskatchewan premiers to serve the Queen. 
 
For her entire reign, I think all members would agree and I 
think the people of this province would agree that Her Majesty 
has attended to her duties with dignity and with quiet authority, 
and hers has been an excellent example not only of leadership 
but most importantly of service. She has been a symbol of 
stability and continuity in an ever-changing world. Think of the 
changes that have been wrought in this world from 1952 until 
today and consider also, Mr. Speaker, that Her Majesty has 
provided that continuous and stable leadership, that stable 
example for all of us through all of those changes. 
 
She has reminded us through her actions and her words that the 
concept of duty is not old fashioned; the concept of duty is not 
outdated; that to serve one’s community is the highest duty, a 
constant imperative for all of us. Our Queen once said, she has 
no particular formula for success. She said: 
 

. . . over the years I have observed that some attributes of 
leadership are universal, and are often about finding ways 
of encouraging people to combine their efforts, their 
talents, their insights, their enthusiasm and their 
inspiration, to work together. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Her Majesty has lived up to her own definition of 
leadership by every considerable measure. Through the years 
she has encouraged us and she has inspired us, and frankly she 
has brought us together, brought us together as Canadians, 

arguably like no other public figure that we could cite or honour 
today. And so, Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to move, for an 
address to Her Majesty the Queen, the following: 
 

That an humble address be presented to Her Majesty the 
Queen in the following words: 

 
To the Queen’s most excellent Majesty, most gracious 
sovereign Queen of Canada. 
 
We, the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in session 
assembled, wish to extend our sincere congratulations to 
Your Majesty on marking the historic milestone of being 
our longest reigning monarch. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan have been honoured to 
welcome Your Majesty and other members of the royal 
family to our province during your reign, and have 
witnessed directly your inspiring example of devotion to 
duty and unselfish labour on behalf of the welfare of the 
people of Canada and other nations of the Commonwealth. 
We trust that your gracious and peaceful reign may 
continue for many years, and that divine providence will 
preserve Your Majesty in health, happiness, and in the 
affectionate loyalty of your people. 
 

I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has moved: 
 

That an humble address be presented to Her Majesty the 
Queen in the following words: 

 
To the Queen’s most excellent Majesty, most gracious 
sovereign Queen of Canada: 
 
We, the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan in session 
assembled, wish to extend our sincere congratulations to 
Your Majesty on marking the historic milestone of being 
our longest reigning monarch. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan have been honoured to 
welcome Your Majesty and other members of the royal 
family to our province during your reign, and have 
witnessed directly your inspiring example of devotion to 
duty and unselfish labour on behalf of the welfare of the 
people of Canada and other nations of the Commonwealth. 
We trust that your gracious and peaceful reign may 
continue for many years, and that divine providence will 
preserve Your Majesty in health, happiness, and in the 
affectionate loyalty of your people. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour 
to join with the Premier in extending both sincere 
congratulations and deep gratitude to Her Majesty Queen 
Elizabeth II, the longest reigning British monarch. 
 
Queen Elizabeth has often been described as a rock of stability 
and an unwavering beacon of light in a world of constant 
change. Her Majesty’s extraordinary devotion to duty and the 



October 14, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7309 

grace, dignity, and steely resolve with which she has served the 
Commonwealth for her entire life has rightfully led to 
widespread admiration throughout the Commonwealth and the 
entire world. 
 
On behalf of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition in the province of 
Saskatchewan, I extend our deepest gratitude for her service. 
Long live the Queen. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 
recognize the member for Saskatchewan River Valley. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
also to rise in the House today and wish Her Majesty Queen 
Elizabeth II, Queen of Canada, well wishes as she becomes 
Britain’s longest reigning monarch after 63 years. As head of 
the Commonwealth and sovereign of 15 Commonwealth realms 
in addition to the United Kingdom, the Queen embodies all that 
is best in the Commonwealth through her strong leadership and 
selfless service to her people. 
 
Her Majesty the Queen is a strong symbol for Canada and 
Saskatchewan. Representing our historic connections with the 
British Westminster model, the Queen has acted as Canada’s 
constitutional monarchy since Confederation. Weaving the 
fabric of our society by promoting strong fundamental values, 
the Queen has had a powerful cultural impact on Canada. As a 
female head of state at the apex of Canada’s political life, the 
Queen continues to empower women all over the world. As a 
strong female leader, Her Majesty the Queen is a mentor, a role 
model, and an inspiration for women inside and outside of the 
political realm even more so as the Queen continually advocates 
for the empowerment of women and the importance of 
leadership. 
 
[14:30] 
 
I would now like to quote a quote from Her Majesty: 
 

I know of no [other] single formula for success, but over 
the years I have observed that some attributes of 
leadership are universal, and are often about finding ways 
of encouraging people to combine their efforts, their 
talents, their insights, their enthusiasm and their 
inspiration, to work together. 

 
How profound is that quote to our society and our leadership in 
Saskatchewan and Canada? Our roles do help define progress as 
we work together as a province, as a country, as a whole as we 
aim to serve for the good of society. Here in Saskatchewan we 
are blessed with the presence of hosting Her Majesty Queen 
Elizabeth II. Her Majesty was here in Regina, Saskatchewan to 
unveil the statue showing her on her horse Burmese. The 
beautiful gardens emphasize a strong relationship with the 
Crown and shed light on our province’s history. As we proceed 
in life, I myself look forward to Kate and William’s story, 
history in the making. 
 
I would like to conclude my remarks by wishing Queen 
Elizabeth II many more years of health. We are truly fortunate 
to have you as our head of state. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to rise in the Assembly today and to join with all my 
colleagues in paying tribute to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II 
who is now the longest reigning British monarch. For over 63 
years and eight months, Queen Elizabeth II has served as our 
Queen and she has done so, Mr. Speaker, with dignity, humility, 
and a deep, deep sense of duty. 
 
The Queen’s service reminds all of us of the importance of the 
Crown continuing to remain an essential part of the 
constitutional order of our great country of Canada. That’s an 
important point for all Canadians, but especially for the 
Aboriginal Canadians who have always had a special 
relationship with the Crown. It’s a special relationship which 
was cemented in the Royal Proclamation of 1763 in which King 
George III, Queen Elizabeth’s third great-grandfather, 
recognized that Aboriginal peoples had rights to the lands they 
occupied, and promised to protect them. And it’s a special 
relationship that Queen Elizabeth II has continued, Mr. Speaker. 
Whenever she has visited Canada, she always makes a point of 
meeting with Aboriginal leaders and community members and 
participating in Aboriginal ceremonies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as an Aboriginal member of this Assembly, we are 
grateful for that and we’re also very grateful for her service to 
our country. Long live the Queen. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to join 
with my colleagues in celebrating Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth 
II who is now the longest reigning British monarch. 
 
I remember well when Queen Elizabeth visited our province for 
our centennial celebration in 2005, and even though it was 
raining outside, myself and I remember there were several 
members of this legislative body outside, along with hundreds 
of others waiting out front to see the Queen arrive at the 
legislature in her horse-drawn landau. And that’s a great 
testament to the admiration that many Saskatchewan people 
have for the Queen. The Queen’s selfless sense of service and 
duty has earned her widespread respect and admiration, not 
only in our Commonwealth but around the entire world. 
 
Over the nearly 64 years she has been our Queen, the world has 
witnessed unprecedented change, and through it all Queen 
Elizabeth II has stood as a symbol of continuity. We are 
grateful for her service and we wish her many more years on the 
throne. 
 
Mr. Speaker, long live the Queen. 
 
The Speaker: — Will the Assembly take the motion as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly in favour of the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 



7310 Saskatchewan Hansard October 14, 2015 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move: 
 

That the address to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II be 
engrossed, signed by Mr. Speaker, and forwarded through 
proper channels. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 
Leader: 
 

That the address to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II be 
engrossed, signed by the Speaker, and forwarded through 
proper channels. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 179 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 179 — The MRI 
Facilities Licensing Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise to speak to Bill No. 179, An Act respecting the Licensing 
and Operation of certain Facilities providing Magnetic 
Resonance Imaging Services and making consequential 
amendments to other Acts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation was introduced by the government 
on May 11th, and at that time the Minister of Health said, we’re 
going to work with the introduction of further private services 
within our health care system in a way that we have not 
heretofore had in Saskatchewan. And the comment made in 
May was that this is something that has worked for the people 
of Saskatchewan. But as we know and as we see each day when 
questions are raised here in this House, it’s much more 
complicated than that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to quote the Minister of Health in his 
scrum yesterday when he’s responding to the issue around the 
emergency room wait times and a reporter says, what’s the 
problem? And the answer from the minister: it’s a very complex 
system. And, Mr. Speaker, that comment, I think, is a good 
summary of why this legislation is tricky. It’s going to have 
some implications over the long term that haven’t been fully 
thought out, and it therefore requires a substantial review of the 
legislation and of other related issues. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, our complex system actually is not that 

complex if the resources are there. I think what’s happened in 
the last couple of years is that the government has run out of 
money, and so they’re trying to figure out ways to push services 
to other places so that people will pay for them in other ways, 
or they’ll be dealt with in other ways. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it strikes me that this legislation introduced 
in the last couple of days of the spring session, and then now 
brought forward as their only bill in the fall without a Throne 
Speech, is not legislation that’s going to solve people’s 
problems, but it’s political legislation. It’s legislation that the 
government kind of wants to throw out there and create some 
interesting discussion. But I don’t think that it’s legislation 
that’s been well thought out, and it clearly has a number of 
challenges. And, Mr. Speaker, I hope to be able to explain that 
comment as the afternoon proceeds and perhaps next week if I 
don’t finish all my comments today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation is based on previous legislation 
that was introduced in this House in 1996. And in 1996, the 
then minister of Health, Eric Cline, brought in what was called 
The Health Facilities Licensing Act. And this legislation was 
introduced because there didn’t appear to be any rules or 
regulations or basic guidance as to how a private health facility 
might be set up and how it would fit in with the overall situation 
in the province. 
 
We had lots of professional legislation. So we regulated 
doctors. We regulated nurses. We regulated dentists. We 
regulated physiotherapists. We regulated a lot of . . . We 
regulated the radiologists. But at that point, there was a concern 
that there were some kinds of facilities that were being 
proposed that really had no rules around them. And therefore 
there were obviously health risks, but there are also cost risks 
for everyone involved. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, this legislation, which is now I guess 
almost 20 years old, has served the province well. And if we go 
back and look at that legislation from 1996 and look at the 
definition of insured health service, we would have these six . . . 
well, five categories plus a general category. 
 
The first category of an insured health service was “an insured 
service within the meaning of The Saskatchewan Medical Care 
Insurance Act, other than an insured service that is designated 
in the regulations. 
 
The second category was “a service that would be an insured 
service pursuant to The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance 
Act, but is deemed to be an uninsured service by reason of the 
fact that it is provided by a physician described in subsection 
24(1) of that Act.” 
 
And the third category was “a magnetic resonance imaging 
service.” 
 
Fourth category, that’s the MRI [magnetic resonance imaging]. 
That’s what we’re talking about in the bill today, 179. The 
fourth category was called “a computerized axial tomography 
service,” and we commonly know that as a CAT scan. 
 
The fifth area was “a diagnostic and therapeutic radioisotope 
procedure in nuclear medicine.” In other words, that’s basically 



October 14, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7311 

a nuclear medicine treatment or a radioisotope treatment most 
often used in cancer treatment. 
 
And then the sixth category was “any other prescribed medical 
procedure the cost of which, when provided to a beneficiary, is 
paid by the minister or a regional health authority.” 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we have this legislation which sets out the 
rules then about how those facilities could be licensed and how 
they could be established in the province of Saskatchewan. 
And, Mr. Speaker, this type of legislation — in Saskatchewan 
it’s called The Health Facilities Licensing Act — is a type of 
legislation which is quite common across North America 
especially, but in the United States it’s quite often called a CON 
[certificate of need], a CON piece of legislation. And I’m not 
sure if anybody here would know. Probably some of the 
viewers at home might know what that means. But what it 
means is certificate of need. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, many states in the United States have set up 
legislation in a much more free-flowing sort of private 
provision of health care to regulate the numbers of facilities. 
And there it’s both hospitals, health care facilities like what this 
one’s talking about, and also in some places it relates to actual 
clinics or groups of medical practitioners or other kinds of 
practitioners. And the question becomes, why would a 
certificate of need be a requirement for something that’s done in 
a particular state? 
 
[14:45] 
 
Well practically it’s about regulating the market. It’s about 
making sure that you don’t have a whole glut of certain kinds of 
facilities and then end up having them all go under and then no 
services provided for people. And clearly there’s lots of 
lobbying. There’s lots of discussion. There’s lots of requests 
from local municipalities around where and how a hospital can 
be built or where or how a clinic be built where various of these 
other types of services are provided. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there was a time in the United States where 
this certificate of need, the rules that were there, probably in 
many states there was a decade where a number of these kinds 
of rules were eliminated. And what’s happened is that there’s 
been a great proliferation of services in a number of states. 
There is a discussion right now in the United States about how 
to bring back this concept of certificate of need and about who 
decides what kinds of services are available and needed in a 
particular area. 
 
So you have this background around services provided to 
people that are regulated, that are carefully licensed and set out. 
And so we have the general rules that are in The Health 
Facilities Licensing Act, which will continue. But if you look at 
our Bill 179, which we’re looking at today, you’ll see that in 
part IV on page 11 that in section 31, effectively they are 
repealing parts of this health facilities licensing Act and 
replacing it with this present legislation. 
 
Now I think what that means is that we’re going to have to take 
a look at Bill 179 on a clause-by-clause basis and then go back 
to The Health Facilities Licensing Act from 1996, which has a 
few amendments, and see how this changes it and why it 

changes it and what the ultimate result is. 
 
And once again, keeping in mind that the context as I see it, 
with many years of experience here in this legislature and in 
this province, that this bill is much more a political kind of 
initiative than a practical one for provision of better services for 
the people of Saskatchewan. And it’s an attempt, but I would 
say a poor attempt, at trying to deal with the fact that the 
Minister of Finance doesn’t have enough money for all of his 
departments and so they’re figuring out ways to divert people’s 
attention from that problem. 
 
So Bill No. 179, let’s take a look at the first part of the 
legislation. It’s called preliminary matters, and the important 
part here always is the definitions. What is it that is happening 
in the legislation? Who does it apply to? It has some kind of 
strange wording, as far as I’m concerned, in how they’ve done 
this, but effectively it goes through and sets out some 
definitions. 
 
The first definition is accreditation program, and that means “a 
prescribed program for determining whether an MRI facility 
meets the appropriate standards to provide MRI services.” So 
immediately you’ve got the word “prescribed” in your 
definition, so the Act will never tell you what that is. So we’ll 
have to go and look at regulations, and as I understand it, there 
aren’t any regulations yet. So we really don’t know what the 
prescribed program is for determining what the standards are, 
but presumably we would figure out a way to get there. 
 
The next definition is an accreditation program operator and it 
means “any person approved by the minister pursuant to section 
5.” Now section 5 says: “The minister may approve any person 
as an accreditation program operator.” Now that doesn’t say 
whether there’s any rules about how you do that. Does it have 
to be a friend of the minister? Does it have to be . . . You know, 
what is it? 
 
It seems to me that it’s a bit wide open for legislation to say, 
well the minister can approve anybody they want and there 
really are no criteria as to who or what they are. So already 
we’re starting off with some problems. 
 
The third definition is an applicant. Now that seems to be pretty 
straightforward because it’s basically the “person who applies 
for a licence” under this Act or “renewal of a licence.” 
 
Next definition, beneficiary. Effectively I think they’re taking 
the definition from The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance 
Act and I think presumably it’s the citizens of Saskatchewan 
who receive benefits under that legislation. So that’s pretty 
straightforward. 
 
Court, Court of Queen’s Bench. I think that’s pretty 
straightforward. 
 
Health region, I think that’s pretty straightforward. It’s one of 
our regional health authorities. 
 
Inspector means “a person appointed or designated pursuant to 
section 21”. So then we go and look at section 21, and we find 
out, “The minister may designate any employee of the ministry 
as an inspector and may appoint any other person as an 



7312 Saskatchewan Hansard October 14, 2015 

inspector.” So is this another friend of the minister or is this . . . 
Who is this? 
 
I mean, obviously, somebody in the ministry. That’s a good . . . 
you know, usually would be a good choice because it was 
somebody who knows something about the health system. But 
here right in the legislation it’s got, once again, the minister just 
appointing anybody they want and it doesn’t appear to have 
here any conditions as to who this would be. 
 
So the next definition is licence. So I hear the member from 
Kindersley talking from his seat. He knows, and I think maybe 
that’s why this bill has its difficulties — because it’s coming 
out of some of the political ministers and the Premier’s office 
rather than a request through the Health ministry. Because they 
know that this is going to cause further complexities in a 
complex system. 
 
And as I go through this, we’re going to see all kinds of places 
where how was this thing going to work. So, Mr. Speaker, I 
know the member of Kindersley always likes to add a few 
things into the discussion but I think practically this is an area 
where he should stay away because if it’s an example of 
something he’s suggested, we’re in trouble. 
 
Now the next item is a licensee, which means the holder of a 
licence. That’s obvious. Minister means the member of 
Executive Council to whom this Act has been assigned. That’s 
the standard definition. And ministry is the one that the ministry 
presides over. These have been the new definitions that have 
come forward, that do not I guess require change if there’s 
decision by the Premier to change the names of ministers. But 
that’s . . . I don’t need to talk about in this particular piece of 
legislation. 
 
Now the term MRI facility is defined and it’s defined to mean: 
 

any place or facility where magnetic resonance imaging 
services are provided to an individual, but does not 
include: 
 

(a) a place or facility operated by the minister, a regional 
health authority or an affiliate, as defined in The 
Regional Health Services Act; or 
 
(b) any prescribed place or facility. 

 
So in other words, this term MRI facility is going to be kept 
very narrow to only those things which are licensed under this 
legislation. Other MRIs are allowed in hospitals, in regional 
health authority buildings, in affiliates’ buildings, or even in 
what could be a stand-alone MRI facility that might be operated 
differently than what’s under this legislation. And so 
practically, that term, MRI facility, has now gained a status as a 
term of definition which relates only to those very narrow 
number of facilities which are licensed under this Act. 
 
Prescribed, well that’s clearly going to be one of the words that 
we’ll see quite often, which is the regulations are going to tell 
us what the Act’s about. And we’ll get there. And then regional 
health authority, we know that that is a definition that’s used 
under The Regional Health Services Act. 
 

So that’s part I. We’ve gotten through some of these definitions 
and we can see that there are some, I guess there’s some 
fuzziness around how some of this is going. But practically, 
right now, this is going to apply maybe to one or two facilities 
in the province and effectively not affect the majority of, or the 
place where the majority of these magnetic resonance imaging, 
the magnetic resonance imaging is being done in the province. 
 
So part II. Now it goes into the licensing issue and basically it 
says that one of these other kinds of MRI facilities can’t be 
operated without a licence and the person or the corporation, 
whoever has an MRI facility or a number of MRI facilities, has 
to get a licence for each one of these operations. And then 
basically it sets out the process and it’s actually I think quite 
similar to the process in The Health Facilities Licensing Act 
where there’s an application to the minister, pay the fee, and 
provide any information that the minister requests and 
effectively, you know, the process of renewal is similar to that. 
 
Now we’ve already noted that the minister can set up anybody 
that they want to be an accredited program, accreditation 
program operator. It’s a bit of a strange combination of words. 
I’m not sure exactly why they’ve done it that way, but we’ll try 
to say it correctly as we proceed along with these comments. 
 
Now when the application is received by the minister, the 
minister is required to forward the application and all 
accompanying information and material to the accreditation 
program operator. So as I understand it, there must be the 
minister’s office and he has appointed a person, say Mr. Jones. 
Mr. Jones is going to be the accreditation program . . . I guess, 
what do they call it? Inspector or something. Yes, I’m not even 
. . . Okay, it’s basically they’re going to forward the application 
to the accreditation program operator and also to the regional 
health authority where the MRI facility is or will be located. 
This accreditation program operator will review the application 
and accompanying information and material and “report to the 
minister whether, in the opinion of the accreditation program 
operator, the MRI facility conforms to the standards of the 
accreditation program.” 
 
Now I think that type of work . . . Well I’m not sure. We’ll have 
to go through here and sort it out. So effectively the 
accreditation program operator says this application is 
reasonable, these people seem to know how to operate the type 
of facility that they’re talking about, and it conforms to the 
standards that we’ve set up for the program. 
 
At the same time the regional health authority will “review the 
application and the accompanying information and material; 
and” — this is the second part — if the applicant to set up this 
MRI facility is applying for a licence to provide MRI services 
to beneficiaries, in other words to people who are going to 
receive or are going to have their payments made by the 
provincial health system, so then there’s some other things that 
they do. So basically: 
 

if the applicant’s applying for a licence to: 
 

provide MRI services to beneficiaries that are to be paid 
for by a regional health authority or by any prescribed 
public funding source, [that regional health authority 
must] report to the minister with respect to whether 



October 14, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7313 

there is a need for the MRI facility in the health region. 
 
[15:00] 
 
So this is what I would call the CON clause, the certificate of 
need clause. So right in the legislation they’re setting out that 
the regional health authority has to be okay with this or approve 
it. 
 
Then the second part of this is that if the applicant who is 
applying for a licence to: 
 

provide MRI services to beneficiaries or to other 
individuals that are not paid for by a regional health 
authority or by any prescribed public funding source, 
[the regional health authority has to] report to the 
minister with respect to the expected effect of the MRI 
facility on the operations of, or the health services 
provided by, the regional health authority. 

 
So this is the part which also fits into this whole concept of 
certificate of need. But it gets at the question of how the 
services would be disrupted, the present services that are being 
provided through the public system. So you have services that 
the public systems may want to include and pay for, which 
there are some things being done like that now, and the regional 
health authority would say yes, we have a need for more of that. 
But they are also required to look at, okay, what happens to the 
services that we’re presently providing? And this, in kind of 
coded language, and maybe it’ll be come out in some of the 
regulations, relates to staffing. It relates to the technicians that 
are required to run some of this equipment, the nursing staff, the 
medical staff that would provide for the services in the 
background. And so practically it does here say that there is this 
ability of the regional health authority to effectively say, stop; 
no, we don’t want this kind of facility in our neighbourhood. 
 
And so what we have then is basically a program, yes, 
somebody analyzed to say whether they can do the job. Then 
there’s an analysis of whether there’s any need for that facility 
in the health region. And then there’s a further report which 
says, this is how it’s going to disrupt or assist the operations 
that are taking place in the region or the health authority region. 
 
And so that clause has got I think some good basis to it, but it 
also has aspects in it that allow for complete override by the 
minister, and so that . . . It’s not an independent process, if I can 
put it that way. It’s a process that is highly subject to political 
interference. 
 
Now the next section, 7, is around how this decision is made. 
And so basically the minister can issue this licence, renew a 
licence, or refuse to issue or refuse to renew the licence when 
all the material is there. And it gives absolute discretion to the 
minister and section 7(2) talks about the fact that “The minister 
may issue or renew the licence only if the minister is satisfied 
that” and then we’ll go through the, it looks like, six provisions. 
 
The first one is that the “applicant has complied with this Act 
and the regulations.” Well I assume there’ll be some advice 
from somebody to the minister about that. The second part is 
that: 
 

The applicant has complied with any other Act, any 
regulation made pursuant to any other Act, any Act of the 
Parliament of Canada and any regulation made pursuant to 
any Act of the Parliament of Canada. 
 

Now I think that’s an interesting clause in this bill, but it 
directly relates to the Canada Health Act. Because what we 
know in the Canadian system now that there have been a 
number of difficulties around facilities like this because the 
province has been held to be offside of the Canada Health Act, 
which has substantial penalties that are imposed on provinces in 
the form of reducing federal health grants to the province. So 
this section here, it’ll be interesting. I guess they probably have 
to get some of the constitutional lawyers in Justice to give them 
an opinion on this as it relates to how this process goes ahead. 
 
The third condition or issue that the minister has to satisfy 
himself on is that: 
 

The MRI facility will be operated in accordance with this 
Act, the regulations and any terms and conditions imposed 
on the licence. 

 
Now practically we haven’t got to all of that kind of stuff. We’ll 
get to it a little later here in this legislation. But there obviously 
would be assurances from the person who’s applied for the 
licence that they’ll comply with this. I think there are a number 
of places where they actually have to put in place a bond that 
would pay for certain kinds of things if they breach the 
conditions in their application. 
 
The fourth area is that the minister has to satisfy himself that “if 
the licence is to provide services mentioned in subclause 
6(3)(b)(i) . . .” So in other words, these are services provided to 
beneficiaries under the provincial plan, so in other words, 
services provided to us that licensing this “. . . facility is an 
effective and efficient use of public resources.” 
 
Now I suppose maybe they’ll have to go to the Provincial 
Auditor or somebody to get an okay on that one. I’m not sure, 
but somewhere there will have to be an assurance that this is an 
effective and efficient use of public resources. Or if we have 
another interpretation of this legislation, this is where the 
politics come in. They keep trying to hit any of the political 
questions that might come up by putting in clauses which may 
or may not be enforceable. 
 
The fifth thing that the minister has to satisfy himself about is 
that “the licensing of the facility will not significantly affect the 
operation of similar services provided by a regional health 
authority or an affiliate.” So in other words, this is confirming 
that the minister has to listen to what the regional health 
authority says under section 6(3)(b)(ii). And if they say, this is 
not going to be a positive thing for our communities because the 
numbers of employees are not sufficient or the number of 
people is not sufficient to actually do the public system and this 
private system, the minister has to take that into account. 
 
So presumably when the minister makes their official decision 
they’re going to have to say something in writing about each 
one of these clauses that I’ve already talked about, the first five. 
 
But then the sixth one is even more interesting because it says 



7314 Saskatchewan Hansard October 14, 2015 

the minister has to be satisfied that “the issuing or renewing of 
the licence would not be prejudicial to the public interest.” And 
so on top of all those other things, you end up having the 
minister having to say, well this is not prejudicial to the public 
interest. And they’re going to have to write something or say 
something about this. 
 
And maybe the regulations will set it out in more detail about 
what the actual process is, but I think that this wording, which 
looks quite straightforward, is actually an attempt to deal with 
all of the political challenges that come from the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association, from health policy analysts, from people 
who run the system, to others who don’t quite agree with this 
style of proceeding. They’re trying to meet all of those 
questions in how the licence is issued. 
 
And what will be telling, if and when this legislation is used, is 
that the public operator may be able to say that, well you can’t 
challenge what I’m doing here because the minister has been 
satisfied that all these points are made, and therefore I’m totally 
protected. So my advice to the lawyers who are working on this 
and the lawyers who will be advising the minister is that you 
will need to have some fairly substantial explanations of how 
the minister is responding to each one of these areas where he 
or she needs to be satisfied that the applicant has complied. 
 
Now then we go down to one more . . . Well there’s a few more 
sections in section 7, and basically it says: 
 

. . . the minister may refuse to renew a licensee’s licence 
on the grounds that the minister is satisfied that the 
criterion described in clause (2)(f) will not be met only if 
the minister has given the licensee written notice at least 
six months before the date on which the licensee’s licence 
expires. 

 
So that clause (2)(f) is the one about public interest. And so if 
on a renewal the minister says something’s happened here since 
I gave you the licence, that this is no longer in the public 
interest, the minister has to give that person that’s operating the 
MRI facility six months notice that they’re going to shut them 
down. 
 
Now I think that also comes out of some situations in other 
provinces where these kinds of facilities have not operated very 
well. So we know both in Ontario and in Manitoba they tried 
this for a while. I think in the year 2007, they shut them down 
or rolled them back into the health system and some of the 
methods of sort of terminating their agreements look like 
they’re reflected in the drafting of this particular clause. 
 
Now section 7(4), another point for the minister. 
 

If the minister is satisfied that the criterion described in 
clause (2)(f) is not met and the licensee has not complied 
with subsection 4(2), the minister may refuse to renew a 
licensee’s licence without complying with subsection (3). 

 
So what this clause is about, it must relate to something that’s 
happened probably in Ontario. It allows for an immediate 
termination of a licence if there’s been a problem with the 
licensee that cannot be remedied. And so I guess that’s a good 
thing, but it’s also anticipating that these things don’t always 

work with as much sunshine or sweetness and light as the 
minister and the Premier would like to think when they start 
talking about them. 
 
So then we go into subsection (5) of section 7 and it says that 
the applicant has to be given written notice of the minister’s 
decision. And so in effect there’s a written notice. Subsection 
(6) then says that the minister has to provide written reasons to 
the applicant. 
 
So that goes to all the points that I’ve been talking about, is that 
this is a very complicated process. But also it’s one that puts a 
lot of onus on the minister to do some very careful homework 
before they either issue the licence, renew the licence, or cancel 
the licence. And it in some ways begs the question of if these 
kinds of facilities are so much of a problem, why are we doing 
this? And it goes back to the point that this is not a simple thing. 
This is quite a complicated situation that will require lots of 
legal advice before you even get started because we haven’t 
even had the licence issued yet, or I guess that clause allows for 
the issuance. 
 
[15:15] 
 
But now we go to section 8, and it sets out the terms and 
conditions of the licence. So the minister’s gone through; 
they’ve given a written notice; they set out the written reasons. 
But well there’s some shortfalls in the applicant’s situation or 
there are some concerns in the local community around what’s 
in the public interest, or the regional health authority says, well 
we don’t have enough people to do this job. So then the licence 
is issued, and it has prescribed terms and conditions, which we 
don’t know because we don’t have the regulations yet. But 
presumably those would be sort of the standard ones around 
what are the fees, you know, some of those things. And it’ll also 
include 8(1)(b), “any additional terms and conditions that the 
minister may impose.” 
 
So the minister may impose a condition that says, well there 
aren’t sufficient staff in this region to fund or to work at your 
facility, so therefore you’re only allowed to proceed with this if 
you’ve recruited people who are going to come and live in 
Moose Jaw or come and live in Prince Albert because it’s been 
very clear from the regional health authority and from the local 
medical community and other of the health care communities 
that this is a problem. So the minister can set that kind of a term 
on this. They could also set some terms around financial 
viability issues. Maybe that’s where there’s some bonds, some 
other kinds of things. 
 
Then section 8(2) says that subject to section 17, which we go 
to, is the opportunity of the licensee to make a representation, 
which is pretty logical, anyway subject to the licence 
application to the licensee making representations through a 
lawyer, so creates some work for some more lawyers, that “. . . 
any time after the licence is issued, the minister may amend the 
terms and conditions of the licence or impose new terms and 
conditions.” 
 
So once again I think that relates to local community concern 
around there aren’t sufficient staff for this new operation or 
there are some financial issues that need to be dealt with or, you 
know, it’s wide open what those things could be. But if some of 



October 14, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7315 

the terms are then met, then the licence can be amended to 
reflect the new situation. 
 
Section 9, real straightforward one. Just have to put the licence 
up in your facility, so we think that’s all right. 
 
Section 10, the licence is not transferable. That’s logical, given 
the complicated way to get the licence. You wouldn’t want to 
have somebody who met all of these conditions of the minister 
and everything else get the licence and then two weeks later, 
transfer it to somebody else who doesn’t know anything about 
all these concerns. So the licence is not transferable. 
 
Then the duration of the licence, how long is it going to last? 
Well unless it’s suspended or cancelled, it’s valid for a period 
specified in the licence, or if there’s no period, a period of three 
years after the day in which the license was issued or renewed. 
So it’s going to be a three-year licence at a maximum, maybe 
less if there are conditions that aren’t met, and then it has to be 
renewed again for another three years. So that’s looks like it’s 
fairly straightforward. 
 
So then we get into the section 12 which is the responsibilities 
of the licensees. Now: 
 

(1) No licensee shall fail to comply with any provision of 
this Act or the regulations, with any term or condition 
imposed on the licensee’s licence or with a standard of the 
accreditation program. 

 
So in other words, you have to comply with the provisions of 
this Act. It’s a bit of a double negative kind of sentence. We 
don’t usually see those in legislation. I don’t know exactly what 
the intention is there, but well it says these are the rules, you 
have to follow them. And then it goes on. The licensee is 
responsible for all the people that work with them in providing 
or assisting to provide the services: 
 

(3) No licensee shall provide . . . [these] services to an 
individual unless the individual has been referred for the 
services by a physician possessing the prescribed 
qualifications. 

 
And so once again we’ll have to look at the regulations when 
they come, what that means. Presumably it will mean that it has 
to be a doctor who’s licensed to practise in Saskatchewan, or if 
they’re a specialist, one that’s licensed to work with doctors 
licensed in Saskatchewan. 
 
Then the next section, 12(4), the MRI services are to be 
provided “. . . in accordance with the prescribed standards.” 
Once again we have to look to the regulations and see what 
those standards will be. 
 
And then, and this goes to more of the political side of this one: 

 
(5) No licensee shall charge or permit any other person to 
charge any fee to any person for MRI services except as 
may be permitted by this Act or the regulations. 

 
So this goes to the heart of the concerns around the Canada 
Health Act and some of the rules in how health care is provided. 
So that section 12(5) actually refers back to the section 7(2)(b) 

where it talks about the Act of Parliament or any regulation 
under the Act of Parliament. So there’s clearly a concern that 
whatever is done is done in a way that doesn’t affect the 
province’s ability to collect their appropriate share of the 
federal money which, as we’ve heard in the election discussions 
recently, is many, many billions of dollars and might be a little 
more, might be a little less depending on who is elected at a 
national level. 
 
But practically for the province that is a concern, and they do 
appear to understand that this is riding the edge of what some of 
the rules are under the Canada Health Act. And that once again 
begs this question of, do we or are we given the full information 
around how this legislation is going to work? And practically 
some of those pieces that we’re concerned about are in the 
regulations that we don’t have, although we’ll see if we can a 
little later here speculate as to what those kind of regulations 
will be. 
 
So then we go into section 13, which is the critical incident 
section. And once again this is a very interesting section to have 
in legislation that relates to one or two facilities or three maybe 
in the province because you have to deal with some of these 
crucial factors for Saskatchewan citizens who might be caught 
in this system through a referral that involves the provincial 
health system. So in this legislation: 
 

“critical incident” means an incident that: 
 

(a) arises as a result of the provision of an MRI service 
by a licensee; and 
 
(b) is listed or described as a critical incident in any 
prescribed code, standard or guideline. 

 
And practically there are lists of kinds of things, whether it’s 
injury or deaths or other things that happen. Those kinds of 
things have to be reported, and that’s what the rest of this 
section will start talking about. 
 
The second part of the definition is: 
 

“legal proceeding” [and that] means any civil proceeding 
or inquiry in which evidence is or may be given, and 
includes the proceeding for the imposition of punishment 
by way of fine, penalty or imprisonment to enforce an Act 
or regulation made pursuant to an Act, but does not 
include any prescribed proceeding. 

 
Now evidently there’s going to be some kinds of legal 
proceedings that will be by regulation excluded from this 
reporting or whatever, but we’ll see what they’re trying to get 
at. But obviously there’ve been some real problems with these 
kinds of facilities in other provinces, and there have been court 
cases about them. There’s been legal opinions. There’s been a 
great deal of discussion. And this legislation is trying to 
anticipate or deal with some of the issues that have been raised, 
and that’s why we need to give it such a thorough review. 
 
Now section 13(2) under critical incidents says that “A licensee 
shall, in accordance with the regulations,” which we don’t have 
yet, but we’ll eventually see, I guess, the licensee shall: 
 



7316 Saskatchewan Hansard October 14, 2015 

(a) give notice to the minister of the occurrence of any 
critical incident; and 
 
(b) investigate any critical incident mentioned in clause (a) 
and provide a written report to the minister with respect to 
that critical incident and investigation. 

 
So effectively what they’re saying is these facilities, even 
though they’re outside the regular system, have to do the same 
thing that a hospital or other facility in the province would do 
around a critical incident. 
 
And subsection (3) goes on to say: 
 

(3) Subject to subsection (5) [around certain privileges], a 
witness in a legal proceeding, whether a party to it or not: 
 

(a) is not liable to be asked any question, is not 
permitted to answer any question and is not permitted to 
make any statement, with respect to an investigation of a 
critical incident; and 
 
(b) is not liable to be asked to produce, and is not 
permitted to produce: 
 

(i) any notice or report mentioned in this section; or 
 
(ii) any information in a notice or report mentioned in 
this section or any documentation used to prepare a 
notice or report mentioned in this section. 

 
And then: 
 

(4) Subject to subsection (5), a notice or report mentioned 
in this section is not admissible as evidence in any legal 
proceeding. 

 
And then: 
 

(5) The privileges described in subsections (3) and (4) 
[which I just read] do not apply: 
 

(a) to information in a notice or report that discloses the 
facts of a critical incident unless the facts relating to that 
incident are also fully recorded in a record other than the 
notice or report and are available to the individual with 
regard to whom the critical incident occurred; or 
 
(b) to information that is prepared for the purpose of 
providing care or treatment to an individual, unless that 
information is also fully recorded in a record other than 
the notice or report and is available to the individual 
with regard to whom the critical incident occurred. 

 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is the boilerplate protection of 
critical incident reporting in the health care system. And there’s 
that kind of protection other places, and they’ve tried to mirror 
that in this legislation as it relates to a private institution that 
has a licence. And effectively what it means is, if you go and 
you get an MRI and something bad happens and you want to 
sue that facility, your lawyer can get the records that are the 
official records, in other words the notes that people have made 
and time of when things happened, but you can’t get the critical 

incident report which includes a description of what happened 
and the investigation. And so basically this becomes a point of 
great contention in some medical malpractice cases because 
there may be information in the critical incident report which 
deals with what’s happened that’s not there on the official 
record. 
 
And I know the Attorney General is looking at me because he 
understands what I’m talking about. Because what happens and 
why this protection is here — and I don’t, you know, I don’t say 
this is wrong — but why the protection is here is that you want 
to have within your medical system, your health system, the 
most detailed review and investigation of where things go 
wrong so that it doesn’t happen again. And it’s often called the 
airline reporting system. Airlines have a very strict rule about 
reporting every critical incident so they can constantly upgrade 
and do better in their business. And in health care, this concept 
of careful reporting and then improving the quality of what 
you’re doing is something that’s been around for quite a 
number of years. 
 
[15:30] 
 
And it’s frustrating if you’re a lawyer for the plaintiff trying to 
sue somebody that you can’t get at some of this. But there is a 
justification for it. What’s just kind of interesting is that that 
whole system that protects the reporting within the official 
health system, it’s necessary to have that extended into this 
particular MRI facilities licensing Act. And once again it’s I 
guess a complication or an additional issue that is in this 
legislation because they’re trying to I guess do something 
political where many people within the system would say, hey, 
what’s the point? I mean this is just a little overboard, a little 
too complex to deal with this and it’s creating even more red 
tape and, you know, how does that make any sense in the long 
run? 
 
So that whole critical incident clause and reporting, it’s 
interesting to go through it. It’s positive if you’re somebody 
who’s wanting to improve your system, but practically, if 
you’re the person who’s been injured and really wants to get all 
the information about what happened, this prevents you from 
getting that. 
 
Now the next section is about annual returns. The licensees will 
give an annual return each year that sets out prescribed 
information. We don’t know what that is because that’s in the 
regulations. But presumably when it comes right after the 
critical incident reporting part, it’ll be a list of the critical 
incidents and what’s happened. But there may be some other 
things they want to know. I’m sure they’ll want to know how 
many patients have been seen and those kinds of things. And 
we’ll see what shows up in the regulations. 
 
So then we go on to section 15, additional information. It says 
that: 
 

The minister may: 
 

(a) request from a licensee any information that the 
minister reasonably requires for the purposes of this Act 
and the regulations; and 
 



October 14, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7317 

(b) [The minister may] specify the manner in which, and 
reasonable time limits within which, the licensee shall 
provide the information mentioned in clause (a). 

 
And then the second part is that: 
 

No licensee shall fail to provide the minister, in the 
manner and within the time limits specified by the 
minister, with any information that the minister requests 
pursuant to subsection (1). 

 
Now this is wide open. Who knows what kind of information 
they would require? But practically there are a whole number of 
areas where there may be pressure on the provincial 
government to provide details to the federal government as it 
relates to concerns about services under the Canada Health Act. 
And it wouldn’t be possible for the minister to say, well I don’t 
know what’s going on over there at that MRI facility, so you 
can’t do anything to us. This gives the minister the power to 
say, well I need every bit of information so I can respond to the 
concerns that are raised by the federal government. 
 
And once again I think this clause must relate to some concerns 
that have arisen in other provinces already where we know that 
there’s been litigation. And presumably the Minister of Health 
and his officials can work on getting some of this information 
together so that we can have a full discussion of that when we 
go to committee. 
 
The next clause in this legislation is section 16 and basically it’s 
once again subject to the licensee making a representation but: 
 

. . . the minister may amend, suspend, or cancel a licence 
if, in the opinion of the minister, the licensee: 
 

(a) has failed to comply with: 
 

And then it says: 
 

any provision of this Act or the regulations; 
 
a term or condition imposed on the licence; 
 
a standard of the accreditation program; or 

 
Once again here it is: 
 

a provision of any other Act, any regulation made 
pursuant to any other Act, any Act of the Parliament 
of Canada or any regulation made pursuant to any Act 
of the Parliament of Canada. 

 
So once again there’s that concern about offending the Canada 
Health Act and losing dollars to the provincial treasury at a time 
when we can’t afford to do that. And the second part is if the 
licensee “is operating the MRI facility in a manner that is 
prejudicial to the health, safety or welfare of any person.” 
 
So effectively there seems to be a lot of ways that the minister 
can shut one of these places down if they have to do it. And 
once again I think this is here in this legislation because of 
some situations that have happened in other provinces where 
there have been some difficulties that have arisen and the 

ministry didn’t have all the tools they needed to actually shut 
some of the facilities down. 
 
And then we go on to section 17, which is a clause around 
opportunity to make representations, and it sets out — we 
referred to this before — but in subsection 8(2) or in section 16, 
and they both are situations where the licensee can make 
representations probably through a lawyer to the minister. But it 
says before the minister does some of these things, it’s either 
suspend or cancel, or I guess the other one is, or amend the 
terms and conditions of the licence, the minister has to provide 
the licensee with a “written notice of the minister’s intended 
actions and the reasons for that intended action” and they have 
to give the licensee “an opportunity to make written 
representations to the minister as to why the intended action 
should not be taken.” 
 
And so effectively it’s setting out a process of fairly serious 
consequence that happens when something might be suspended 
or the licence may be suspended, cancelled, or amended. And 
then it sets out the procedure that’s there. And that looks like 
it’s relatively reasonable, except once again the minister’s given 
this big bomb, this big special power to act to protect the public 
interest, and so that the minister can act immediately to do 
whatever they need to do — suspend, cancel or amend the 
licence — without giving the opportunity for written notice. 
And if they do that, then there’s an opportunity afterward for 
the written representations to be made. 
 
It’s noted here that the minister is not a judge. They’re not 
required to give an oral hearing and so it’s all done in writing. 
But when the minister’s made the decision there’ll be a . . . 
issue a written decision and a copy of the decision will be 
provided. This kind of process is not very usual in government, 
but I know some of my colleagues on this side of the House — 
and I assume on the other side of the House — know that the 
Minister of Environment often has powers like this which are, 
you know, kind of obscure in a way. But through a process, a 
decision will be put in front of the minister with all kinds of 
supporting documents and a report, and then the decision is 
made. And I think in health care, it doesn’t happen that often. 
So this is a bit interesting, that this whole process like this is in 
this legislation. 
 
So then we go on to the next section, which is the appeal at 
court. And basically that’s a situation where the decision — in 
other words, the written decision with reasons that has been 
given by the minister — can be appealed to court. But note this: 
only on a question of law. Now, you know, lawyers know what 
this means, but you can’t dispute the minister’s interpretation of 
the facts. In other words, whatever the facts are and the way the 
minister’s described it, you can’t argue about that. But you can 
argue if they’ve not applied the law properly. 
 
So as a result, this process, it’s not a total appeal. It doesn’t 
preclude obviously some other kinds of court applications 
which may, or not, be effective, but clearly it sets out how to 
appeal on a question of law. In other words, where the minister 
has not appropriately applied the law and the regulations. And 
regulations, once again we have to say, we haven’t seen yet. 
 
Now another point . . . I won’t go through the rest of section 18 
because it just sets out all of the various powers that a court has, 



7318 Saskatchewan Hansard October 14, 2015 

and once again we know from the definition that that’s the 
Court of Queen’s Bench. And then one important point is that 
unless the court orders otherwise, an appeal of the decision of 
the minister does not stay the effect of the decision. And that’s 
important because what it means is the minister’s decision is 
effective immediately, and that there actually would have to be 
a fair bit of argument to try to overturn that. And I think the 
rationale for it, and I think I accept it, is that these decisions 
would not be made lightly. They would be made in situations 
where the public, there’s a chance of harm for the public, and 
something needs to be done right away. So that’s there. 
 
But anyway, we’ve got the procedure. It’s a bit curtailed, but 
practically, you know, you can appeal to the Court of Appeal, 
Supreme Court if you had to or other places, but most of the 
time these things would be resolved in the discussions I think 
within the department. 
 
Now part III of this legislation is called administration, and 
effectively this sets out how this legislation is going to be 
implemented. It sort of answers a couple of questions that we 
had earlier, but doesn’t necessarily answer them fully. 
 
First one relates to agreements with a licensee or accreditation 
program operator. It says: 
 

20(1) The minister or the regional health authority may 
enter into any agreements with a licensee that the minister 
or the regional health authority considers necessary 
respecting the administration of the licensee’s MRI 
facility, including an agreement to make payments to the 
licensee for the MRI services provided at the MRI facility. 

 
So the minister may . . . And then subsection (2), “The minister 
may enter into any agreements with the accreditation program 
operator that the minister considers necessary respecting the 
accreditation program.” Now so I suppose practically both of 
those relate to payments, how they’re going to get paid, and it 
just gives the power to the minister to enter into the agreements. 
 
Now then we go to section 21 around inspectors. The minister 
can designate any employee of the ministry or any other person. 
So once again, it’s pretty wide open as to who you might 
appoint to do this particular job. 
 
Section 22 on inspection, it talks about what the inspector will 
do and basically says, “. . . any inspector may make any 
inspection, investigation or inquiry that the inspector considers 
necessary.” So in other words, complete discretion to that 
person, the inspector, who’s an employee in the Ministry of 
Health most likely but doesn’t have to be. 
 
And every licensee who has one of these MRI facilities has to: 
 

(a) cause the MRI facility for which the licence is issued to 
be open for inspection by an inspector at all reasonable 
times during the hours of operation of the MRI facility; 
and 
 
(b) cause all records and equipment pertaining to the 
operation of the MRI facility to be available for inspection 
by the inspector during the times prescribed in clause (a). 

 

[15:45] 
 
And the inspector can’t enter a private dwelling without a 
warrant. This effectively obviously relates to the fact that 
maybe some of the records would be in a private dwelling. 
There can be consent that covers that, or I think you can get a 
warrant issued that would allow for the entry into a private 
residence. 
 
So the next section relates to warrants and the type of warrants 
that may be necessary for an inspector. This gives the inspector 
extra power to get access to information that they need when 
there are basically reasonable grounds to believe there’s . . . an 
offence against the Act has been committed and that there’s 
evidence of the offence that can be found at a place or premises 
proposed to be searched. And then it goes on basically 
describing the terms for warrants, and that’s following a fairly 
standard format. 
 
The next section, 24, goes to the copies of records issue, and it 
allows for the inspector to make copies of any records that they 
need, and the records can be taken away to be copied as long as 
the originals are returned promptly and returned in a reasonable 
fashion. And so effectively the inspector can certify a copy of 
that record that can then be used later to the same effect in court 
as the original record. That’s I guess a provision that allows for 
ease of enforcement. 
 
Next, section 25 basically says that “No person shall resist, 
obstruct, hinder, delay or interfere with an inspector or person 
aiding an inspector in the performance of an inspector’s duties.” 
This is obviously similar to the clauses that the sheriffs have to 
protect the work that they do. 
 
And then it sets out the offences and penalties, and there are 
penalties of up to $20,000, and if it’s a continuing offence, it’s 
$20,000 a day or portion of a day where the offence continues. 
So these are pretty substantial financial penalties. And then it 
sets out how that’s to be done. Now there’s a two-year limit on 
prosecution for any contravention of the Act, and so that’s good 
to know that there’s a limitation period that way. 
 
The minister can apply to the court for an order of compliance 
related to anything that’s trying to be enforced, so that power is 
given here. 
 
And then we go into immunity section. This is always 
interesting, but basically there’s: 
 

No action or proceeding that . . . [would lie] or shall be 
commenced for any loss or damage suffered by any person 
by reason of anything in good faith done, caused or 
permitted or authorized to be done, attempted to be done 
or omitted to be done by any of the following pursuant to 
or in the exercise or supposed exercise of any power 
conferred by this Act or the regulations or in the carrying 
out or supposed carrying out of any decision or order 
made pursuant to this Act or any duty imposed by this Act 
or the regulations. 

 
And then it lists the people: the Crown, the minister, regional 
health authority, the accreditation program operator, inspector, 
or any employee acting on the instructions of any of the above 



October 14, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7319 

people. 
 
So that’s effectively the body of the Act, 29 sections. But then 
we get to the regulatory section, and we have section 30(a) to 
(x), and there’s all kinds of things that are set out to be 
prescribed, which we’re all very curious about and we’ll see 
whether or not we can try to piece together and figure out what 
the Act actually will do. But it’s interesting to note 30(a) says 
that regulation can define, enlarge, or restrict “. . . the meaning 
of any word or expression used in this Act but not defined in 
this Act.” So it’s that wide-open power that the Crown likes to 
have, and it’s here. 
 
And then for further definition it goes through a whole bunch of 
different things that can be done. And so there’s: 
 

prescribing programs that are accreditation programs and 
requiring licensees to participate in an accreditation 
program; 
 
prescribing places and facilities that are not MRI facilities; 
 
prescribing the amount and requiring the payment of 
application fees and other fees payable by the applicants or 
for other services provided by the minister or the 
accreditation program operator pursuant to this Act or the 
regulations. 

 
And then a regulation respecting the eligibility and criteria to be 
met by the applicants for the licensees, and regulations around 
prescribing public funding sources. And then regulations on 
terms and conditions of the licences and regulations “respecting 
the MRI services provided at an MRI facility, including the 
period within which services must be provided.” 
 
Then it sets out the qualifications and regulation of the 
physicians. It will set out the fees that may be assessed. It sets 
out the quality and standards of the facility, the qualifications of 
the employees for the facility, and then rules around 
construction, alteration, maintenance, repair, and location of the 
MRI facility. And then rules around the equipment in the 
facility. Then what kind of information is to be recorded and 
reported, what kind of records are to be kept, and what kind of 
systems that they’re going to have to monitor the provision of 
the MRI services, and then setting out categories for licensees 
and different terms and conditions for each category. 
 
And then this is one that we saw earlier — well we’ve seen a 
number of these earlier — but also setting out the annual returns 
and how information is provided, and then basically setting out 
regulations around how these codes and standards and 
guidelines and other things will be adopted and amended, and 
then continuing to do some of those things. 
 
And so effectively, the one I guess good thing here is that it’s 
clearly defined that the licensee under an MRI facilities 
licensing Act is included under The Health Information 
Protection Act. 
 
So section 33, the final section is the section on proclamation 
which we’ll assume that the government may want to try to do 
that as quickly as possible. 
 

So we have all these pieces, if I can put it that way, that are part 
of the legislation and once again go back to say that this is 
pretty complex stuff. It’s dealing with federal-provincial 
relations and a number of situations across Canada where 
there’ve been some major problems with facilities like this. 
There’s an attempt to deal with that in the legislation, on the 
surface of it, but then it’s also got so much of it laid out in 
regulations. 
 
So I just happen to have here a memo from the Ministry of 
Health dated September 29th, so that’s just a few weeks ago, 
which is a request to the public for review and comment on 
regulatory development pertaining to Bill 179, The MRI 
Facilities Licensing Act, with comments due October 30th. So 
another couple of weeks. And I think it’s worth putting on the 
record what it says here: 
 

The Ministry of Health invites you to review and comment 
on potential regulatory language pertaining to Bill 179, 
The MRI Facilities Licensing Act. Bill 179 has been 
attached for reference purposes. Attached for discussion 
purposes is a consultation document that outlines the 
proposed roles and responsibilities of the stakeholders 
involved in private payment for MRI services. The 
ministry is seeking feedback on all aspects of the 
administration and operation of the proposed service, 
particularly as it pertains to the administrative and/or 
operational aspects that may directly impact the 
day-to-day operations of your organization. Please note 
that the language is subject to change and has not been 
approved by the minister or cabinet. 

 
Well that’s a good thing because they don’t have any power to 
do it until the Act passes. The next paragraph: 
 

The regulations create the licensing requirements for all 
private facilities that provide MRI and establishes two 
categories of licences depending on whether services are 
publicly or privately funded. As described in the 
consultation document, a clinic licensed pursuant to the 
proposed Act would have to provide a scan to a patient on 
the regional health authority wait list every time it 
provides a scan which is privately paid for. Furthermore, 
the proposed language requires regional health authorities 
to report on the anticipated impact of an MRI facility on 
the public health system operations. The purpose would be 
to ensure that services which are provided by clinics 
licensed pursuant to the proposed Act do not have a 
detrimental effect on the public system. A physician 
referral would still be required for any person to obtain 
medically necessary MRI services. 
 
We look forward to receiving your written feedback on the 
attached material . . . is requested on or before October 30. 

 
And so effectively we have this information and it does add 
some more pieces to this puzzle. I think it raises some more 
questions, but I think it’s worth taking a look at it because in 
many ways this is sort of the guts of this legislation because, as 
we know, often what’s in the regulations is more of what’s 
going on. But we have to remember, this hasn’t been approved 
by cabinet and it’s marked quite clearly, for discussion 
purposes. 



7320 Saskatchewan Hansard October 14, 2015 

So anyway, once again you go to the definitions in the 
regulations. So these are not the definitions in the Act but the 
definitions in the regulations. The Act is obviously The MRI 
Facilities Licensing Act. Then it talks about what . . . a category 
1 licence means a licence described in line (l) bullet (ii) sub (a). 
So effectively you have to go look in this draft document and 
see what that is. And so category 1 licence: 
 

permitting publicly funded MRI service delivery in the 
case of an applicant who intends to provide MRI services 
under a contract for services with a regional health 
authority, the minister, or other prescribed public funding 
source. 

 
So that’s the definition. 
 
Then a category 2 licence is: 
 

permitting private pay MRI service delivery in the case of 
an applicant who intends to provide MRI services to 
individual patients and to accept private payment for those 
services directly. 

 
And so effectively the description of this is that there’s two 
categories of licences. One can be for all public scans and the 
second for any scan that’s purchased by a third party, and they 
include their insurance companies, private companies, Workers’ 
Compensation Board, or individuals who wish to pay for their 
own scan. So we have two types of licences although 
practically, given the number of facilities that are actually going 
to be built, I would assume that the facility will apply for both 
sets of licences. 
 
And so then it goes into the definition of MRI services, and this 
is actually I think quite crucial because this then goes to 
actually what we’re talking about that’s going to be the subject 
of the legislation. And as it says here in the rationale: 
 

MRI services has been explicitly defined as being the 
taking of images, the interpretation of the scans, the 
uploading of such information to be accessible by other 
clinicians as is current practice in the public system, and 
the storage of images. This level of clarity is required to 
ensure that the MRI service includes all of the necessary 
elements. 

 
[16:00] 
 
And so that’s the rationale, but I’ll read the exact wording of 
what’s in the proposed regulation. It says: 
 

MRI services includes the production of a radiological 
image from a magnetic resonance imaging machine, (b) 
the medical interpretation of the image mentioned in the 
previous bullet, (c) the digital transcription of the results. 

 
Fourth, the communication of the results to the ordering 
physician or the regional health authority. And then fifth, the 
digital storage of the image on the diagnostic information 
system referred to in line (g). 
 
And line (g) refers to I think the facility which connects in with 
the RIS [radiology information system] system. And then the 

final item is, “any further consultation required on the image or 
interpretation of the image for clarification purposes.” 
 
You’ll note in this definition in the regulations, and also in the 
Act, it doesn’t say that this has to happen in Saskatchewan. And 
that’s a crucial issue here because there are many concerns 
around some of the new services that have been provided, that 
those services are being provided outside of the province. And 
so then what is the effect of the legislation that we have here? 
We have jurisdiction over a certain area. And especially in the 
whole radiology area or the imaging area, there are systems 
whereby the images are taken in a jurisdiction in North 
America, interpreted overnight in India or China, and sent back 
so that people see them on their desks in the morning. I don’t 
think there’s anything in here that limits that possibility, and so 
I think one of the questions we’ll need to ask and have 
answered is, who’s going to be located in Saskatchewan? Are 
they going to be available for our physicians and others to 
contact in a way that allows them to provide the . . . you know, 
allows the specialists to provide the information that’s 
necessary? 
 
I know right now there’s concerns already around some of the 
facilities that we have that access to information has been 
greatly limited by some of the decisions of the present 
government. 
 
The next definition refers to a referring physician, and basically 
it sets out the referring physician as a physician qualified to 
practise in Saskatchewan or one in Canada that may be a 
specialist, I think is how it’s described. 
 
And then it goes on, the next definition, the final definition in 
the definition section of the regulations is “second scan 
service.” So this is a new term, and it’s a new concept which 
I’ve read some of the comments that have been made publicly 
by the minister and by the Premier, and I think they’re having a 
bit of a hard time describing exactly how this is going to work. 
 
But under these regulations, second scan service means “the 
provision of MRI services to an individual who is referred to 
the licensee by the regional health authority in line (n).” So let’s 
go to line (n) and see what they say. So line (n) says: 
 

Conditions of Licence, Private Pay Service Delivery 
 
An MRI facility that has been issued a category 2 licence 
is subject to the conditions set out in this section. The MRI 
facility must not accept an order to provide MRI services 
from a physician who owns or is a shareholder of or who 
practises in that MRI facility. 

 
In other words, there’s a conflict issue. You can’t own the 
facility. And that’s a big problem in the United States especially 
and possibly in some other parts of Canada. 
 

A licensee may charge for an MRI service that the licensee 
performs under the authority of a category 2 licence 
subject to line (p). For each MRI service purchased from 
the licensee, the licensee is required to provide a second 
scan service of similar complexity to a patient identified 
by the regional health authority pursuant to bullet 5 at no 
charge to that patient. 



October 14, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7321 

And then it goes on to say the licensee is responsible for the 
following with respect to providing the second scan service 
mentioned in bullet 4 within X business days after having 
provided the MRI services provided pursuant to bullet 3; 
requesting from the regional health authority mentioned in 
section whatever, physician to advise regional health authority 
of referral; a list of up to a certain number of patients and their 
contact information, from which the next patient awaiting MRI 
services that would otherwise be provided by a category 1 
licensee or a regional health authority to be selected. 
 
And then contacting the person who is to receive the second 
scan service and offering two opportunities to receive that 
service within a certain number of days, and providing the 
second scan service to the next available patient within a 
certain number of business days after having received the list of 
patients mentioned in clause (a). 
 
And then within a certain number of business days after 
providing the second scan service, notifying the regional health 
authority mentioned in clause (a) that the second scan service 
was completed. 
 
So anyway, so that’s the wording of the regulation. Then it goes 
and it says the reasoning behind this. 
 

While conditions for category 1 licence will be set out in 
their contracts with the RHA with whom they are 
contracted [that’s reasonable; those are the ones on the 
public system], given the relativity small community of 
physicians in Saskatchewan, the section on conflicts is 
intended to prevent a conflict of interest and to also 
mitigate potential inappropriate referrals. The charging of 
fees in this section is permissive for those charging private 
individuals and companies, but ensures that no charges can 
be required from the person receiving the second scan. 

 
This provision is the requirement for the licensee to provide the 
second scan to a patient on the public list, thereby reducing the 
number of patients waiting for this service. 
 

The section outlines the responsibility of the licensee in 
how the second scan is to be coordinated with the public 
system. Given existing health record tools and following 
existing protocols, the licensee would request the list of 
patients from the regional health authority in which they 
operate. The regional health authority will be responsible 
to maintain an updated public list, with the licensee 
providing updating information about those patients who 
have been provided MRI scans within their facility. 

 
So on top of an existing system of waiting lists and everything 
else, we’re going to add in this sublist, sublist, and reporting 
back and forth. And so, I think, practically a decision by the 
government just to provide more resources to the regional 
health authorities to get the job done might have been a smarter 
move than adding this even further complexity into this whole 
situation. 
 
So then we get into the regulations around the application fees, 
and they’re going to set those fees for a certain amount of 
money. That hasn’t been set yet. Obviously there’ll be some 
further discussion, so those are just blanks. 

Then it goes into the accreditation program, and this is an 
interesting point because right now the MRI facilities accredited 
. . . Well this is what the regulations say is what’s going to 
happen: 
 

The MRI facilities accreditation program established by 
the College of Physicians and Surgeons of the province of 
Saskatchewan is prescribed as the accreditation program 
for the MRI facilities at which physicians provide MRI 
services. 

 
For the purposes of section 5 of the Act, the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons of the province of Saskatchewan 
is approved as an accreditation program operator. 
 
A licensee of an MRI facility to which the bullet 1 applies 
must participate in the accreditation program and must 
comply with the standards contained in it. 

 
So right now it says, and the rationale here is: 
 

Consistent with The Health Facilities Licensing 
Regulations, the College of Physicians and Surgeons of 
Saskatchewan currently operates the accreditation program 
and would be requested to continue for all MRI facilities. 
This program will set the standards and conduct audits to 
ensure proper procedures are followed thereby ensuring 
public safety. 

 
And then there’s a requirement that everybody participates in 
this. This whole discussion is kind of curious to me because the 
present Deputy Premier, when he was the Health critic, was on 
a big, long, hard run against the system that we had, which was 
to use the College of Physicians and Surgeons to provide 
accreditation of radiology. There’s another group called the 
Canadian Association of Radiologists that he was championing. 
And he had a lot of years in there, but he didn’t change the 
accreditation when he was there. I think good reason there 
wasn’t, but he sure spent a lot of time huffing and puffing about 
it 10, 11 years ago. 
 
So we go on to the next section around, is the medical director. 
And basically a licensee must ensure that these MRIs at the 
MRI facility are under the continuous supervision of a medical 
director, and in order to act as a medical director, he has to be a 
duly qualified medical practitioner who has a specialty practice 
in radiology recognized by the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons of Saskatchewan or meets the requirement set out by 
the accreditation program operator, which is the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons. The medical director is responsible 
for control and safekeeping of the MRI records at the MRI 
facility. 
 
But one of the concerns again here is whether this medical 
director is required to reside in Saskatchewan or be somebody 
who is in Saskatchewan. It appears to be a bit fuzzy on this, and 
we know that through some of the existing facilities that are 
operating in the province, there are some concerns about the 
lack of connection to the local community. And so I think that 
— these are draft regulations — I think there should be much 
clearer recognition that these facilities are important in the 
province of Saskatchewan and they should be dealt with by 
people here in the province. 



7322 Saskatchewan Hansard October 14, 2015 

Now the next section under the regulations is a section around 
employment of staff. It effectively follows The Health Facilities 
Licensing Act, but the licensee must ensure that all physicians 
who provide or assist in doing the MRI services meet the 
requirements for those services set by the College of Physicians 
and Surgeons of Saskatchewan, and that all of technologists are 
members of the Saskatchewan Association of Medical 
Radiation Technologists, and a record of all these qualifications 
are kept at the MRI facility, and that there are sufficient staff to 
make sure the place is operated in a safe and appropriate 
manner, and that each person is appropriately trained.  
 
And so this is an area obviously where the inspectors will come 
and follow, and they’re trying to set out some of these 
conditions which then can be inspected. It may be that there 
needs to be a little more clarity in how all that fits together, but 
there are some provisions there. 
 
Next section in the regulation, proposed regulation is around 
MRI records. And it basically says that — and once again just 
mimicking what’s already in The Health Facilities Licensing 
Regulations — that they have to keep records on every person 
who receives the services. They have to make sure that the 
systems that they’ve got are appropriate, and that they will be 
able to upload all of the information into the diagnostic 
information system that’s approved by the Ministry of Health. 
And that’s a very important issue because the last thing we want 
is to have information that’s not available for the physicians 
who’ve requested it. So some of these things may need to be 
more specific in dealing with this. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Now one of the clauses in this legislation or in these proposed 
regulations is bullet 2, and basically it says that all of the 
licensees upload all the MRI images. But there’s a further part 
to it, and it says that this bullet respects patients’ access to 
privacy in the event a patient chooses to have their records 
remain confidential. And it’s not quite certain exactly what this 
means. But I think it’s such that people can go and get diagnosis 
at one of these places and not have it come into the system. 
 
And I think practically there needs to be some very careful 
work done in this area because we want to make sure that, you 
know, patients’ privacy is protected, but we also want to make 
sure that the information is there for the physicians and others 
who are working with them. And so this becomes something 
that needs to be very carefully worked out. And I think at this 
stage it’s, you know, it’s got some of the ideas there but I’m not 
sure it’s fully fleshed out how that should be. It also sets out 
some of the limits on how long the information should be kept 
in the system. 
 
Now then the regulations then say, well that all of the MRI 
services are to be provided in accordance with generally 
accepted standards and the standards of the accreditation 
program; and that the equipment must be appropriate and it’s in 
safe operating conditions, serviced at regular intervals; and that 
it’s performing all its functions within the manufacturer’s 
specifications. So that’s obviously a reasonable request, and it 
makes sense as this goes forward. 
 
Then the regulations set out how the business records are going 

to be dealt with and how those records need to be available. 
And once again it follows The Health Facilities Licensing Act. 
Now the annual returns, it sets out what the annual returns are 
to consist of, and once again it follows The Health Facilities 
Licensing Act. 
 
Line (k) or the whole (k) area in the regulation relates to 
reporting. And this is once again a fairly complicated area, an 
area that because of some of these, I guess, political decisions 
made around this that aren’t always terribly logical in the 
provision of services.  
 
So what it says is that category 2 licences, that’s the one that 
provides services to private carriers: 
 

That licensee shall provide a report in a form specified by 
the minister of all MRI services provided during each 
month to the minister and to the regional health authority 
in which the MRI facility is located within 14 days after 
the end of that month. 

 
So at the end of the month, the report has to go into both places 
within 14 days. The report has to include the name of the MRI 
facility, the code for the type of exam, the name of the type of 
exam, and the exam order status related to the MRI services 
performed on an individual. 
 
The second part is the name, address, and telephone number of 
the referring physician, the date on which the patient was 
referred for MRI services and the date of the patient’s initial 
visit with that physician, priority level, the date the MRI 
services were provided, the name of the interpreting physician 
— in other words, presumably the radiologist — the radiology 
information system accession number. So that’s, the RIS system 
has a number as each image is put into the system. And then, if 
applicable, the person billed for payment. 
 
And so this whole area is interesting in the reasoning, and once 
again it goes to the complexity and the fact that this is more of a 
political bill than a practical bill. And it says category 1 
licensees don’t have much difficulty reporting because they’re 
just dealing with patients in the public system. But the category 
2 licensees are having some very specific things that they must 
include in their report, and the reason, as stated here in this 
paper, is that other jurisdictions have difficulty quantifying the 
number of MRIs provided by the private system in their 
jurisdiction: 
 

This provision will ensure the minister has access to 
information about all scans provided to address true MRI 
demand and capacity in the province for program 
planning. 
 
The level of detail indicated in the reporting requirements 
ensures patient confidentiality, but will facilitate 
investigations by the minister in the event any concerns 
are raised by patients or persons, and the patient provides 
informed consent to a ministry official to follow up with 
the regional health authority or private vendor on their 
behalf. 

 
So it’s interesting how once again they’ve learned something 
from some other jurisdictions that are having some problem 



October 14, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7323 

with this type of legislation. And so what we have here is some 
pretty specific requirements set out in the information. 
 
The next section on categories of licences is pretty 
straightforward, and the key thing there is that an applicant can 
hold both categories of licences. And that’s probably what will 
happen. 
 
Then the next section goes to the terms and conditions of the 
licence. As we saw before when we were looking at the Act 
itself, much of the detail of what was going to be in some of 
these licences was not included there. And so let’s go through 
and we’ll see what’s being requested. 
 
So line (m), terms and conditions of the licence. Following 
terms and conditions apply to all licences, that’s licensing 
category 1 or category 2. 
 

The licensee must provide to the minister, and have in 
place at all times during the term of its licence, a prepaid 
contract to accept the licensee’s patient records in the 
event that the licensee ceases to operate or has its licence 
cancelled with an information management service 
provider acceptable to the minister or the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons.  

 
And so basically this is the HIPA [The Health Information 
Protection Act] requirement, and I think this relates to all of the 
medical records in the dumpster that caused a fair bit of 
difficulty for both the Privacy Commissioner and for the 
Minister of Health because there didn’t seem to be any rules. 
And I know they’re working on that, although I don’t think 
we’ve got the full solution yet. 
 
This next condition on all licensees is that they have to provide 
a letter of credit or bond, or other form of security satisfactory 
to the minister, be used to defray costs if patient records of the 
licensee are not properly secured or abandoned in the event the 
licensee cease to operate and has its licence cancelled. So either 
the accreditation program operator, which is the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons, or the minister has to have this as 
available to be redeemed by them immediately should further 
funds be required to deal with abandoned records or abandoned 
images. 
 
And then this next condition on the licence is very curious, and 
we’re going to . . . This will go to the heart of, I think, the 
whole legislation, and it may be quite a headache for the 
Premier and for the Minister of Health: 
 

A condition of all licences is that licensees may not offer 
employment or contracts for services to individuals to 
provide imaging or technical services to the licensee if 
those individuals are under contract with or employed by a 
regional health authority, an affiliate, or the Saskatchewan 
Cancer Agency if that action would significantly 
negatively impact the ability of the regional health 
authority or the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency to provide 
publicly funded MRI services.  

 
So the reasoning on this particular clause says this item will 
ensure that the provision of private payment for MRI services 
does not have a negative impact on the delivery of publicly 

funded, publicly delivered MRI services. 
 
So we have this political decision to bring this Act in. The 
department’s working with it, but they’re trying everything they 
can do to protect the public system, and I applaud them for 
doing that. 
 
The question that I have is, how is anybody going to enforce 
this kind of a condition in the licence? And I think there needs 
to be some further definition to this as to how this clause, which 
is in place for all licensees under this legislation . . . because 
arguably, this is going to have a negative impact on the ability 
of facilities in the province to provide services. So there’s going 
to be a big onus on the Premier; there’s going to be a big onus 
on the minister to make sure that this clause that’s in a 
suggested language of the regulations that are out there, before 
the Act is even passed, that this clause is dealt with. 
 
And I think practically these are attempts — may be reasonable, 
but I’m not so sure about that — to try to defuse the political 
problems that this is going to cause. It’s a greater complexity in 
the whole system. I don’t think the advantages are there. I think 
that, you know, the Premier can have one-liners and the 
minister can sort of give superficial comments about this, but 
how it actually works, as we’ve seen for a couple of hours here, 
is going to cause a significant number of difficulties. And I’m 
not sure it’s going to provide that much more service. A better 
choice would have been to properly resource the system that we 
have now, but that doesn’t appear to be on the table. 
 
So then a further condition on the licence is that a licensee may 
only perform MRI services if the services have been ordered by 
a referring physician who has appropriate privileges to order 
MRI services in the health region where the physician practises. 
Or, in the case of services ordered by a physician from outside 
of Saskatchewan, that physician is licensed to practice medicine 
in Canada and meets the qualifications of the referring 
physician in the jurisdiction where the physician is licensed to 
practise. 
 
And so basically, you know, it’s putting some pretty strong 
restrictions on there. And hopefully they’ve been talking with 
the college of physicians and surgeons and, I think, more 
importantly, the Saskatchewan Medical Association around 
how some of these clauses come together. 
 
And then the next section in here says that a licensee may only 
perform MRI services where the services have been ordered by 
a physician from outside of Saskatchewan, that physician is 
licensed to practice medicine in Canada and meets the 
qualifications of a referring physician in the jurisdiction the 
physician is licensed to practise. 

 
And so that parallels the one I just read before, but basically this 
clause (b) is set out there to make sure that they can be provided 
to physicians from outside of Saskatchewan but within Canada. 
They have specifically limited referrals to Canadian physicians 
as it would become too difficult to define circumstances in 
which training requirements must be met in order for referrals 
from out-of-country physicians to be accepted. 
 
So I don’t know if that’s something that was requested and then 
denied but, you know, I guess there is an option for a 



7324 Saskatchewan Hansard October 14, 2015 

private-pay delivery to go and recruit people from other parts of 
the world and set up sort of a medical tourism operation in 
Regina or Saskatoon. But this appears to preclude that unless 
you’ve got a local physician involved with the request. 
 
[16:30] 
 
And we previously talked about line (n), which is the conditions 
of licence on a private-pay service delivery. So we won’t go 
back there. And then we go to line (o) and it’s like basically a 
regulation on providing information from a patient list to a 
licensee: 
 

A regional health authority may disclose personal health 
information and personal information of patients to 
licensees as may be required to permit licensees to 
perform MRI services and second scan services pursuant 
to these regulations.  
 

So this is that attempt to just pull these facilities right into the 
regular system. Now I think it works, but once again it’s 
another sort of complicating factor in the situation where 
they’re setting up these special facilities. 
 
Now line (p) gets into this once again interesting context of the 
second scan. So line (p) says: 
 

The regional health authority may identify the next most 
appropriate patient. If the regional health authority, after 
making reasonable efforts, is not able to identify a patient 
of similar complexity for the purposes of bullet 5 and line 
(n), the regional authority may identify the next most 
appropriate patient. 

 
Well what’s going on here is, and the rationale kind of 
describes it, it says: 
 

This section outlines responsibilities of the RHA and how 
the second scan is to be coordinated with the public 
system. 

 
And for people who like red tape, just listen here: 
 

Clarification is provided regarding the responsibility on 
the RHA to co-operate with the licensee by identifying the 
secondary scan patients and providing the necessary 
information to permit the licensee to contact the patient. It 
is possible that at some point in the future no “similar” 
patient will exist on the public list to receive the second 
scan from the licensee. This section allows the RHA to 
identify another patient on the waiting list to be eligible 
for a second scan. 

 
Now we note that there’s no definition of similar and all these 
other things in here. And even in their discussion here they put 
the word similar in quotations because they realized this is 
going to be one interesting task. 
 
So anyway, then it goes, line (q) in the regulations — we’re 
getting close to the end of them, fortunately — says that “All 
the referrals for MRIs for publicly funded have to go through 
the RHA,” which they do now. 
 

Then we go into line (r) and this is another interesting clause. 
And talking about red tape, well listen to this one: 
 

No recovery of cost re: services provided by category 2 
licensees. 

 
And this deals with the political problem that the minister and 
the Premier sometimes get. 

 
Any person who chooses to pay for MRI services offered 
by a category 2 licensee is not entitled in any 
circumstances to recover from the ministry, a regional 
health authority, or the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency any 
costs incurred with respect to the MRI services provided. 
 

And then: 
 

A category 2 licensee shall obtain a signed 
acknowledgment on a form approved by the minister from 
a patient receiving MRI services from a category 2 
licensee before providing any MRI services to that patient. 
The signed acknowledgment form mentioned in bullet 2 is 
part of an MRI record for the purposes of bullet 1. 

 
So basically this is bending over backwards to say that all 
attempts must be made to ensure that patient access to publicly 
funded MRI services are prioritized for acuity, and what this is 
saying is that if somebody goes and pays for a service at one of 
these agencies in Saskatchewan and it’s shown then that they’ve 
got some specific problem, they can’t go back and get paid for 
it in the same way as we’ve seen the Minister of Health say that 
to people who get services in Alberta or Minot or Texas or 
wherever they would go. 
 
And so not only does it say they’re not entitled. It says that the 
licensee has to get a signed acknowledgement of that. And I can 
just see the future staff for the Minister of Health sitting up 
there saying, I want a clause in there so I don’t have to deal 
with these kind of calls, and clearly that will deal with it, but 
once again it’s some more red tape and some more fun in this 
whole thing. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got a piece of legislation which the 
Premier and the Minister of Health and others have brought 
forward as more of a political missive than a practical one. A 
smarter move would’ve been for the Minister of Health to work 
with treasury board and the Minister of Finance and make sure 
that the facilities that we have already were adequately 
resourced and used to the fullest extent of their ability because 
that is where the system is going to work the best. 
 
And I think that the people in the department who’ve worked in 
this area, you know, putting the legislation together and putting 
the regulations, proposed regulations, together have done an 
admiral job on something that doesn’t really feel right for them. 
And I have to say it doesn’t feel right for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And that’s why I’ve spent so much time going through this 
legislation because it’s obvious that they have looked carefully 
at the failures in other provinces with this type of thing. 
They’ve looked at where there have been some difficult 
problems, and they’ve tried to put in some protection for the 



October 14, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7325 

taxpayers of Saskatchewan in how to deal with this. 
 
I suppose the good thing is that when the government changed, 
all the power in the minister makes it fairly straightforward to 
correct this whole thing by putting the funds in the right places. 
So I’d have to say that is a positive thing. It’s quite different 
from The Ambulance Act which has got all kinds of protections 
in there that are extremely difficult to change. This one I think 
maybe has learned from that legislation not to ever do that 
again. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this legislation does not sit well with me. I 
know it doesn’t sit well with many people within the health 
system. It’s obvious that there’s a lot of uneasiness within the 
department and the people who are working on it, including the 
lawyers. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I have no further 
comments, but I sure look forward to having the Minister of 
Health answer questions in a whole number of areas because 
there’s a lot of explaining to do on this particular legislation. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion before the House is second 
reading of Bill No. 179, The MRI Facilities Licensing Act. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I adjourned debate. 
 
The Speaker: — Oh, you adjourned. Sorry, I missed that. The 
member has moved adjournment of debate on Bill No. 179. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 10 
a.m. tomorrow morning. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:39.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7299 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7299 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7299 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7299 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7299 
ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 Introduction of Pages 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 7299 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7299 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7300 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7300 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7300 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7300 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................  7300 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatoon Engineer of the Year Award 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7301 
 Orange Shirt Day 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7301 
 Self-Esteem Workshop for Girls 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7301 
 World Mental Health Day 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7301 
 Poverty Awareness Week 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7302 
 Dr. Shadd Celebrated in Melfort 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7302 
 University of Regina Reaches Record Enrolment 
  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7302 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Provision of Out-of-Province Medical Treatments 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7303 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7303 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7304 
 Funding for Education 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7306 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7306 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on House Services 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7307 
MOTIONS 
 Revisions to the Code of Ethical Conduct for Members of the Legislative Assembly 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 7307 
 Congratulations to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7308 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7308 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7309 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7309 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7309 
  Cheveldayoff (transmittal motion) ........................................................................................................................................ 7310 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 179 — The MRI Facilities Licensing Act 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7310 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


