






















































Hansard: March 19, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 37A  THURSDAY, MARCH 19, 2015, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6607 
 March 19, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
real pleasure to introduce to members in the Assembly today 
and to our guests, some folks that have joined us who are very 
special to the province of Saskatchewan. In your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, we have Jim Hopson, CEO [chief executive officer] of 
the Saskatchewan Roughriders, Brenda Edwards, his wife; and 
Tyler has joined us as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, later this day, this evening in fact, friends and 
family of Jim will gather together and roast . . . I should say pay 
tribute to him as he is marking his retirement from his position 
as CEO of the Saskatchewan Roughriders. And in a moment the 
member for Silver Springs will have a member’s statement to 
say a few things about Jim. 
 
But let me just say very, very quickly in the introduction how 
grateful we are in this province for his transformative leadership 
of this football team — this football team whose identity is 
synonymous with the province, this football team who have, 
well they’ve been to four Grey Cups while Jim’s been the CEO. 
They’ve won two, doubling the output from all of the other 
CEOs and presidents before him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, more than that, this football team he’s led is better 
now off the field. They’ve always been great off the field, but 
what a heart the team has for causes and charity here, and it’s 
because of the leadership by example of Mr. Hopson. 
 
I think if you check the sports merchandising stats, you’d find 
out that either the Habs or the Leafs battle out for number one 
in terms of Canadian sports merchandising and the third place 
goes to the Saskatchewan Roughriders — amazing in a hockey 
country, and here too we credit Mr. Hopson. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would just ask all members to join with me 
in welcoming the Hopsons, Jim and Brenda, Tyler to their 
Legislative Assembly, and to thank him for his great leadership 
for the Riders and for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a real 
honour to join with the Premier and welcome the Hopsons to 
their Assembly here today. And certainly Jim Hopson as 
president and CEO of the Riders has presided over a time and 
led a period of unprecedented success in building Rider nation, 
as the Premier has so rightfully attributed. You’ve been a major 
part of that. And the success, from merchandising to filling that 
stadium, to the success on the field and the two Grey Cups and 
the exceptional players that have been recruited and the 
world-class organization that you’ve built here in Regina, is 
something of pride for all of us. 

And it’s fitting in a way. It’s sort of, it’s a beautiful day outside. 
The melt is on. You start to think about spring camp coming 
along for the Riders. But also all across the province in small 
communities and in northern Saskatchewan, and certainly here 
in Regina, where football’s alive and well, folks will be hitting, 
hitting the fields for some spring camps. It’s a part of our 
culture. It’s something we’re proud of. And thank you so much, 
Jim, for joining us today. 
 
Of course he also played for the Roughriders. He’s also had an 
exceptional career in education as a teacher, as a director of 
education, has influenced so much in so many good ways in our 
province. We’re just simply thankful for that. And we also have 
something else in common: we’re both Thom Collegiate 
graduates, but he came from a generation I think along with my 
dad there at that point in time. But it’s a pleasure to have him in 
the Assembly. 
 
It’s also nice to have Ms. Brenda Edwards in her Assembly, a 
leader in education and to her province as well. Thank you for 
joining us. And Mr. Tyler Hopson, someone who gives of 
himself to public service through a Crown here in this province, 
nice to have you here, Tyler. 
 
So to the Hopsons, I join with the Premier to give a very warm 
welcome. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’d like to give a special introduction to Ms. 
Caitlyn Dixon. Caitlyn is a resident of our fair city of Moose 
Jaw who recently competed in The Brush Contest for L’Oréal 
Paris in the next makeup designer. And I’m going to have a few 
more words to say about that in a member’s statement in a few 
minutes; so with that, I’ll cut it short. And I’d like to ask all 
members to welcome Caitlyn to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to welcome 
Caitlyn to her Legislative Assembly. I’ve been following the 
contest on Facebook quite closely. And Caitlyn’s mom and I 
used to play in a rock band back when I was in my 20s. So I’ve 
known her mom for a long, long time, so pleased to see . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . We were called the eclipse, if 
anybody’s wondering. 
 
But anyways, I know her mom’s a beautiful lady, and I’ve been 
watching the work of Caitlyn and all the best for you when you 
go to Paris. So congratulations and we hope the best for you. 
Welcome to your Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I’d like to introduce in your gallery a lady who has been 
important in many of our lives here in the legislature. She has 
been instrumental in bringing a lot of teachers into the 



6608 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2015 

legislature to learn about the parliamentary system, and we’re 
grateful for your leadership and for all the work that you’ve 
done. Welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
want to welcome the Hopson family, a family of champions in 
many ways. 
 
But we also have a couple of northern champions here today I’d 
like to introduce. One of them of course is Gary Tinker. As you 
all know, Gary Tinker is a champion for the disability 
community. He’s walked a lot of miles to bring awareness to 
this, and I want to recognize him in the Assembly for his very 
special effort that he’s undertaken on behalf of all people from 
northern Saskatchewan that have many varieties of disabilities. 
 
And with Gary today is another champion, Randy Stomp. 
Randy is a vocational counsellor with the Gary Tinker 
Federation. He’s a very compassionate and caring individual, 
very, very committed, and I want to recognize him today. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to play against Randy 
in a game of hockey. So, caring, compassionate, but do not get 
him upset when he has a hockey stick in his hands. My bruises 
have finally healed, Mr. Speaker, but I just want to say with all 
due respect to both Gary Tinker and Randy Stomp, keep up the 
fantastic work. You’ve done a wonderful job on behalf of the 
people, the disabled people of northern Saskatchewan, and I 
thank you for your service. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the government members, and all members quite frankly, we 
too want to welcome Gary and Randy to their Legislative 
Assembly. It’s always a great time to meet and talk with Gary. 
I’ve never seen anyone that’s so enthusiastic and positive as 
that gentleman, and we commend you for all of the great work 
that you’ve done on behalf of people with disabilities. So thank 
you so much, and welcome to your Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members, I’d like to introduce two individuals seated 
in your gallery. The first is Mr. Nathaniel Cole, someone who is 
busy and active around the city of Regina. It’s good to see him 
in the legislature today. And with Nathaniel also is Mr. Adam 
Duke, who is our candidate in the upcoming election in the 
constituency of Humboldt-Watrous, someone who is very 
committed and energetic and doing hard work. So it’s a real 
pleasure to welcome both of these individuals to the Legislative 
Assembly today, Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition calling for greater support for 
education. And we know that education is one of the most vital 

services this government can provide to its citizens, but this 
government has failed to deliver a long-term plan and vision 
and the necessary resources to prioritize delivery of educational 
excellence. And we know that this government has failed to 
deliver a real plan to close the Aboriginal education gap, to 
support English as an additional language, to support 
community schools and their communities and students. And 
we know that we must build the best education system for today 
and for Saskatchewan’s future. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately prioritize education by laying out a 
long-term vision and a plan with the necessary resources 
that provides the best quality education for Saskatchewan, 
that reflects Saskatchewan’s demographic and population 
changes, that is based on proven educational best 
practices, that is developed through consultation with the 
education sector, and that builds strong educational 
infrastructure to serve students and communities long into 
the future. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
the city of Moose Jaw. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 
again today to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents 
as it relates to the unsafe conditions created on Dewdney 
Avenue by that government when they failed to properly and 
safely plan for heavy-haul truck traffic. The petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to take action as it relates to the unacceptable 
danger, disturbance, and infrastructure damage caused by 
the heavy-haul truck traffic on Dewdney Avenue west of 
the city centre, to ensure the safety and well-being of 
communities, families, residents, and users; and that those 
actions and plans should include rerouting the heavy-haul 
truck traffic, receive provincial funding, and be developed 
through consultation with the city of Regina, communities, 
and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions today are signed by concerned residents of 
Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. Homelessness is a major problem in La Ronge and in 
other parts of the North, and it is getting worse. Shelter is a 
basic need for everyone, but under this government it’s getting 
harder and harder for people to find adequate housing, 
especially families, seniors, women and children who face 
abusive situations. The problem is getting worse because of the 



March 19, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6609 

rising level of poverty, skyrocketing home ownership costs. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the Saskatchewan 
government to build a homeless shelter in the Lac la 
Ronge area to meet the needs of addressing homelessness 
in the Lac la Ronge area. 

 
It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased today 
to present a petition in support of safe staffing levels in 
long-term care. The petitioners point out that many aspects of 
long-term care are deteriorating under this government; that this 
government is failing to fix the basics in long-term care, 
including rejecting the further urgent requests from long-term 
care facilities for increased and needed staffing levels. They 
point out that the government has removed the regulations 
requiring a minimum standard of care for seniors, resulting in 
neglect; and that chronic understaffing in long-term care 
facilities results in unacceptable conditions, including 
unanswered calls for help, infrequent bathing, and a rise in 
physical violence amongst residents. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the government to 
commit to the creation of safe staffing levels for all valued 
members of the health care team and to reintroduce actual 
numbers of staff to match the level of care, needs, and the 
number of residents under their care in long-term care 
facilities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by folks in Melville, 
Prince Albert, Maple Creek, Saskatoon, Warman, Regina, and 
Wapella. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Monsieur le Président, je voudrais présenter 
une pétition pour appuyer les droits des élèves fransaskois et 
fransaskoises. 
 
Et ils disent, nous, les résidents et les résidentes de la province 
de la Saskatchewan qui ont signé ici, voulons vous faire prendre 
conscience des enjeux suivants. Les écoles fransaskoises sont 
très importantes pour l’avenir de la communauté fransaskoise. 
Beaucoup d’élèves arrivent en Saskatchewan en provenance des 
pays et provinces francophones. Le gouvernement de la 
Saskatchewan a une responsabilité constitutionnelle d’appuyer 
les élèves fransaskois et fransaskoises. Le Conseil des écoles 
fransaskoises ne devrait pas avoir besoin de lutter en Cour 
suprême pour défendre ses droits constitutionnels. 
 

Nous, en la prière suivante, demandons respectueusement 
au gouvernement de la Saskatchewan de: 

 
Respecter ses obligations constitutionnelles et d’appuyer 
le CÉF avec toutes les ressources et le support nécessaires 
pour la préservation de la langue et de la culture 
francophone en Saskatchewan. 

 
Monsieur le Président, il étais signer par les citoyens de Regina. 
Je vous presenter. 
 
[10:15] 
 
[Translation: Mr. Speaker, I would like to present a petition to 
support the rights of Fransaskois students. 
 
And they say, we the undersigned residents of the province of 
Saskatchewan wish to bring to your attention the following 
concerns. Fransaskois schools are very important for the future 
of the Fransaskois community. Many students arrive in 
Saskatchewan originating from francophone countries and 
provinces. The Government of Saskatchewan has a 
constitutional responsibility to support Fransaskois students. 
The Conseil des écoles fransaskoises shouldn’t have to fight in 
the Supreme Court to defend their constitutional rights. 
 

We, in the prayer that follows, respectfully request the 
Government of Saskatchewan respect its constitutional 
obligations and support the CÉF with all of its resources 
and support necessary for the preservation of the 
francophone language and culture in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is signed by citizens of Regina. I so present.] 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Agriculture Safety Week 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
snow in the fields is melting, and producers all across the 
province will soon be out seeding this year’s crop and preparing 
to put livestock out into the pasture. So in the spirit of planting 
seeds for a great harvest, I rise in the Assembly today to 
recognize Agriculture Safety Week. 
 
Every year, an average of 14 people are killed on the job in our 
province’s agricultural sector. One death is one too many. 
Every one of these deaths is a tragedy, and every one of these 
deaths affects families and communities all across our province. 
In addition to these deaths, many others suffer terrible injuries 
that affect them for the rest of their lives. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, nearly every agriculture injury is a 
preventable injury. By wearing the correct personal protective 
equipment, taking the time to locate buried and overhead power 
lines, and by being cautious and careful when operating farm 
machinery, we can ensure that all farming families and farm 
workers will be able to make it home safe at the end of a hard 
day’s work. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in 



6610 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2015 

recognizing Agriculture Safety Week, and I hope that each 
member here today will do their part to ensure that, come 
harvest time, we will have zero deaths or injuries on our farms 
and ranches. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 

Legacy of Roughrider Chief Executive Officer 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. To you and through you, it gives me great pleasure 
today to recognize someone who has made a significant 
contribution to our province. Jim Hopson, president and CEO of 
the Saskatchewan Roughriders is retiring, and I appreciate this 
opportunity to say thank you to Jim and wish him the very best 
in a well-deserved retirement. 
 
Jim is leaving a lasting legacy of outstanding commitment and 
dedication, not only to the Saskatchewan Roughriders, but to 
our entire province. His career has been a model to follow. Jim 
has made the Riders the success they are today and has created 
a solid foundation to build on. His remarkable contribution has 
touched the lives of many in immeasurable ways through his 
talent and service. 
 
On a personal note, I had the opportunity to work with Jim on 
the new stadium project. Every step of the way his vision, 
unwavering commitment, and patience was a strong, guiding 
force in moving the project forward. Jim set a standard in the 
Canadian Football League for doing things right and succeeded 
in leading the team to that point. Under his direction, the 
Saskatchewan Roughriders have achieved great stature, 
including bringing home two Grey Cups. 
 
From becoming a financial juggernaut to sharing his 
philosophies on marketing, along with his sensible game day 
operations, Jim’s legacy will continue. Jim, we sincerely hope 
that you enjoy good health and much happiness in your 
retirement. We feel extremely privileged to have had the 
pleasure of working with you and calling you a friend. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

International Day of the Francophonie 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Merci, monsieur le Président. Je me lève en 
ma place en récognition de la Journée internationale de la 
francophonie. Chaque vingtième de Mars, nous célébrons la 
culture et la langue francophone avec tous des cinq cents 
millions francophones dans le monde. 
 
La langue du français est une langue globale. Nous savons, 
c’est la langue de la diplomatie, la langue de l’amour, et c’est au 
cœur de l'identité pour les fransaskois et les fransaskoises en 
notre province. C’est quelque chose qui connecte des Canadiens 
et des Canadiennes en chaque région de notre pays. 
 
Malheureusement, monsieur le Président, ce gouvernement 
choisit de couper le budget de l’office des affaires 
francophones. Cinq mille moins pour le petit office des affaires 
francophones, mais le gouvernement continue avec chaque 
dollar pour le bureau de le premier ministre. 

Cette coupe est en plus des batailles ce gouvernement continue 
de combattre en la Cour suprême contre le CÉF. 
 
[Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in my place in 
recognition of the Journée internationale de la francophonie. 
Every 20th of March, we celebrate francophone culture and 
language with all of the 500 million francophones in the world. 
 
The French language is a global language. We know it’s the 
language of diplomacy, the language of love, and it’s at the 
heart of the identity for the Fransaskois in our province. It’s 
something that connects Canadians in every region of our 
country. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this government has chosen to cut 
the budget of the office of the francophone business office: 
5,000 less for the little francophone business office, but the 
government continues with every dollar for the office of the 
Premier. 
 
This cut is in addition to the battles this government continues 
to fight in the Supreme Court against the CÉF [Conseil des 
écoles fransaskoises]]. 
 
This track record of cuts and underfunding certainly seems like 
a strange way to say je t’aime [Translation: I love you] to the 
francophone community, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so I ask all members on the eve of the Journée 
internationale de la francophonie to consider the important 
contributions of our Fransaskois residents and join me in calling 
on this government to respect its constitutional obligations to 
francophones in Saskatchewan. Merci, monsieur le Président. 
[Translation: Thank you, Mr. Speaker.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

International Day for the Elimination of Racial 
Discrimination 

 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, on Saturday our province will 
join the UN [United Nations] and governments around the 
world in proclaiming the International Day for the Elimination 
of Racial Discrimination. The Attorney General will be joining 
Chief Clive Weighill and the community members in an event 
tomorrow in Saskatoon to mark the day. 
 
Saskatchewan has a long history of protecting human rights. 
We have taken a number of momentous steps forward that has 
advanced the global campaign towards racial equality. In 1947 
we became the first jurisdiction in North America to pass a 
general human rights Act. Along with promising such 
fundamental issues as civil liberties and process and freedom of 
worship, it also prohibited discrimination on the basis of one’s 
race, colour, and ethnic origin.  
 
Earlier in this session we celebrated the 40th anniversary of the 
Saskatchewan multiculturalism Act, the Act which enacted our 
province to be the first in Canada with legislation in support of 
cultural communities. Yet our past also presents opportunities 
to learn from the lessons of history. UN Secretary-General Ban 
Ki-moon is asking all the world’s citizens to be mindful of how 



March 19, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6611 

these lessons can help us continue in our global goal of ending 
discrimination. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let us build on the work of generations of settlers, 
immigrants, and refugees and indigenous peoples who have 
fashioned Saskatchewan into one of the world’s most vibrant 
cultural landscapes. I ask members to join me as we recognize 
the International Day for the Elimination of Racial 
Discrimination. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Saskatchewan High Schools Athletic Association 
Fosters Love of Sport 

 
Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With the school 
year moving along, this is the time of year when many high 
school sports move into playoffs. From badminton to wrestling 
to basketball, the Saskatchewan High Schools Athletic 
Association provides all high school sports with the 
administration and organization needed to allow competition 
between schools and participation in sport across this province. 
Working closely with the various boards of education, the 
SHSAA [Saskatchewan High Schools Athletic Association] 
plans and coordinates all playoffs leading to provincial 
championships in badminton, basketball, cross-country, curling, 
football, golf, soccer, track and field, volleyball, and wrestling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you can imagine, this organization is always 
busy. Currently, regional basketball tournaments start this 
weekend, and Hoopla 2015, Saskatchewan’s version of March 
Madness, kicks off March 28th in Saskatoon. 
 
I’d like to give a special thank you to all 11 members of the 
SHSAA executive including President Roger Morgan as well as 
Executive Director Kevin Vollet and team for putting together 
another amazing year of competition in sport for our 
Saskatchewan student athletes. A commitment to fairness 
ensures the competition is genuine yet fosters the love of sport 
in all of our athletes. I’d ask all members of the Assembly to 
join with me in thanking Kevin and Roger of the SHSAA and 
all of our volunteer coaches for another successful year. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 

Peacock Junior Boys Win Championship Title 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, it was an exciting 
day in Moose Jaw last week as the Peacock junior boys’ 
basketball team captured their second straight Moose Jaw high 
school athletic league title. 
 
Going into that final game, the boys were a little apprehensive 
about facing an old rival that they had lost to twice during the 
regular season. But Coach Dave Roney was confident that he 
had a team that was a strong team going into the matchup. The 
boys already had proved throughout the season, and Coach 
Roney credited the win with having an especially strong 
defence, defeating Assiniboia 43 to 40 in that championship 
game. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the team is a tightly knit group that had been 
together for the past three years in either grade 9 or 10. With 
plans to move into the senior division next year so as not to 
break up the team, we should expect continuing to see great 
things from the Peacock boys’ basketball team. 
 
It’s always exciting to see our young athletes put their heart and 
their soul into something they love, and it’s even more exciting 
when that drive pays off in a championship title. Mr. Speaker, I 
would ask all members of the Assembly to join me in 
congratulating coach Dave Roney as well as the entire Moose 
Jaw junior Peacock boys’ basketball team. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

Moose Jaw Resident in Design Competition Finals 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to extend congratulations to Moose Jaw resident Caitlyn 
Dixon. Caitlyn recently entered The Brush Contest by L’Oréal 
Paris, a contest that will award one lucky contestant the position 
of L’Oréal Paris’s next makeup designer and a trip to Paris for 
the finals. 
 
In order to enter the competition, Caitlyn had to create a video 
under three minutes showing her creativity and personality 
while showcasing a daring and colourful makeup look. 
Contestants had to garner support with online votes, with the 
top five moving to the finals in Toronto this month. Caitlyn had 
the support of thousands of people across the province 
including Saskatchewan Roughrider quarterback Darian Durant. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the luck of the Irish shone on Caitlyn this 
past St. Patrick’s Day. With over 6,000 votes, Caitlyn finished 
fifth place out of 50 contestants nationwide. Caitlyn now joins 
the other four contestants on March 26 to compete in the final 
part of the contest that will be nationally broadcast on etalk. 
 
On a side note, Mr. Speaker, I found out today is her first visit 
to the legislature, and she is also a former classmate of my son. 
So I’m Dylan’s dad. Mr. Speaker, I ask that all of my 
colleagues please join me in wishing Caitlyn the best of luck in 
Toronto on March 26th. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Mr. Broten: — My question is for the Premier. Why is this 
government cutting funding for English as an additional 
language supports? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we have over the years of our 
government been able to invest significantly more dollars with 
respect to education in the province of Saskatchewan, with 
operating grants increasing every year. That was the case in this 
particular budget we’re talking about, Mr. Speaker. In addition 



6612 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2015 

to that, our government’s record includes massive increases in 
investments to education capital. That is also very, very much 
reflected in the budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would point out to members opposite as well and 
members of the House that this government is the government 
that’s actually undertaken unprecedented moves in the middle 
of a calendar year, where we’ve noted pressures in a particular 
division, pressures in a particular school, to provide more 
funding for things like English as a second language, for more 
EAs [educational assistants] and more classroom supports than 
we’ve had in the past. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is reflective of the priorities of the 
government in terms of education and will be reflected in terms 
of our priorities going forward as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the question was why this 
government is cutting funding for supports like English as an 
additional language. It’s this government’s record that causes a 
school division to send a flyer home with the kids talking about 
how their child will be affected. There will be fewer staff 
working directly in schools with students, less funds to support 
students with diverse needs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know that the vast majority of our population growth has 
been a result of immigration. Seventy-six per cent of the people 
coming to the province, Mr. Speaker, has been through 
immigration. We know that many of the young newcomers 
coming to Saskatchewan require help learning English. Yet this 
government, Mr. Speaker, is slashing funding for EAL [English 
as an additional language] supports by 29 per cent. That’ll put a 
significant strain on our already overstrained and 
under-resourced classrooms. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is to the Premier. How can he justify 
this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I think the flyer the member is 
referring to was sent out prior to the budget. Mr. Speaker, I 
think it’s important to note, first of all, the record of the 
government, well, to point out the record of the government in 
that particular school division. Here’s the record of the 
government. I think it’s around an 18 or 19 per cent enrolment 
increase there since 2007 — the Minister of Education may 
correct me on the exact number, but it’s around an 18 or 19 per 
cent increase in enrolment in that division — while operating 
funding from the government has gone up 23, 24 per cent. 
Operating dollars, well he . . . That’s the fact of the matter. It’s 
back to 2007. I invite him to consult the budgets of the province 
of Saskatchewan back to 2007. 
 
Funding for that particular division has increased greater than 
enrolment has increased, Mr. Speaker. Moreover the amount of 
capital investment, new schools and school repairs and 
maintenance in that particular school division is unprecedented, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s unprecedented. And in the budget that the 
member’s referring to is referenced more education capital, new 
schools, in that particular division. 

Mr. Speaker, there are more EAs today than there were 
previously under the previous government. There are classroom 
supports that we have continued to fund in the province of 
Saskatchewan, in the growing province of Saskatchewan. And 
as I’ve mentioned, unlike any government previous, including 
theirs, when pressures present themselves in a year — we’ve 
done this on a couple of occasions now — the government was 
there to provide additional support. 
 
That’s the record of the government. And it’s our intention to 
continue to support education at levels never seen in the history 
of the province, including under members opposite, so that we 
can continue to maintain the education advantage that we have 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the school division sent this piece 
of paper home with the students because they were already 
frustrated with the funding that has not been coming from this 
government, Mr. Speaker. And Saskatchewan people certainly 
won’t be happy with a 30 per cent reduction in English as an 
additional language supports. 
 
[10:30] 
 
It’s not just school divisions that are frustrated. The teachers in 
this province are frustrated, and rightfully so, Mr. Speaker. 
Yesterday the vice-president of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation had this to say: 
 

They talk in this budget about the increasing population. 
We’ve got a lot of diverse needs in the classroom, a lot of 
intensification of work, and teachers are trying to do the 
absolute best job they can to ensure student success. But 
they need the resources and the supports to do that.  

 
We have increasingly diverse needs in the classrooms. We have 
the intensification of work for teachers. We have desperately 
needed resources in classrooms in order to ensure student 
success. Yet this government, Mr. Speaker, cuts funding for 
English as an additional language by 30 per cent. What does the 
Premier have to say to the province’s teachers who will be 
incredibly frustrated by this short-sighted decision? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there’s been no cut to ESL 
[English as a second language] of 30 per cent. That’s certainly 
the information we have before us in the House. That needs to 
be clarified on the record. 
 
Secondly, with respect to this newsletter and with respect to 
Prairie Spirit, I invite the Hon. Leader of the Opposition of the 
NDP [New Democratic Party] to consider the facts. Since 2007 
this division has received a 27 per cent increase in operating 
funding, outpacing their enrolment growth, which was 18 per 
cent — 18 per cent enrolment growth — 27 per cent, up till 
yesterday, in increased operating funds. And with the Minister 
of Finance’s budget brought down yesterday, the numbers have 
only increased. 
 
For 2015-16, there will be . . . the number would actually be a 



March 19, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6613 

30.7 per cent increase since 2007 in operating funds for this 
division, while their enrolment has gone up 18 per cent. Mr. 
Speaker, these are the facts of the matter. And you could go 
through the province and to different school boards and find 
very similar numbers. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, school boards — quite rightly — across the 
province and other third parties will say, well we would like 
more. And we understand that in government. Mr. Speaker, this 
budget was about choices. We put a priority on Education and 
on Health and Social Services. Those ministries went up 1.9 per 
cent in total, but all the other ministries were cut on average a 
total of point six per cent. 
 
And that brought us, Mr. Speaker, to a balanced budget. A 
balanced budget that does not increase taxes on Saskatchewan 
people. A balanced budget that continues to build infrastructure 
in the province of Saskatchewan at a record level. A balanced 
budget that will keep Saskatchewan strong, that will maintain a 
AAA credit rating. And they don’t like any of this, Mr. Speaker, 
because these are the facts, and these are the reasons why the 
people of this province support the budget brought down 
yesterday by the Finance minister. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the choice that this government 
made was a 30 per cent cut in English as an additional language 
supports, making it more difficult for students to learn, making 
it more difficult for teachers to teach. That is the record. That is 
what we see from this government. 
 
The Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, Mr. Speaker, has 
concerns about the quality of school buildings. And I definitely 
share those concerns, especially since this government, Mr. 
Speaker, especially since this government is keeping the $1.5 
billion list of desperately needed repairs a secret. They won’t 
share that information. They say it’s a cabinet secret, Mr. 
Speaker. But here’s what the STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation] vice-president has to say yesterday: 
 

We know the school plants need a lot of work in a lot of 
areas in the province. But really the heart of education is 
the people inside those buildings, the teachers doing the 
jobs with the students, the support people working with 
students. It’s direct supports for teachers and students that 
we’re most concerned about.  

 
Yet this government cuts supports for English as an additional 
language, and it’s not adding any new educational assistants, 
Mr. Speaker. My question to the Premier: how on earth can he 
justify cutting direct supports for teachers, for students, despite 
the growing needs in our classrooms? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. How on earth can 
the Leader of the Opposition stand in his place and make stuff 
up? Here are the facts, Mr. Speaker. We have responded to the 
needs in school divisions by increasing operating funding by 31 
per cent. 
 
Here now is the section I’d like to invite the member to 

understand about the people in those schools. Because he’s 
right — that’s the most important part of the system. The 
regular teacher numbers in the province, 614 more under our 
government. Student support teachers, 200 more under our 
government. Psychologists for the classroom and the students, 
up 45 per cent. Speech language pathologists, up 24 per cent. 
Occupational therapists, up 53 per cent. Social workers, up 14 
per cent. 
 
And when it comes to our newcomer students, Mr. Speaker, I 
can inform the House and the member again, to clarify the 
record, this year, this year the number of English as an 
additional language teachers is up 8 per cent. These are the facts 
of the budget — not just this budget, but budgets previous. 
They don’t like the fact, Mr. Speaker, that we have invested 
unprecedented money in education in those human resources, in 
teachers, in classroom supports. We’re building nine joint-use 
schools in this budget, many other capital improvements and 
rural schools being built by this government. Mr. Speaker, the 
record on education of this Saskatchewan Party government far 
exceeds anything we ever saw after 16 long years of New 
Democratic government in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, we saw misinformation from the 
Corrections minister just recently, Mr. Speaker. And the 
Premier might not like what’s in the budget, and I can 
understand that, but here is the reality. Funding for EAL 
supports last year, $588,000. This year, $420,000, Mr. Speaker 
— a 30 per cent drop for EAL supports — making it more 
difficult for teachers and students in our classrooms. 
 
With the kind of windfall rate resource revenues that we’ve had 
in this province, Mr. Speaker, year after year after year, we 
should have some of the best resourced classrooms in the 
country, Mr. Speaker. We shouldn’t have schools propped up 
with two-by-fours as we do in Prairie Spirit. We shouldn’t have 
cuts to EAL when we know that there are more and more 
students who need those supports. We shouldn’t be hearing 
these stories, Mr. Speaker, but that’s what we are hearing from 
this government. It is ridiculous to not be adding educational 
assistants, and it is short-sighted and it’s wrong-headed 
absolutely to be cutting funding for EAL supports in the 
classroom. Teachers will say that. Parents will say that. 
Students will say that. I wish this government would say that 
too, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question is for this Premier. How much is his government 
spending on implementing lean into the education sector? Will 
he scrap that and properly support EAL supports? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve read down the list 
of classroom supports that have massively increased under the 
government. I have noted that the number of English as an 
additional language teachers in the province this year is up 8 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker. These are the facts of the record. 
 
But this budget was about choices. Mr. Speaker, we had 
unprecedented revenue shortfalls from oil. We had some other 
pressure points on the revenue side, and so this government 



6614 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2015 

made choices. 
 
It’s interesting to note what members opposite did when they 
were in government, when they were faced with a revenue 
challenge. They also made choices. They raised taxes 17 times. 
They raised the PST [provincial sales tax] three times. They 
raised income taxes twice. They raised business taxes four 
times. That doesn’t even count all the education property tax 
hikes because they weren’t properly funding education. 
 
They’d stopped investing in infrastructure. They closed 176 
schools when they had a revenue challenge. We’re building 
them. They closed 52 rural hospitals. They closed the Plains 
hospital. They closed 1,200 long-term care beds, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s the choice they made. And what happened as a result? It 
was a decade of decline from ’96 to ’06. We lost 30,000 people, 
many of them young people. 
 
Yesterday the population numbers are out. We’re up 120,000 
since this government got elected. These are the choices the 
NDP made. We chose to keep taxes low, to continue to build 
infrastructure including brand new schools, Mr. Speaker, and to 
continue to keep this province in leadership in the country. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, he can huff and he can puff, Mr. 
Speaker, but he needs to provide this answer to the parents and 
to the teachers in the province. Why did this government . . . 
And now he’s passing it off to the Education minister. Isn’t that 
typical? 
 
Why is this government dropping EAL supports from $588,000 
to $420,000? Why is he doing that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
privilege to rise in the House today, and I want to give some 
facts and I want to give some figures. Mr. Speaker, there has 
been an increase in each and every year to the overall operating 
grant for school divisions, over 31 per cent since November 
2007. Total funding for pre-K to 12 [pre-kindergarten to grade 
12] education in our province is now approximately $2 billion. 
This funding is over and above our almost $1 billion capital 
investment, over and above the $878 million that was a 
reduction to education property tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the total budget for education since 2007 has 
grown by 112 per cent. Mr. Speaker, in 2007 the education 
budget was $943 million. Mr. Speaker, this year, over 2 billion. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Quality of Care and Staffing Levels in Long-Term 
Care Homes 

 
Ms. Chartier: — We have heard story after story after story 
about a quality of seniors’ care that is far from adequate in this 
province. And the independent Provincial Ombudsman has 
heard those stories, too. One of the biggest complaints which 
the opposition and the Ombudsman are hearing is about 

extremely low staff-to-resident ratios. Just this week we had 
family members travel from Swift Current to raise concerns 
about inadequate staffing levels. Yesterday’s budget had just $1 
million for non-capital needs in seniors’ care facilities. To the 
minister: why so little? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this government has added over the last seven years 
nearly 800 full-time equivalents to long-term care staff in our 
integrated facilities, Mr. Speaker, all across this province. Mr. 
Speaker, that is for roughly the same number of residents. So in 
fact, each and every year the resident-to-staff ratio has 
improved under this government compared to where the 
members opposite left it when they were the government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget does invest $10 million in additional 
funding on top of what had already been previously announced, 
Mr. Speaker. Some of those dollars will go towards long-term 
care and improving the care that we provide to our residents, 
both with providing purposeful rounding, training for every 
single facility, every single health region in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve seen some positive benefits from that program 
already in some facilities. As well, Mr. Speaker, a dedicated 
dementia behavioural unit, both in Regina and Saskatoon. 
There’s capital dollars to begin that so that our health regions 
can address those really complex, challenging cases of 
dementia, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As well, we want to ensure that for the vast majority of seniors 
that do not live in long-term care, may never live in long-term 
care, Mr. Speaker, that we have the supports to provide for 
them in their own community. And this budget does include 
that in the HomeFirst/Quick Response, to expand that program 
and to eliminate the wait-lists when it comes to individualized 
funding for people that are on home care, that want to choose 
their own version of home care, whether that be through a 
community-based organization or whether that be through a 
private nursing organization, Mr. Speaker. So there is much in 
this budget for seniors of this province, Mr. Speaker, to help 
support them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Except if you’re a senior who lives in 
long-term care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government has spent $3 million on the Premier’s 
American lobbyist. It has spent $4 million on John Black’s 
travel and accommodation. It has handed a $5 million research 
grant to the failed American smart meter manufacturer, but it 
only has 1 million for seniors’ care. 
 
What about the $8.5 million of urgent request which this 
government rejected last year for desperately needed staff, for 
lifts, for tubs, for facility repairs? To the minister: where is the 
money for those urgent needs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 



March 19, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6615 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, we have identified $10 million that are in this budget 
on top of what already had been identified in last year’s budget 
that is going to continue forward. So that’s over $14.5 million, 
Mr. Speaker, directly related to seniors. 
 
I think it’s also important to note, Mr. Speaker, that the health 
budget of the province of Saskatchewan, nearly half of it — in 
fact I believe it is over half of it today — directly relates to 
seniors’ care and providing health care for seniors in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of the budget, the line item for our health 
regions, over 50 per cent increase since this government took 
office, Mr. Speaker: a significant increase, far greater than the 
rate of inflation, far greater than the rate of population growth, 
Mr. Speaker. This government is dedicated to not just the 
seniors, but all the citizens that we serve, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In terms of the equipment purchases, we did provide dollars to 
the Urgent Issues Action Fund, Mr. Speaker. I can report in 
terms of our life safety and critical equipment, that budget is 
$27.8 million, up four and a half million dollars. Regions are 
free to use that money. As well, block funding for equipment 
purchases is $11 million and regions are free to use that in 
long-term care, surgical, or wherever . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 

Climate Change 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Does the Environment minister believe that 
climate change is a myth that is based on witchcraft reasoning? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I would like to 
thank the member opposite for the question. With respect to 
lowering greenhouse gas emissions in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, this government’s actions and 
investments have been unprecedented: $70 million, Mr. 
Speaker, invested in Go Green funding and low-carbon 
innovation and technologies. Mr. Speaker, there’s been in 
excess of $5 billion in investment, public and private 
investment, in the province of Saskatchewan in low-carbon 
technologies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these investments include successes such as the 
carbon capture and storage project at Boundary dam 3 which is 
reducing those emissions by in excess of 90 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s equivalent to removing 250,000 vehicles off the 
road. Mr. Speaker, that also includes successes such as with 
SaskPower, and investments in SaskPower’s power supply right 
now, Mr. Speaker, is 25 per cent coming from renewable 
sources. 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Year after year after year this government has 

cut funding for climate change programs. Just since the 2013-14 
budget, climate change funding has almost been cut in half, so 
it’s no wonder why more and more people are starting to 
question whether this government even believes in climate 
change. After all, the newly minted Sask Party candidate for 
Stonebridge-Dakota says climate change is a myth based on, 
her words, witchcraft reasoning. 
 
To the Environment minister: does this government believe that 
climate change is a myth based on witchcraft reasoning, and is 
that why we’ve seen cut after cut to climate change programs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, there’s been controlled 
spending across the board, Mr. Speaker, across government. 
And with respect to climate change, there’s some controlled 
spending measures there that are as a result of reduced use of 
outside consultants, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government’s record when it comes to 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions in Saskatchewan is strong, 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned. It includes public and private 
investments such as a carbon capture and storage facility at 
Boundary dam 3. It includes SaskPower’s power supply coming 
25 per cent from renewable energy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is in contrast, this is in contrast to just not that 
long ago, Mr. Speaker, when a third of those present caucus 
members were a minister of this file, Mr. Speaker. And that was 
at a time when policy decisions were being made that caused 
the economy in this province to stagnate. People were leaving 
this province by the truckload, Mr. Speaker. All the while, 
greenhouse gas emissions increased by 70 per cent. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Cancellation of Move From Community-Training Residence 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, two days ago the 
Corrections minister was proudly touting this government’s 
plan to move an adult correctional facility into a Normanview 
neighbourhood, even though they didn’t consult one bit. The 
community was outraged, but the minister said the community 
just needed to hear “factual information.” Well it turns out it 
was actually the Corrections minister that didn’t have factual 
information. She said repeatedly that the lease on the current 
facility was ending, that the owner of the facility wasn’t 
interested in renewing the lease, and that offenders being 
moved into the residential neighbourhood were extremely low 
risk. Despite her saying all of those things very definitively, all 
of it was inaccurate. To the minister: how can she explain this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll repeat the 
words that I said yesterday. As soon as I became aware of the 
facts surrounding this particular move or initiative, I 
immediately asked our officials to cancel this move from the 
current community-training residence to Dales House, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m going to, you know . . . Proper community 
consultation is important, speaking . . . you know, answering 



6616 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2015 

the member’s question and comments. Of course they are. And 
we didn’t do a good enough job when we first started. We can 
do better and we will do better in the future. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — It’s just so disappointing, Mr. Speaker, 
and appalling that that government would push forward with a 
plan for which they had no consultation with the people as a 
government, with the people of the community, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s just so disappointing that that minister was unwilling to ask 
the questions within her own portfolio, is just so unwilling, Mr. 
Speaker, that anyone on that side is willing to do their 
homework. 
 
What we’re aware of, Mr. Speaker, is that renovations have 
been completed within that facility, Mr. Speaker, for this 
purpose. So not only did they not consult, Mr. Speaker, not only 
did they not know whether there was dangerous sexual 
offenders or violent offenders in that facility, Mr. Speaker, they 
proceeded with spending a whole bunch of money, Mr. 
Speaker. They finally have done the right thing and shelved the 
plan. My question to the minister: can you tell us about how 
much was spent on those renovations that’s now utter waste? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Mr. Speaker, after I was informed of the 
facts surrounding this particular move, I immediately asked the 
officials to cancel the move from the current CTR 
[community-training residence] to Dales House, Mr. Speaker, 
as soon as I became aware of the facts, Mr. Speaker. With 
respect to the cost, my understanding is that the only thing that 
has been done within current Dales House, or Dales House that 
is currently vacant, is painting, Mr. Speaker, and that’s what I 
know to date. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Opposition House Leader on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. McCall: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Please state your point of order. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Earlier in 
question period, the Premier used language that he ought to 
know was unparliamentary language in referring to the Leader 
of the Opposition. I would ask you to make a ruling on the use 
of the expression, “making stuff up,” which in point of fact, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve already had a minister of that Crown apologize 
for and withdraw that remark previously in the life of this 
government. So if you could please enlighten the House on that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Certainly I listened very closely to the debate that 
happened on the floor of this legislature, and certainly I saw 

information come forward that us on this side of the House have 
no basis or reason to believe that it is indeed factual. So it was 
part of the debate and I would urge the Speaker to rule that the 
point of order is not well taken. 
 
The Speaker: — I will review the tapes and the words to make 
a determination and come back to the House with a decision. 
 
Why is the minister on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — I’m requesting leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to introduce 
guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Legislative Assembly, I’d 
like to introduce a group of special guests sitting in the west 
gallery that are with us today. Sitting in the gallery we have 
more than 50 grade 8 students from Hillcrest Public School in 
Estevan, St. Michael School in Weyburn, and St. Augustine 
School in Wilcox. Can you give us all a wave there? 
 
These students are accompanied by their teachers: Cat 
Billesberger from Hillcrest, Joanne McLeod from St. Michael, 
and Bill Sherven from St. Augustine. They’re here today to 
participate in a program called A Day in the Legislative 
Assembly where they will learn about the province’s 
democratic governance system and have an opportunity to tour 
this beautiful building. This is a biannual event planned by the 
Provincial Capital Commission to welcome students and 
teachers from across the province to their capital, home of the 
seated government in Saskatchewan. 
 
I look forward to meeting with them this afternoon, sharing 
some of my experiences as an MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] and a minister, and I’ll be joined by the member 
opposite from Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to please join me in welcoming 
these guests to their Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 676 to 717. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 676 through 717. 
 
 



March 19, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6617 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to enter back into the budget debate. Certainly I hit the points 
yesterday, some of the very important ones where this budget 
really has failed Saskatchewan families, despite the fact that 
this government is spending more money than ever before, well 
over $14 billion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The members opposite want to get loud and start heckling, and I 
hear the member from his seat in the very back from Walsh 
Acres. It’s interesting that he wants to shout across the floor 
here today, Mr. Speaker, when he sat just as quiet as possible 
when he had a plan that he had rubber-stamped to have a 
correctional facility moved within his riding, Mr. Speaker. You 
know, he sat quietly until it was raised on the floor of this 
Assembly. So I’d suggest to that member, if he wants to start 
shouting across the floor of the Assembly, that’s fair game. 
That’s fair game. I’d urge him as well to start returning phone 
calls, to start speaking with his constituents and start standing 
up for the people of his riding, Mr. Speaker, but he can choose 
whatever approach he wants in this Chamber. 
 
What I would like to talk about is just the lost opportunity that 
has, you know, occurred again in this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
Well over $14 billion in spending and, you know, it just hasn’t 
made an impact into where it matters for Saskatchewan 
families, Mr. Speaker. You know, we laid out in advance of this 
budget very specific priorities that needed to be addressed, Mr. 
Speaker, in education, in health care, in seniors’ care, and these 
are all issues for which we just saw insignificant and inadequate 
investments from this government. 
 
We know, Mr. Speaker, that if we fail this current generation of 
students for example, that we limit their opportunity as 
individuals and we limit our potential as a province. So there 
should be no excuses, Mr. Speaker, within a big spending 
budget like this of over $14 billion to not make the investments 
that are needed into the classrooms here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. These are the kinds of things that we’ve been focused 
on. 
 
It’s been disappointing as well to see the government breaking 
the promises with Saskatchewan people. I think of the students 
that are impacted by the changes to the graduate retention 
program, Mr. Speaker, the tax credit. You know, these are 
students that have gone to school at a time where they have an 
extremely high cost of tuition — second highest in fact I believe 
in Canada, Mr. Speaker — high cost of housing. Students that 
have taken on borrowing, Mr. Speaker, many that are 
graduating, working hard throughout, graduating though with 
some debt, they were counting on the government to keep its 

commitment so that they could establish themselves as they 
make those steps, Mr. Speaker. So it’s unfortunate to see that in 
a budget of well over $14 billion that this government chose to 
take back from people like students, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s disappointing that this government has kicked out over 
6,000 seniors, middle-class seniors, from the seniors’ drug plan, 
Mr. Speaker, coming with it a significant cost for those seniors. 
And if you think about it, with a progressive income tax system, 
those seniors have paid into that program their entire working 
lives, Mr. Speaker, their entire working lives. They’re not 
getting something for nothing here, Mr. Speaker, as government 
may want to characterize. They actually very much have 
invested and paid into this program, and they deserve a 
government that will keep its commitments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I look at the active family benefit as well and, you know, this 
one here has been eliminated for households with an income 
being the threshold of over $60,000, Mr. Speaker. Well if you 
think about it, that accounts to . . . If you have two 
hard-working people making $30,000 each, Mr. Speaker, that 
active family benefit is now being clawed back from them, Mr. 
Speaker, is now being taken away from them. Well this issue in 
itself and that threshold just speaks to me, Mr. Speaker, in that 
this government really doesn’t get the affordability pressures 
that families are facing. So on many fronts, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
disappointed with what we see in this budget. 
 
I know on a local level, Mr. Speaker, within Regina Rosemont 
what people were looking for was something that would 
recognize that cost of living has been jacked up in a big way on 
far too many. They look to their power bills, Mr. Speaker, and 
the covering for, in many ways, the mismanagement and errors 
and waste of this government, Mr. Speaker, through that power 
bill and those increases, and we see it through many other 
measures with the cost of living. Now this budget doesn’t go 
any distance to make life more affordable. It actually makes it 
more expensive, Mr. Speaker, and it’s disappointing that 
government won’t recognize this important reality. 
 
I know throughout the constituency as well, we have many 
schools that are overcrowded and pressured, Mr. Speaker, 
which is why we need to see meaningful commitments to 
infrastructure, ones that are understood and are transparent and 
work directly with school boards. But that hasn’t been the 
approach of this government. The approach of this government 
has been to ignore working with school boards and with the 
education sector, Mr. Speaker. And you know, it’s caused 
certainly a failure for this government to understand the realities 
that are going on in classrooms. 
 
[11:00] 
 
Certainly we know they’ve also disrespected teachers and 
haven’t listened on that front, so what we have is a very strained 
environment in classrooms. What we have is a government 
who’s not a full partner in education, in fact is a poor partner in 
education, Mr. Speaker. And a result of that is that we have 
classrooms, Mr. Speaker, that are over capacity. We have 
insufficient resources where they matter. When we look at the 
growth within the province, something we should all champion 
and be proud of, Mr. Speaker, it’s also important for us to 
champion where those needed investments need to occur. 



6618 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2015 

Today there was a discussion about English as an additional 
language, Mr. Speaker. These are really important areas to 
support, Mr. Speaker. And if this government would identify 
the realities of today’s classrooms, would listen to partners in 
education like the teachers, like the school boards, they’d 
recognize that the plan of this government and approach of this 
government is insufficient on this front, just the same as they’re 
not enabling and supporting the needed supports and 
professionals within classrooms, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also know that within Rosemont, people definitely wanted to 
see action on seniors’ care. We’ve spoken in a broad sense 
about the crisis that’s occurring within seniors’ care in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, the inadequate action of this government 
to even identify and take that issue in the serious light that it 
should. We saw a couple of investments in this budget, some 
progress in home care, which is good. We have a distance to 
still go on that front, Mr. Speaker. We saw some dollars 
towards seniors’ care, but it wasn’t even sufficient dollars to 
ensure that the urgent issues that were identified by health 
regions over a year ago would be addressed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We see emergency rooms that I know are lined up, Mr. 
Speaker, and too many that are forced into hallways within our 
hospitals. That just doesn’t provide the dignity to patients that 
they deserve. 
 
I know Pioneer Village, Mr. Speaker, is just well past its useful 
life as a facility. It has some of the best workers within that 
facility, Mr. Speaker. It serves individuals and families from all 
over this province. It’s important provincial infrastructure and 
service to all of us, Mr. Speaker. Every one of our 
constituencies are impacted by this facility, Mr. Speaker, and 
it’s disappointed not to see any mention or any sort of a plan as 
to how and when that facility will be rebuilt. 
 
You know, if you go in there, it has issues with water leaking 
through the facility. It has issues with duct tape on floors. The 
facility is quite literally falling apart. And thank goodness for 
the exceptional workers throughout that facility, Mr. Speaker, in 
providing the best care they can provide, but the facility itself 
needs a commitment and a plan from this government to be 
rebuilt. 
 
We saw no action as well . . . We see a time where this 
government is spending big, record in fact, Mr. Speaker, over 
$14 billion, but we see government in our constituency actually 
taking back things like the rec room over at Regina Village, Mr. 
Speaker, something that was essential to those within that 
facility, something that provided quality of life, something that 
provided health, Mr. Speaker. And we see this government 
continue to just stand by those sorts of decisions where they’re 
taking, you know, a room like that back from those that live at 
Regina Village, something that just totally isn’t acceptable. 
 
We see no action from this government as it relates to the 
unsafe conditions that have been created on Dewdney Avenue, 
Mr. Speaker. It seems no recognition of the need to get those 
heavy-haul trucks off of Dewdney Avenue. And of course the 
long-term plan has to be, you know, a proper west bypass, but 
there needs to be immediate actions and urgent actions to get 
those trucks off the road and rerouted in an appropriate way. 
And you know, we’ve worked with community and, supported 

by our local councillor, I submitted proposals to government 
well over a year ago, but we see no recognition of this issue. It 
just simply is something that they’re dismissing. But it’s a 
massive safety issue that’s causing significant damage as well, 
Mr. Speaker, so I was disappointed not to see anything that 
front. 
 
I spoke yesterday to just where this budget didn’t hit the mark 
in education and health care and seniors’ care, making life more 
affordable for families, and how it just really missed the mark 
for families. 
 
I do want to just touch one last piece around the education 
portion, and that’s that boards right now are forced into a 
situation where they have significant shortfalls. We were 
quoting, I guess, today the shortfall that’s been identified by 
Prairie Spirit. They’ve communicated to their students and to 
their families the consequences of that: larger class sizes, fewer 
supports, lack of ability to support extra programs, lack of 
ability to ensure that students with diverse needs receive the 
supports that they need. 
 
But that’s not isolated to Prairie Spirit, Mr. Speaker. I know as I 
go across the province and meet with school boards, I know as I 
listen to the trustees across this province, I know as I chat with 
teachers across this province I hear about the conditions that are 
inadequate across the province. And when I speak with boards, 
what I continue to hear is that there are big shortfalls when it 
comes to the supports for learning funding, and that leaves 
boards shortchanged to the tune of millions and millions of 
millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker, each board. 
 
I know it’s significantly pronounced in our urban centres. I 
know that in Regina, for Regina Public and Regina Catholic, 
this is a big issue, Mr. Speaker. And we’re growing as a 
province. This provides exceptional opportunity, but if this 
government shortchanges education and creates shortfalls in our 
school boards, Mr. Speaker, it has an impact on students. 
 
I know the same to be true in my meetings with Saskatoon, both 
Saskatoon Public and Greater Saskatoon Catholic Schools, Mr. 
Speaker. They have massive shortfalls within the needed dollars 
around supports for learning, Mr. Speaker, and these are areas 
that quite simply the government needs to commit to. I know 
the same is true up through Prince Albert and through the Sask 
Rivers school board, Mr. Speaker — left with a big shortfall. 
And what this means is boards are left with very tough 
decisions. These are our leaders and educational leaders and 
trustees and teachers who want to see the best for students, who 
are committed in a common sense way to improve education, 
but their hands have been tied by this government with 
inadequate funding and big shortfalls from making that happen, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We would have liked to have seen the waste cut, Mr. Speaker, 
that we’ve identified. I spoke about that yesterday. We didn’t 
see any real action on that front. It’s unfortunate this 
government was unwilling to cut waste, Mr. Speaker, the tens 
of millions of dollars it continues to dole out for lean, its 
unprecedented amount of money that it doles out for 
consultants, Mr. Speaker, that the auditor actually says which 
haven’t, you know, had defined purpose, haven’t had 
objectives, haven’t had job descriptions. That’s not good 



March 19, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6619 

management, Mr. Speaker, and it’s fraught with the risk of 
wasting all sorts of money. 
 
We see the government continuing to be adamant, to go down 
this ideological, costly P3 [public-private partnership] route, 
Mr. Speaker, on all fronts, Mr. Speaker, basically denying 
common sense and denying any of the objective information 
around P3s on this front — the cost of them, Mr. Speaker, the 
impacts for the future. And what this government should be 
doing at this point in time is learning from circumstances in 
places like British Columbia, certainly Alberta as well and in 
Ontario where these just haven’t worked out well, Mr. Speaker. 
I know in the cases of Ontario and British Columbia, the 
auditors have weighed in and have identified actually billions of 
dollars of wasted taxpayers’ money as a result of this 
ideological pursuit of P3s, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we need infrastructure in this province, Mr. Speaker. We 
need it in a big way. But we need to make sure we get best 
value, best bang for our buck when we address that 
infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. So if we’re doing infrastructure in 
the way this government is, with wasting dollars along the way 
and shutting out local construction companies and contractors 
here in this province through that process, Mr. Speaker, which 
certainly P3s have the impact of doing, Mr. Speaker, then we’re 
really failing to provide that full benefit, economic benefit that 
we should get from infrastructure, or best value for taxpayers, 
Mr. Speaker. So we’d urge government to look at this in a 
different light and hopefully come to some sense on this front 
before they go further down the road of wasting more money in 
this ideological pursuit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’d also laid out in advance of the budget . . . We’ve been 
working on this front. We’ve been working with business 
leaders. We’ve been meeting with companies. And we’ve put 
forward legislation to improve procurement in this province. 
The government has just been far too slow on this front, Mr. 
Speaker. They first denied there was even an issue. Now their 
response is insufficient and slow. What companies deserve in 
this province is a fair shot, not some special deal but a fair shot, 
Mr. Speaker, in being a part of the infrastructure of this 
province. We know the economic benefits of that. We know 
these are the very companies that are investing in 
Saskatchewan, that are placing capital in Saskatchewan, that are 
hiring in Saskatchewan the very workers that are building their 
lives in Saskatchewan, paying taxes in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, and so it’s an area that needs to be addressed. They 
deserve a fair shot at procurement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also know that we need to do this through the lens of 
ensuring maximum value for taxpayers. And the simple, naive 
process of government right now doesn’t make that as its focus, 
Mr. Speaker, and it needs to be that focus. And in far too many, 
in far too many cases, Mr. Speaker, of infrastructure, we just 
don’t see the fair opportunity for Saskatchewan companies to 
engage on a level playing field. We know the consequences of 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I mentioned yesterday but, you know, an example of this 
would be the Swift Current long-term care P3, Mr. Speaker, 
where that thing is being built, Mr. Speaker, with Alberta rebar, 
Ontario mechanical, and Quebec steel, Mr. Speaker. And you 
know, now we hear some new awarding of contracts that also 

are to Quebec companies, Mr. Speaker, and you know, we don’t 
even have reciprocity with Quebec on the trade front, Mr. 
Speaker. So we need to level the playing field and provide a fair 
shot for Saskatchewan companies who have skin in the game, 
who are driving our economy. And this would allow us to be 
stronger as an economy as a whole. 
 
We didn’t see in this budget, and it doesn’t even necessarily 
need to be as a budgetary item, but what we don’t see as an item 
of important priority from this government is addressing the rail 
transportation issues, Mr. Speaker. And this is an important 
time for us to do so because when this economy, Mr. Speaker, 
once again is fired up on all cylinders, Mr. Speaker, it’s going 
to be critical that that system is able to perform. It’s going to be 
critical that it’s able to get farmers’ product to market, to get 
grain to market, Mr. Speaker, but also all of our manufactures, 
all of our potash, all of our goods, Mr. Speaker. And we know 
that that system is inadequate; we know that it’s failed to 
perform. And we know it’s something that needs real 
leadership, Mr. Speaker, and I’m disappointed just to see this 
not being resolved because this has a big economic impact to 
the future of Saskatchewan. And it’s not even a budgetary item 
that comes by way of cost, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also didn’t hear from this government . . . And you know, 
the melt is on. We recognize some of the flooding that was 
going on in Moose Jaw yesterday, very hard for residents there, 
Mr. Speaker. We know we have a saturated water table. We 
know that there’s pressures of high water all across this 
province, Mr. Speaker, but we just haven’t seen the leadership 
required to address the actual potential flooding and, more 
importantly, a water management strategy that’s preventative 
and addresses these pressures. 
 
There’s great concern right now with the growing Quill Lakes, 
Mr. Speaker, and the potential for them to breach the banks, but 
also the continued I guess growth of those lakes onto 
agricultural land, Mr. Speaker, and the impacts of such as well 
where they’re saline lakes, of course, Mr. Speaker, and have 
significant degrading impact onto agricultural land or other 
watersheds that they come in contact to. We know there’s high 
water and pressures all through the sort of the east central side 
of the province and all up north of Humboldt. There’s some 
very significant pressure points right now, Mr. Speaker, and we 
need to make sure we’re planning of course to mitigate against 
damage this year. But we need to take a better water 
management — preventative, proactive — approach as a 
province as a whole, and I personally was very disappointed to 
not see that there. 
 
You know, as we look across the province, it would be wrong 
not to identify the pressures on families and the need for child 
care, Mr. Speaker, accessible child care. It was disappointing 
that in this growing province this government chose to scrap its 
commitment to grow the number of child care spaces, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And you know, if you think about this and you want to . . . And 
if you think about the actual cost of doing so, Mr. Speaker — 
members can heckle all they want — but this is the same 
government, Mr. Speaker, that rammed forward to increase the 
number of MLAs by three, Mr. Speaker, increase the number of 
MLAs by three, a cost of almost $1 million a year, Mr. Speaker, 



6620 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2015 

moving forward. Something that we absolutely don’t need, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s no need for three more MLAs. But if you 
think of the cost of $1 million a year, that in itself is 250 new 
child care spaces, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[11:15] 
 
So it just speaks to a government that’s sort of lost their way, 
lost their focus, focus more on themselves, Mr. Speaker, maybe 
their partisan interests, and not focused on what really matters 
to Saskatchewan families. And that’s certainly where we’ll 
continue to have our focus, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I guess, you know, we’ve come through a pretty special, 
almost decade-long run of economic growth and boom, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve had record revenues. And it’s disappointing to 
many, Mr. Speaker, to see that, you know, through that period 
of time, that at the, you know, towards this 10-year period now, 
that we actually have higher debt as a result of choices of this 
government. We have no long-term savings plan established, no 
plan in sight, Mr. Speaker, on that front, to make sure we’re 
planning in a prudent way for the next generation as well, Mr. 
Speaker. And in fact, a rainy day fund that was depleted during 
the best days, Mr. Speaker, by this government — that was 
back in 2009 and 2010 — was well over $1 billion, I believe, 
over 1 billion, 1.3 billion, Mr. Speaker, now down to, at the end 
of this year, Mr. Speaker, almost just $200 million, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We certainly see, it seems, a bit of an overreliance on the 
Crown sector in this budget, which could be fraught with risks. 
When you look at pulling an extra $250 million out of the 
Crown sector, as this government is, Mr. Speaker, we have to 
remember that the Crowns are all of us. Crowns are our 
constituents. There’s one place, the place those revenues are 
coming, are the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. So this is 
one where, you know, Saskatchewan people are going to watch 
with some level of caution, but that’s a big increase to what this 
government is counting on out of the Crown corporations. 
 
So draining the rainy day fund again, did so last year; an 
increase in the utilization and reliance on the Crowns, Mr. 
Speaker; and big debt growth, Mr. Speaker. In fact if you look 
back to the debt of this government when it was elected in 
2011, it was just over $8 billion for the public debt that’s 
reported in the summary, Mr. Speaker. That debt has now 
increased to over $13 billion. That was just a few years, Mr. 
Speaker. So we’re talking about a $5 billion, $5 billion of debt 
growth, well over 60 per cent, Mr. Speaker, over a very short 
period of time. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, these are aspects which we need to pay 
attention to. Saskatchewan people are common sense when it 
comes to their finances. They’re common sense when they 
come to what they expect from their government on the 
financial side of the equation. They’re prudent, they’re 
responsible, and they expect, I think, Mr. Speaker, that through 
the best days, through record revenues, they expect their 
government to make improvements in the financial position of 
the province, not degrade it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this is something that is important for us to continue to 
observe, watching this government crank up the debt for 

Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, and it’s important for us to 
keep an eye on. And it’s important that as we come through 
periods of lower oil price that we plan in a better way, Mr. 
Speaker, to make sure we can fully capture the opportunities 
that will present themselves through progress and through 
development, Mr. Speaker, and make sure that the next time we 
are able to experience bounty and windfall, Mr. Speaker, that 
we have structures in place that allow us to improve our fiscal 
position, to put dollars away for the future, and allow us to 
make the meaningful improvements that’s required in the 
infrastructure of this province as well in the services for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
So with that being said, Mr. Speaker, I’ve entered into this 
debate yesterday and some time here today. It’s been a pleasure 
to do so. Certainly I’m disappointed, as are Saskatchewan 
families, with what’s been brought forward in this budget, a 
budget that’s spending in a record way — over $14 billion — 
but taking back from Saskatchewan families and asking them to 
pay more for less, Mr. Speaker. So at this point in time I won’t 
be supporting the budget, and we’ll be moving the following 
motion: 
 

That all the words after “that the Assembly” be deleted 
and the following be added: 
 
disagrees with the government for tabling a budget that 
increases spending to a record level but is full of waste and 
fails to deliver opportunities for young people, fairness 
and affordability for families, and dignity and security for 
seniors. 

 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I know this will be seconded, or I 
understand this will be seconded, I hope it will be seconded by 
the member from Saskatoon Nutana. And I look forward to her 
entry into this debate here today — always smart, always strong 
— and at this point, thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for Regina 
Rosemont, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That all words after “that the Assembly” be deleted and 
the following be added: 
 
disagrees with the government for tabling a budget that 
increases spending to a record level but is full of waste and 
fails to deliver opportunities for young people, fairness 
and affordability for families, and dignity and security for 
seniors. 

 
Why is the Premier on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave of the 
House to make a statement regarding a point of order put earlier 
in the day. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave to make a 
statement. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 



March 19, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6621 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Withdrawal of Remarks 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, thanks to members on both 
sides of the House for leave, and apologies for interrupting the 
member for Nutana. Mr. Speaker, upon reflection, the point of 
order raised by the House Leader opposite, the Opposition 
House Leader, with respect to that point of order, I would like 
to withdraw and apologize the remarks referenced to question 
period. 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to thank the Premier for his 
apology and withdrawal, and that resolves the matter. There 
will be no need for a decision. I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Mr. 
Wotherspoon.] 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
indeed I would like to second the motion that was made by my 
colleague from Regina Rosemont. And it’s always a bit of a 
difficulty for me to get up and speak after him since he gives 
such fine remarks and such a thorough review of a lot of the 
problems that we find in this particular budget that was just 
presented yesterday here to the House and to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Just at the outset, I want to thank the Premier for his words. It’s 
always appreciated when those kinds of things are dealt with 
reasonably. But at this point I’m going to focus my comments 
on the budget. 
 
It’s hard to believe, Mr. Speaker, that this is the fourth budget 
that I’ve had the opportunity to speak to. I can’t believe how 
time flies, and I think that’s a sign that, you know, we’re busy 
in this legislature doing the things that we need to do. And I 
think certainly as the official opposition, our role as always is to 
shine a light on the activities of this government, on the 
decisions made by this government, and certainly where our 
role is to reflect what we’re hearing from the voters in our 
constituencies and certainly the people in Saskatchewan around 
the province. Because we know a lot of people are already 
contacting our office with respect to concerns about this budget, 
and I’m going to be addressing a few of those today. 
 
Before I start though, I think it’s appropriate for me to give a 
few thank yous to the people that support me in my position as 
an MLA for Saskatoon Nutana; and first up, definitely my CAs 
[constituency assistant]. I have had two CAs over the course of 
this year. First of all, Deborah Aitken who is on maternity leave 
right now. She had a young son in November, so she’s taking 

time to be with her son. And in her absence I have the good 
fortune of having Mr. Cody Gieni keep the office running in my 
absence. And certainly he’s an incredibly capable person who 
has done a great job for me, and I always know he’s got my 
back and Deborah as well. So it’s always great when we have 
these solid constituency assistants who are dedicated to the 
people in our constituency and certainly to the work that we’re 
doing as MLAs. 
 
I also want to thank my provincial executive for my riding. 
Certainly Cary Schaefer who’s our president and Tim 
Hutchinson who has been a long-standing supporter and 
contributor to the hard work that we do as our constituency. 
 
We just had our annual fundraiser on the weekend. It was an 
Irish ceilidh. And we had a lot of fun, Mr. Speaker, and an art 
auction was a highly successful event. Lots of people came out 
to join in. And what really made me happy was the number of 
kids that showed up to dance. We even had the Leader of the 
Opposition doing the chicken dance with his two girls. So that’s 
always a joy to me. Perhaps Mr. Speaker might want to come 
next year and do the chicken dance with us. Oh he’s saying, no. 
So it’s really a lot of fun. We do the Virginia reel, and it’s an 
example of community. Mr. Speaker, don’t get me going on the 
actions for the chicken dance. We do have a good time there. 
 
And I think part of the thrill for me is when we have community 
events where people come of all generations. So we had at our 
dance, we had some great musicians. We also had some older 
couples who know the old dances like the polkas and the 
waltzes, but then we had the younger kids doing their thing too. 
And then we did a Virginia reel where, you know, in some 
places the arch that we used was a little wee person and a great 
big tall person, and it was just a lot of fun. So I think those 
kinds of events build community, and certainly I want to thank 
my executive and the good people from Saskatoon Nutana and 
Saskatoon Southeast as well who were very active and partners 
in that event. 
 
Finally I just want to say a shout-out to my friends and my 
family for their support. My two boys are thriving these days. 
My one son, I just found out yesterday, we were talking — he’s 
in Montreal — and he’s highly involved in a student protest at 
the University of Concordia. And so he’s planning a student 
action, day of action, and I know he’s really engaged in the 
political process there. He’s quite frustrated with the Liberal 
government of Quebec and their allegiances with the corporate 
world that he’s concerned about. So I’m very proud of him for 
being political and taking that stand as a young man, because 
his biggest frustration, Mr. Speaker, is that so many students are 
not willing to engage in the discussion. They’re scared. They’re 
worried. They don’t want to affect their studies, and so they’re 
not . . . He’s concerned about the future of democracy if people 
don’t take a stand and stand up for what they believe in. I’m 
very proud of him. 
 
My other son is off to New Zealand these days. And he is now 
hiking in southern New Zealand and sent some photos last night 
as well of beautiful terrain. He’s enjoying the youth. So I’m so 
proud of my two boys, and certainly I want to say thank you to 
my friends as well and all my family who support. I know my 
dad just wrote a letter to the Leader-Post the other day, the old 
farmer. And it was a blistering letter, Mr. Speaker, and he still 



6622 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2015 

is, he’s not pulling any punches. He’s very disappointed in the 
direction that agriculture’s going. And he wrote a letter to the 
editor of The StarPhoenix, at 88, that I think is such a good 
letter. So I’m very proud of my dad and his farm activism as 
well. 
 
So that keeps me going. That’s what sort of motivates me to 
continue to do the work that I do. And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, 
I’m so disappointed in what this government tabled for the 
people of Saskatchewan yesterday. 
 
We’ve been asking for, we’ve been looking for a number of 
things, but the three main things I think that we were hoping 
would be in this budget were this, Mr. Speaker: we’re looking 
for more opportunities for young people, for my children, for 
them to be able to come back to Saskatchewan and have a 
career, have the graduate retention program to rely on. All of 
those things. 
 
We were looking for affordability for families. And quite 
frankly, Mr. Speaker, this budget goes the other way and makes 
life way more unaffordable for families, which is really 
disappointing. 
 
We were also calling for dignity and security for seniors. In 
times of record revenues, Mr. Speaker, we have a government 
that still fails to recognize the crisis we have in seniors’ care. 
They’re not taking it seriously. They’re dismissing it, and 
they’re choosing instead to have this wasteful spending on other 
pet projects. 
 
So what did we get? What did we get in yesterday’s budget? 
Well first of all we see that this government has no shortage of 
revenues. The revenues keep coming in. Our non-renewable 
resource sectors are strong. Agriculture is strong. We know that 
both grain farmers and producers are doing very well. We know 
that communities are doing their part in paying their taxes and 
getting the job done. 
 
But what happens when this government gets higher revenues? 
We don’t know. We’re saying, where does all this money go? 
It’s certainly not going into the pockets of the families. What do 
we see here? Families are paying more and they’re getting less, 
Mr. Speaker. And that’s really hard for people with young 
families for sure. And we know that the cost of housing has 
gone up. We see utility costs going up, Mr. Speaker. We see 
food costs going up. And yet we see that we now have an 
income test for the active families benefit. I mean, that is such a 
regressive move. And really, the active families benefit 
could’ve been strengthened and bolstered, but this government 
chose to do the exact opposite and actually cut it pretty much in 
half. 
 
Having had two boys who were active in soccer and music 
lessons, Mr. Speaker, I mean, I was always fortunate enough I 
guess in my position to be able to do those extracurricular 
activities, but we know there are many, many families who 
can’t. And when you look at the income testing level that this 
government chose, we’re certainly going to have plenty of 
questions for the minister in committee about how they came to 
that determination that 60,000 was appropriate. 
 
[11:30] 

But I think if you look at some of the numbers when people are 
trying to pay for their home, trying to keep down two jobs if 
they’re fortunate in their family to be able to have both parents 
working, paying for child care, looking after all the needs of 
their kids, plus trying to get ahead a little bit, and then on top of 
that having this imposed upon them is a blow. It’s nothing less 
than that, Mr. Speaker, and we’re very disappointed in that. 
 
What else do we get? We get the walking back of the graduate 
retention program. As I said already, we’re getting calls from 
concerned people who were reliant on this program and had 
great need for it to help them get forward, and here we see it 
now being attached to the income tax program. Many of these 
students are still seeking positions of employment or gainful 
employment, and it just seems like a real sort of step backwards 
that we see in this budget. 
 
Now I guess what the question that this government didn’t ask 
is, what do families really need? What are they looking for? 
And we’ve been calling for some of these things but we see that 
instead . . . You know, we know that there’s an infrastructure 
deficit in hospitals and schools in this province, but instead of 
dealing with the deficit for the hospitals — there’s a $2.2 billion 
deficit — right now we get 27 million for that infrastructure 
deficit. That’s one-tenth of what’s required, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve called for but we did not get any relief for the highest 
ambulance fees in the country, Mr. Speaker. That’s something 
that terrifies people with sick children or with sick parents. This 
is an area that, you know, when you look at the overall scale of 
the budget, this is one area that we can’t understand why that 
this government didn’t take a look at it. We presented the case. 
We had a very strong case presented by some individuals in the 
province here, but they chose to ignore that. And indeed with 
the changes to the employment assistance benefit, we know the 
families that are being cut off from that are also going to be cut 
off from the coverage for ambulance services. So anyone with 
health issues, with children who are dealing with serious health 
issues, complex health issues, that’s going to be a real step 
backwards. 
 
What else do families need? Well we were asking for a simple 
one: more staff in senior care homes. We know what the deficit 
is. We continually see this government refusing to even put in 
minimum care standards and regulate them because we know 
that they just don’t want to deal with the deficit that exists in 
staffing. 
 
The urgent needs, we talk a lot about the urgent needs that the 
health care regions have identified in long-term care homes, the 
number of physical aids that are required or lifts and things like 
that, and also of course care aids, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so the failure to actually take these problems and address 
them head on is very concerning, and I think . . . We use the 
expression head in the sand, but it really is appropriate in this 
case because we don’t think this government is taking it 
seriously. 
 
Another thing we’ve been calling for and we don’t see is any 
reduction in class sizes or sort of a maximum cap on class sizes. 
School boards are struggling with this. Families are struggling 
with this. Teachers are struggling with this. And with the 



March 19, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6623 

complexities and the intensification of issues that the Leader of 
the Opposition raised today in terms of English as an additional 
language and other complex needs of today’s student bodies, 
Mr. Speaker, this is a problem. And this is something that we 
will continue to press this government on and shine a light on 
because they need to take it seriously. And I think at this point 
they’re just too happy to push it onto the school boards. 
 
The school boards are starting to push back, Mr. Speaker. I 
mean generally we understand school boards need to be 
appreciative of what government does, but at some point I think 
we’ve already started to see the breaking point for some school 
boards. And when they actually speak out, I think that’s 
something, Mr. Speaker. And I really wish this government 
would take note of that and acknowledge it and realize what it 
takes for a school board to actually do that. 
 
I have so many people come to me and say, I’d love to say 
something but I can’t because I’m worried about my job. I’m 
worried about the repercussions. And this is not an uncommon 
comment that I get, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another issue that we talk about — and we’ve been asking and 
asking; this is for many years now — is an increase in EAs. 
And I know there was some talk today about numbers and how 
those are happening. But it’s the funding for the EAs that I 
think is still not sufficient and needs to be addressed seriously. 
 
What else do families need? More child care spaces, Mr. 
Speaker. And again we see a stepping back and a pedalling back 
in this budget of the need for creating those spaces and making 
sure that there are staff that are available to actually work in 
those child care spaces. The wage levels for child care workers 
is abysmal, and when we think that we’re putting our most 
precious thing in daycare — our children, the most precious 
commodity we have — and we have situations where we can’t 
get people to work in daycares, there is a problem. And I think 
it’s an issue of priorization of values, and we see the misplaced 
priorities that this government has. 
 
We do see some stuff in this budget that we will continue to 
bring to the attention of the Assembly, and that’s under the 
heading I have of wasteful spending. So this is the misplaced 
priorities that we’ve been talking about, Mr. Speaker. 
Obviously top of our list is the whole John Black lean program 
where we have this American consultant who’s coming in and 
imposing a theology, basically, on the health care system that so 
many people have said, this is not working, this is not right. 
And the waste is incredible. 
 
We know we have a bloated administration in our health care 
system. We need that addressed, but this government is unable 
to take care of that problem. We have consultants charging 
more than $120 million a year and no record on the part of this 
government as to what the work is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I did a freedom of information request on one 
consultant that comes out of Regina here. They’ve done more 
than $35 million of work for this government over the last 
seven years. That’s a lot of money; it’s almost as much as the 
John Black lean contract. And every request for information 
that I got, they blacked out the statement of work that this 
company is doing. So we have no idea what this company is 

doing. We know that they got $35 million to do it. But it’s 
really difficult, as a member of the public, to not be able to 
access exactly what the contract was and why we’re spending 
$35 million for one company, one contractor here in Regina. 
 
There’s a . . . the ambulance . . . oh sorry, I’ve already talked 
about that one. 
 
The P3 rent-a-school scheme, I mean again we’ve highlighted 
in this Assembly the difficulties with that kind of process. And 
what concerns me most, having two young adult sons, is the 
fact that the debt that this government is incurring as a result of 
these P3 schemes, it’ll be . . . Probably the debt will be as much 
as the cost of the schools themselves, by the time it’s all done, 
because they’re pushing it off for 30 years. So who’s going to 
be dealing with this debt problem? It won’t be us; it’ll be our 
children. This is a generational form of debt, Mr. Speaker. And 
I think for a government that has as much money as this 
government has — record revenues, the most revenues of any 
budget in the history of our province — and yet they’re still 
needing to punt debt into the future on my children’s backs. I 
don’t appreciate that, Mr. Speaker, and I think a lot of people 
are going to find it very disturbing. 
 
We can’t get accountability on the process. We don’t know 
what SaskBuilds is up to; it’s kind of a mystery right now. I 
think if there’s . . . they’re floundering in terms of trying to get 
a plan together. We hear about these nine schools but . . . and 
certainly those are schools that were imposed on the 
communities. There wasn’t any consultation with the school 
boards. And so there’s a lot of concerns there about this whole 
scheme. 
 
Further to that and something that my colleague from Regina 
Rosemont has raised in the House, and in fact we’ve introduced 
legislation to deal with that, is the procurement policy that this 
government is adhering to right now. The one small example I 
can give of how this isn’t working is some colleagues of mine 
or friends of mine in the Big River area who have been doing 
tree planting, reforestation in the Big River area . . . which on a 
side note, reforestation was cut this year yesterday, and there 
was some young journalists here who were very concerned 
about that. 
 
But reforestation as it is, is now being . . . The tendering policy, 
the procurement policy is such that large, mega tree-planting 
companies are coming in and getting these contracts because 
they can lowball the price. But what we’re not getting is that 
sort of care and attention and I think the local flavour that my 
friend’s company brings to the table, and I think my colleague 
from Regina Rosemont has indicated that on a number of 
occasions. And certainly when we speak to that bill, we want 
transparency and we want that clarity of where’s the fairness. 
How do we ensure that the local people are getting jobs and that 
we’re protecting the folks from Saskatchewan as much as we 
are ensuring that the government is getting a good deal? It’s not 
just about the bottom line, Mr. Speaker, and that’s the flaw in 
this policy. 
 
I think for me the biggest concern, and this is one that may not 
get as much attention in the public because it deals with 
understanding the provincial finances . . . And certainly when I 
look at the budget and now with the change this year, I’m just 



6624 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2015 

barely keeping above water when I try to figure out exactly 
what all these numbers mean. But what I do understand, what I 
do understand, Mr. Speaker, is that, in spite of the shortage of 
almost $700 million this year from oil and gas revenues, this 
government has chosen to go into debt to the tune of 700 
million just in its general operations for the future. And that is 
something that really worries me. 
 
How can it be? How can it be that we have a government whose 
revenues have doubled in the last few years, that cannot put 
money away, a government that drains the rainy day fund — I 
think it’s called the Growth and Financial Security Fund — this 
is a government that is spending like drunken sailors, Mr. 
Speaker? And yet they can’t . . . They’re putting us further into 
debt. 
 
And I think what I want to share right now is just a blast from 
the past. I want to share something that’s in the Canadian 
Encyclopedia, but I will save that for a few minutes down the 
road. But I don’t want to forget, so I’ll remember to do that. 
 
Anyways, back to borrowing 700 million, that’s what reminds 
me of . . . The next step I guess I want to mention in terms of 
numbers was the Growth and Financial Security Fund. This is 
again, in a time of record revenues, we see this government still 
taking from the Growth and Financial Security Fund. It was 
1.35 billion at its height, and it’s now down to 200 million. 
What’s going on, Mr. Speaker? Again this government has 
record, record revenues, and they’re draining the Growth and 
Financial Security Fund. 
 
We see them pulling out the sale, privatization of our Crowns. 
We have the privatization of Information Services Corporation, 
a corporation that was making good money for the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan, paying into the general revenue. That revenue’s 
gone now, and now they’re taking the 107 million, I think it is, 
from that sale and using the privatization proceeds to manage 
their affairs. That’s not what we need to see from a government 
with record revenues. And we see the comments today in 
response to the budget from the potash corporations about their 
plan to take the money now instead of in the future. I mean so 
they’re grabbing money that should be saved for the future, and 
they’re spending money now that will be debt in the future. And 
I don’t think that shows any signs of a responsible government. 
And I’m sure people are going to start asking questions about 
this, and they already have on some of the programs. 
 
But on the larger scheme, I mean we can’t hide the fact that 
there’s debt. And it’s just, it’s the silliness of the Minister of 
Finance smiling and proudly pronouncing that this is a balanced 
budget. I mean the ridiculousness of it is beyond belief, Mr. 
Speaker. But I mean the people are paying attention. People are 
watching this and they’re starting to wonder where the money is 
going. 
 
Just to speak specifically on a couple of my areas of 
responsibility as a critic, I just want to talk a little bit about the 
environment, Mr. Speaker. In this budget alone we see a 6.3 per 
cent cut in climate change and of course that’s added up to the 
82 per cent overall. 
 
And earlier today I asked the Minister of the Environment . . . 
And we know that one of the new Sask Party candidates has 

printed an article about calling climate change witchcraft 
reasoning. I think that kind of language has got to be alarming 
to a lot of people in Saskatchewan who see the changes not only 
here in the province as a result of global warming, but also 
around the world. And when we see cities like São Paulo in 
Brazil, 2 million people with no fresh water; with the state of 
California and Phoenix, Arizona, and Las Vegas all dealing 
with no water, not a shortage of water but no water in the very 
near future, these are things that people are paying attention to. 
And when we see this kind of response from this government, 
there’s concerns. And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
something that as the Environment critic I do get a lot of 
comments on. 
 
We know that total spending on climate change since 2009 was 
$64 million. That’s about 4 per cent of the cost of the CCS 
[carbon capture and storage] project. And we know, Mr. 
Speaker, the CCS project is only going to deal with less than 2 
per cent of the emissions that this province produces. There’s 
nothing else on the table, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In terms of environmental protection, I mean the minister spoke 
the other day about how robust that program was. It’s down 30 
per cent this year — 1.7 million. And it was actually, it’s now 
only $34 million and it was 40 million in 2009. So we see a cut 
of $6 million just in environmental protection alone, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In 2009, the total expenses for the ministry was 200 million. It’s 
now $162 million. So we see a cut of $40 million overall from 
the budget. In 2009, staff was over 1,000. It’s now down to 866, 
so it’s about a 15 per cent cut in staff. We see no change or 
chapter for the climate change part of the new Environmental 
Code, something that I think three or four ministers have been 
working on since this government came into power. We still 
don’t see the chapter on climate change. We see no strategy for 
dealing with the serious drainage issues that I get calls on from 
across the province. So the only question we have left for this 
approach to the environment, Mr. Speaker, is, where did the 
money go? If they have so much money, why are they cutting 
$40 million from this particular ministry’s budget? We don’t 
know where it is. 
 
[11:45] 
 
In tourism, we see a cut of 11 per cent in the fairly small 
tourism budget. It’s down 1.73 million and it was at 16.172 
million. It’s now down to $14.442 million. Only question I 
have, Mr. Speaker, is, where did the money go? They have 
record revenues but we’re still seeing cuts to areas like 
environment, tourism, also Parks, Culture and Sport. 
 
We see a number of small cuts and I think some pundits were 
referring to this as a budget of a death by a thousand cuts. Well 
here we have a cut to the Provincial Capital Commission of 
$145,000, down 5 per cent. 
 
We also know there’s no further money for the Meewasin 
Valley Authority and, Mr. Speaker, that’s something where this 
government has completely dropped the ball. We see a beautiful 
part of Saskatchewan, an urban park in Saskatchewan that has 
been basically left in the lurch by this government. And we see 
the city of Saskatoon stepping up to the plate. We’ve seen some 



March 19, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6625 

federal funding, but the value for the dollar that that 
organization receives means they have to really shut down some 
of their operations and stop providing the services to the 
citizens of Saskatchewan that take advantage of that beautiful 
urban park. 
 
We see the community infrastructure fund being cut by 70 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker. That’s something that communities have 
relied on to build in their communities and a 70 per cent cut 
seems pretty harsh when you have record revenues. 
 
I talked a bit earlier about the active families benefit cut of 
approximately $6 million. That’s half, half of the people that 
were taking advantage of this cut or this tax break in order to 
make sure that their kids are getting the activity that they need 
and the cultural training that they need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do a lot of shows around the province with 
old-time music and every time we go to these schools, we ask 
the kids, how many of you want to learn these instruments? 
And of course they all want to learn the instruments. But when 
afterwards we ask, is there anyone teaching in this area, this 
kind of music or any kind of music, we find out that there just 
isn’t enough instructors and people available to teach. So that’s 
a sad thing. And if there’s no demand for lessons, then we’ll 
have less and less teachers as well. It’s kind of like a vicious 
circle. 
 
We’re ever hopeful. I guess maybe we’re optimists, but we 
were really hoping to see the reinstatement of the film 
employment tax credit. It’s kind of painful this year because we 
see the final, the end, the completion of the film employment 
tax credit in the budget. It’s now 100 per cent gone and so is our 
film industry, Mr. Speaker. We have a lot of people doing very 
good work in the province but, in terms of an industry, it’s been 
decimated. And we’re still hopeful at some point this 
government will see reason. 
 
And the new tax rebate for manufacturers and export remains to 
be seen, and we’ll certainly have questions for the minister and 
his staff on how this new rebate will help out the creative 
industries. We know that most creative industries don’t even 
have full-time employees, but rather they’re contractors; they 
work on multiple projects per year. And certainly individual 
artists and musicians don’t have staff. So we’re not exactly sure 
how that’s going to help the folks in the creative industries. 
 
Again with all these cuts to Parks, Culture and Sport and the 
fact that we have record revenues, record revenues and cuts to 
all these line ministries, I’m left with one question. Where did 
the money go? 
 
Same with agriculture. We’re going to look at agriculture. We 
see a number of cuts to crop insurance premiums. I know part 
of that is explained by the fact that premiums are lower, so that 
will help producers. But also AgriStability is down 6.4 per cent. 
Again the minister and his staff have explained that that’s in 
relation to an evening out of the federal funding that goes along 
with AgriStability. But even yesterday in the rotunda, Mr. 
Speaker, I was speaking to a farmer who’s concerned about 
AgriStability and the confusion around that. Nobody really 
knows what’s going on. So those are issues I think over and 
above the actual budgetary lines that we see in the budget itself. 

But in terms of agriculture, again in 2007-08 there were 518 
full-time equivalents in that ministry; this year, 392 — a 25 per 
cent cut in the services and the programs that have been 
provided to the people of Saskatchewan in the agriculture area. 
So again we have record revenues but we see a 25 per cent cut 
in the number of public servants that are providing services to 
the people. So with record revenues and all these cuts, where 
did the money go? We have to keep asking that question. We 
see a steady, gradual erosion, Mr. Speaker, of programs, 
services, staff. Where has the money gone? 
 
This government is going to spend a record amount of money 
this year, more than any other year, but families aren’t feeling 
the love, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is one of the concerns we see. We know this government 
could choose to do the right thing. They could choose to fix 
seniors’ care. They could choose to legislate and deal with the 
number of children in classrooms and make sure that the 
classroom sizes are responsible and reasonable and allow for 
learning. We know that they could choose to make life more 
affordable, but the sad part of it, Mr. Speaker, is that they 
choose not to. They have record revenues. They choose to go 
into further debt, and that’s something I think that’s very 
disappointing. 
 
Perhaps electioneering . . . I know there’s some comment in the 
pundits again today about whether or not is this an election 
budget. And so when we see this massive amount of 
infrastructure spending this year as a result of debt, people 
aren’t going to see the debt. They’re going to see the activity 
and think, oh isn’t this great. But I think people also know that 
when we have debt, it’s going to bind the hands of our kids and 
our kids’ generation, and that’s what concerns me about all of 
this punting of debt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We see a government that decides to keep spending on their 
favourite pet projects and, as a result, Saskatchewan families 
need to dig deeper in their own pockets for housing, for utilities. 
Seniors need to now make decisions regarding whether or not 
their medications should be purchased or whether they should 
buy food because again, the threshold for the seniors’ drug plan 
has been drastically lowered. 
 
Parents need to decide whether or not their kids can go into the 
sports programs that their children are interested in because of 
again an arbitrary limit placed on families of $60,000. 
 
So there’s certainly . . . It’s a disappointing budget, Mr. 
Speaker. Despite the fact that we are doing so well as a 
province, we don’t see people doing well. We don’t see families 
doing well. We don’t see seniors doing well. We don’t see 
students doing well. So I think again, and I know we say it a lot, 
but I think we have to keep asking this question, Mr. Speaker: 
where has the money gone? 
 
And so as a result of that, I am very honoured to be able to 
second the motion that my colleague made, and I would like to 
adjourn debate at this time . . . I just conclude my remarks, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Lloydminster. 
 



6626 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2015 

Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour and 
privilege to rise in the Assembly today to support the Minister 
of Finance and second our 2015-2016 budget, which is a 
balanced, fiscally responsible, and accountable summary 
budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to begin my remarks with a few 
acknowledgments. I have only been a member of this Assembly 
for a very short time, but I’ve quickly come to recognize and 
appreciate the valuable role my constituency assistant, Ms. 
Tracy Patterson, plays. I know she is back home in my 
constituency watching this, and I want to say thank you for all 
she does. She is an amazing and wonderful person who 
surprises me with her many talents and abilities. She does an 
outstanding job in handling the everyday tasks of answering 
phone calls, visitors to my offices, inquiries of constituents, and 
giving helpful and pleasant direction, all while keeping me in 
the loop and keeping my schedule organized and coordinated. 
Thank you, Tracy. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say thank you to my husband 
Kim and eight wonderful children who continue to be my rock 
and solid foundation of support. They continually encourage me 
and are there when called upon to take care of things back home 
that need to get done while I’m away, and they are always 
looking after one another even with their own busy lives at 
work and school. I know that all members of this Assembly can 
relate to the strength and support of family they need and get 
while doing their work as elected representatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the first budget that I have had the 
opportunity to take part in under the Saskatchewan Party 
government, and by looking at its fiscally responsible and 
accountable design, I know it won’t be the last one for me to 
participate in. I know the people of this province and I hope all 
members of this Assembly will support it. 
 
Keeping Saskatchewan strong, what a catchy and 
self-esteem-building motto for the people of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. Yesterday our Finance minister tabled a budget that 
definitely speaks to the strength of this province and the 
tenacity with which the people of Saskatchewan push forward, 
continue to work hard, and are committed to investing their 
lives and livelihoods in this province even during challenging 
times. Mr. Speaker, the 2015-2016 budget tabled yesterday 
shows this Saskatchewan Party government’s commitment to 
ensuring Saskatchewan remains strong, grows as a province and 
as a leader economically within Canada and on a global scale. 
 
But I must take this opportunity to reiterate important points 
made by the Finance minister because the response from the 
opposition left me wondering whether they were even in the 
room and listening. I don’t believe they were hard to follow or 
understand, so I will once again tell everyone in this Assembly 
the Saskatchewan Party government’s plan for keeping 
Saskatchewan strong: (1) keeping taxes low, (2) controlling 
operating spending, (3) continued investment in infrastructure, 
(4) creating new jobs, and (5) continuing to provide a balanced 
budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the government’s plan for keeping 
Saskatchewan strong, a hard-pressed reality for the opposition 
to grasp and understand as their record for 16 years did not 

show any of this. Their record left the economy weak: no jobs 
for our young people, an out-migration of many of our citizens. 
Investors took their businesses to other provinces. The people 
were paying higher taxes, and there was a full stop on 
infrastructure needs, leaving behind a huge deficit on multiple 
levels to be dealt with. The 16 years of NDP governance 
depleted our province in so many ways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the Saskatchewan Party took the reins in 
2007 we began seeing just the opposite. The people of 
Saskatchewan once again experienced hope and optimism, and 
in eight years I can certainly say, we’ve come a long way, baby. 
We have seen an extensive resurgence in our economy and our 
population, and this 2015-2016 budget will and has not let them 
down. Mr. Speaker, we will never go back to the way the NDP 
left this province. 
 
The investments that the Saskatchewan Party government has 
made in its people and its economy have placed our Premier 
and this province as a force to be reckoned with. Mr. Speaker, it 
is not an easy task to get a AAA rating as a province, but this 
government’s good public policy and leadership from an 
outstanding Premier has put our province in the driver’s seat, 
with many of the other provinces riding in the back seat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of the commitment by the Saskatchewan 
Party government to develop a strong growth plan and stick to 
it, I personally have seen and experienced the benefits of 
progress and prosperity in my community and constituency. 
Reduction of business taxes, SaskBuilds grants, and changes to 
regulations created a development boom on the Saskatchewan 
side of Lloydminster. 
 
Our city saw development of housing and commercial property 
in the past three years over and above anything they’ve ever 
seen. For three years now construction values in Lloydminster 
have reached or surpassed 180.4 million, which includes the 
largest construction values ever recorded in the city and 
totalling well over half a billion dollars of investment. 
 
I have lived in Lloydminster for 28 years on the Saskatchewan 
side and, I can assure you, under the NDP no development ever 
occurred on the Saskatchewan side of Lloydminster in their 
days of governance and leadership. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Party government, through their deregulation, 
lower taxes, and business incentives has allowed my 
community to grow and prosper like never before. 
 
[12:00] 
 
The Canadian Federation of Independent Business has even 
ranked Lloydminster as number two of the top 10 mid-sized 
Canadian entrepreneur communities and recognized it as a 
strong place for business and development opportunities. 
Development companies out of Calgary are looking at 
investment in the area, and oil and gas companies and farm 
implement dealers are expanding and investing in infrastructure 
on the Saskatchewan side of Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my own children saw this growth and career 
opportunity after leaving the province for a while and have 
come back to their home community to work and start their own 
successful business and careers. My daughter Nevada teaches 



March 19, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6627 

grade 11 and 12 biology and chemistry at the Lloydminster 
Comprehensive High School. My oldest son, Dr. Casey Young, 
is a radiologist working for the health region and has two of his 
own successful diagnostic imaging clinics, and my two sons, 
Dr. Chester Young and Dr. Riley Young, are practising 
dentistry. And I’m happy to say that this June my son Fraser 
will graduate from the University of Saskatchewan and also 
return as Dr. Fraser Young, participating in the Westlake Dental 
clinic in Lloydminster Saskatchewan. 
 
It may seem obvious, Mr. Speaker, but one of the sure signs of 
an entrepreneurial hot spot is the presence of a high 
concentration of entrepreneurs and a high business start-up rate, 
and that’s exactly what Lloydminster has. It is also important 
that business owners have high levels of optimism and success 
in their operations. Good public policy, supportive fair 
government taxation and regulatory policies, and business 
incentives is what this government gave to help create the 
success and growth of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the price of oil has affected our budget, but our 
government’s commitment to supporting families and 
communities across this province will not waiver in the 
2015-2016 budget despite this. We have a very diverse 
economy and can continue to rely on other commodities and 
investments to weather the storm and continue on the path of 
keeping Saskatchewan strong. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan 
Party’s growth plan for the province’s natural resources is to 
work to mitigate the affects of commodity swings. We can’t just 
rely on oil and gas. 
 
This year we are experiencing growth and strength in our 
mining and potash industry. As the Minister of Finance noted in 
his budget speech, the province is changing the way in which 
potash companies can claim capital expenditures as tax 
deductions. The deferring of these deductions will increase 
provincial potash revenues by 150 million this year alone and, 
with a broader review of the entire potash production tax 
regime, we should see a more consistent and ongoing increase 
of potash revenues in the future. Strong investments from our 
mining and potash industry tells us that they like the way we 
provide and support opportunities for business growth and 
development, and so they continue to work with us to bring 
strong revenues, jobs, and business to our province. 
 
Many of you may not have counted, but there are 13 potash 
mines in Saskatchewan. None of them were built under the 
NDP government. Following the 1975 election, and without 
mentioning a word of it in their campaign, the NDP government 
took steps to expropriate all of the potash mines by the end of 
1976. Since that time, international investors have been 
petrified of NDP government. Now that they are out of office, 
we have an expansion of Mosaic and a brand new potash mine 
at Jansen, Saskatchewan. This is a true mega project, as the 
Jansen mine is projected to produce more potash than all of the 
13 mines combined. Mr. Speaker, this would never have 
happened under an NDP government because of their past 
actions. 
 
I also want to point out, the valuable industry that began our 
province has seen its ups and downs but continues to surprise us 
when we need it most — our agriculture industry. Agriculture 
commodities and exports have held strong and remain 

encouraging: over 13.9 million in food exports alone this past 
year, and it shows no sign of slowing down. 
 
I was born and raised on a mixed farm in Saskatchewan. My 
parents still own the farm although it is strictly grain now. My 
father is 94 and my mom is 91, and if they had their way, I 
know they’d still be on the farm. But my five brothers continue 
to actively farm and manage the annual cycle of seeding, 
summerfallow, spraying, swathing, harvesting, and taking the 
grain to market. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many areas of my constituency are strong 
agriculture communities. The Lloydminster Exhibition 
Association hosts many agriculture events year-round with 
people traveling from all over the world to attend livestock and 
farm shows. That is why this government supported and 
invested in the construction and renovation of a modern 
exhibition facility that can now hold its own on the world stage. 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party government has been 
there to support our agriculture industry through thick and thin 
and will continue to do so with many of the initiatives and 
incentives put in place over the past eight years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been hard to watch the oil prices drop 
drastically, knowing the effect it would have on our budget, and 
admittedly it has created a challenge for us to find the revenues 
needed to support the people of Saskatchewan. But we should 
not negate the industry completely. Our Minister of Economy 
and this government has worked hard to develop a positive 
investment climate for oil and gas industry over the past few 
years and will continue to do so moving forward. 
 
Saskatchewan does remain one of the best places for oil and gas 
companies to invest. This is important to note, as the Fraser 
Institute’s annual global petroleum survey has ranked 
Saskatchewan as the number one place in Canada and third 
globally for oil and gas investment. The Lloydminster area 
alone saw 2014 December sales of $973,220 and $5.3 million in 
land sales just recently in February. This is a positive sign that 
this government is doing all the right things to keep and 
maintain the interest of oil and gas companies interested in 
investing and doing business in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the Minister of Finance stated in his budget 
speech yesterday, investing in the infrastructure of this province 
has been and will continue to be a priority for this government. 
The 2015-16 budget commits $3.3 billion in highways, schools, 
health facilities, and Crown sector capital. 
 
In 2007 the Saskatchewan Party inherited an astronomical 
infrastructure debt load from the NDP government. They had 
16 years to invest and support infrastructure needs in this 
province, but instead they took the quick and easy way out. 
They closed doors and shut down highway equipment 
operators. They closed schools. They closed hospitals. They 
closed long-term care homes and other health facilities across 
this province, and they stopped fixing holes and paving our 
highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we won’t do that to the good people of 
Saskatchewan. They deserve better, and we plan to give them 
better. You will see new schools where needed in high student 
population growth areas. You will see needed renovations and 



6628 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2015 

repairs where absolutely necessary in schools and health care 
facilities. You will see new hospitals and you will see highway 
construction and paving. But, Mr. Speaker, this commitment 
and activity for improved infrastructure needs in this province 
from the Saskatchewan Party government isn’t new. It’s just 
ongoing. 
 
I know this Assembly hears about the many new schools, 
hospitals, and health care facilities that have been built or are 
being built across our province. But just let me share with you 
some infrastructure investments the Saskatchewan Party 
government has already made in the last few years in my 
constituency alone. 
 
In health, 1 million to the Lloydminster Hospital for immediate 
structural and space deficiencies; 533,000 to the Lloydminster 
Hospital for a third operating room; 250,000 for the 
introduction of the Home First/Quick Response. In highways, 
28.5 million for paving of Highway 55; 5.1 million for 
resurfacing Highway 3; 4.1 million for repaving Highway 17. In 
education, 5.4 for a new École St. Thomas Elementary school; 
7.4 million for a new College Park elementary school; and 6 
million for the Hillmond Central high school gym replacement. 
 
In social services, $866,703 for five units to the Lloydminster 
senior Métis housing; 11,033 for the Lloydminster affordable 
home ownership program; 350,000 for seven units to Habitat 
for Humanity; and 770,000 for a five-unit condominium 
complex to the Headstart program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, delaying or stopping spending on infrastructure 
like the NDP did does not fix the problems and most certainly 
would cost the taxpayers of this province more in the long run. 
With the highest credit rating in North America and low interest 
rates right now, it is the best opportunity to borrow what is 
needed to get the work done. As part of this investment, we will 
assure the taxpayers of this province good, prudent fiscal 
management by setting aside revenues each year to make our 
payments on the borrowed dollars. We do not want to leave our 
future generations with any debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, investment in our future generations is a high 
priority of this government as well, and the 2015-2016 budget 
most certainly assures us of that. The Saskatchewan Party 
government recognized the need for more physicians, nurses, 
and front-line care workers in this province and decided to do 
something about it. They began recruiting more nurses, more 
specialists, and more physicians. They put in place an 
educational and assessment program for foreign physicians to 
assure the people of this province that they are receiving quality 
health care. More importantly, this government increased 
medical and nursing seats at our universities so that we can 
retain our very own brightest and best physicians and nurses. 
I’m happy to say my community of Lloydminster just recently 
received four more of these newly licensed physicians. 
 
Mr. Speaker, education and job creation for our young people 
are valuable and important investments made by this 
government and will continue to be a priority. The Minister of 
Finance highlighted in his budget speech the continued 
investment of adult basic education seats and other training to 
keep our skilled labour force strong. With a growing population 
and strong industry and business growth, we need to have a 

vibrant and growing workforce that we can rely on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, finally just as I wrap up my comments, I 
understand someone from the opposition tried to give the 
Minister of Finance a shoe during his pre-budget media scrum 
the other day. I was told it was an older, somewhat shiny shoe 
on the outside with most of the sole cut out of the bottom. I am 
now certain, Mr. Speaker, that the shoe belongs to the 
opposition member from Regina Rosemont because based on 
his comments about the budget yesterday and today, it’s the 
same old tired NDP shoe with only a rough shine and a bit of 
spit polish on the outside, empty and smelly on the inside, and 
certainly no sole left for the people of Saskatchewan. He can 
keep it. We have two brand new ones right full of great plans 
and a vision where they are headed and fresh soles to give to the 
people of Saskatchewan. We are ready to dance and show our 
great moves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party government has a vision 
and a plan for this province, and we are on a mission to 
accomplish that by 2020. We will never, never let the people of 
Saskatchewan down like the NDP did. We are committed and 
driven to keeping Saskatchewan strong. Mr. Speaker, I am 
proud and honoured to second the motion to accept this 
government’s 2015-2016 budget as presented by the Minister of 
Finance on March 18th, 2015, and I further ask all members of 
this Assembly to vote in favour of the 2015-2016 tabled budget. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:15.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6607 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6607 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6607 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6607 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6607 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6608 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6608 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6608 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6616 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6608 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6608 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6608 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6609 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6609 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Agriculture Safety Week 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6609 
 Legacy of Roughrider Chief Executive Officer 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6610 
 International Day of the Francophonie 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6610 
 International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6610 
 Saskatchewan High Schools Athletic Association Fosters Love of Sport 
  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6611 
 Peacock Junior Boys Win Championship Title 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6611 
 Moose Jaw Resident in Design Competition Finals 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6611 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Funding for Education 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6611 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6611 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6614 
 Quality of Care and Staffing Levels in Long-Term Care Homes 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6614 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6614 
 Climate Change 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6615 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6615 
 Cancellation of Move From Community-Training Residence 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6615 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6615 
POINT OF ORDER 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6616 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6616 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6616 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6616 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY (BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6617 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6621 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6626 
STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Withdrawal of Remarks 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6621 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6621 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


