






















































Hansard: May 12, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 63A  TUESDAY, MAY 12, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7197 
 May 12, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a privilege and an honour to introduce a 
number of people seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. Seated in 
the front row are a number of people from Saskatoon and area, 
and I’m going to begin by introducing, first of all, David 
Buckingham and his wife, Karen — if they would give us wave 
— secondly, Jim and Kathy Buckingham, and of course 
David’s niece, Jennifer and Patrick McGillicky. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we’re honoured to have David Buckingham 
here in the legislature. David is born and raised in 
Saskatchewan on a farm near Shellbrook, has had the 
opportunity to grow up with three brothers, three older brothers, 
so that must have been a chore in itself. I’m sure all the chores 
on the farm got done with four boys. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, David entered the business, the car-hauling 
industry, an entrepreneur, has been in that business for 36 years. 
And an interesting statistic, because he’s crossed Canada-wide 
in terms of the business, probably the number of autos that he 
has transported across Canada is about 70,000 from Ontario to 
British Columbia. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour to recognize somebody like 
David who has served as the mayor of Borden. And of course 
during 2013, at a very difficult time, David took the lead as a 
key individual in dealing with the flooding. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the most important part though of David’s 
next career is going to be the MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] for Saskatoon Westview because David won the 
nomination for the Saskatchewan Party in March of 2015 and 
will be the next MLA representing Saskatoon Westview. I’d ask 
all members to join me in welcoming David. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I also would like to 
welcome a gentleman from Prince Albert, Mr. Joe Hargrave. 
Joe and his wife, Fran, of course have lived in Prince Albert for 
the last 14, where Joe has been the owner and operator of 
Riverside Auto Group and prior to that served with BMO [Bank 
of Montreal] for 20 years. Mr. Speaker, in 2007 Joe expanded 
his business. He has another location in Melfort, and of course 
he created Hyundai in Prince Albert — a very successful 
entrepreneur, a member of the Rotary Club, Board of Police 
Commissioners for Prince Albert, and a board member for the 
Prince Albert and District Communities Futures. And, Mr. 
Speaker, most importantly he will also be the next MLA for 
Prince Albert Carlton, and I ask all members to welcome him. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Government 
Relations. 
 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have two groups to introduce to you today. First of all, to you 
and through you to the Assembly, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, some individuals from the 
Saskatchewan public service. 
 
These public servants are part of the new 57-member civil 
service response team that are going to support the 
government’s response in an emergency situation. These 
members, in addition to their regular jobs in the civil service, 
have taken a three-week training program at our emergency 
management and fire safety base in Prince Albert, and they’re 
now ready to be called up to help and deploy to support our 
emergency management staff and rapid responders as they 
respond to emergencies around the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, joining us today — I’d ask them to please stand 
and be acknowledged as I introduce you — we have from 
Regina, Donna Ackerman who’s with the Public Service 
Commission. We have from Saskatoon, Desiree Hesson with 
the Ministry of Justice. We have from Regina, Trevor Leggett 
with the Ministry of Justice, and from Yorkton, Kevin Ross 
with the Ministry of Justice. 
 
They’re also accompanied today by our Fire Commissioner and 
Executive Director of Emergency Management Duane McKay, 
Deputy Commissioner Rick Galloway, and Logistics 
Emergency Services Officer Nolan Carter. 
 
This is a very unique program in the country, Mr. Speaker, as I 
mentioned. These public servants are dedicating, besides their 
regular full-time jobs in the civil service, have taken the training 
and are there to be deployed when needed. We want to 
recognize that today. There’s four of them here today. The 
entire group is 57 members, and we’re just delighted with the 
way this program’s turning out. You’re going to hear more 
about this unique program in just a few minutes during member 
statements, but for now, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members of 
this Assembly to please give them a warm welcome and a thank 
you in their Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I’d also like to introduce, in 
the west gallery we have a group of 58 grade 4, 5, and 6 
students from the great community of Eston. They’re here to 
tour the Assembly. I look forward to an opportunity to chat with 
them a little bit later. They’re also accompanied by chaperones: 
Jocelyn Nash, Collin Fox, Jenna Johnston, Chris Toth, Lily St. 
John, Cary Andrew, Marla Colley, Marty Wagner, Fay Krenz, 
and also teachers Tawna Hansen, Kylie Lorenzen, and all 
members of the Assembly will recognize the last name, Jodi 
Bjornerud. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before I finish I would just like to point out that 
Eston, the great community of Eston is also home to the 
Minister of the Economy, and I mentioned Jodi is the daughter 
of the MLA from Melville-Saltcoats. And a number of other 
members, I believe, want to welcome the students to the 
Assembly today to the point that our Whip today asked me if he 
was the only member of the Assembly to not welcome them 
today. So, Mr. Speaker, I know a few more people would like to 
welcome them; the Minister of the Economy is especially 
anxious. Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to please give them a 



7198 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2015 

warm welcome to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to join with the minister opposite in welcoming, in 
your gallery, our fire commissioner, Mr. Duane McKay, along 
with the civil servant emergency response team that’s been 
established. Certainly we’re ever so thankful day in, day out for 
the leadership and work of Fire Commissioner McKay and the 
civil servants across Saskatchewan, in conjunction with 
volunteers and hard-working people across our province, that 
keep us safe and respond to emergencies. So whether it be in 
wake of a fire or whether it’s flooding or wind or other 
circumstances, we know that these individuals will respond on 
our behalf in communities all across Saskatchewan to ensure 
the safety and well-being of communities. So I ask all members 
to join with me in welcoming Fire Commissioner McKay and 
the new emergency response team. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, it’s my honour to welcome some 
very important guests from Thom Collegiate here today, Mr. 
Speaker, my former high school. Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to 
welcome two teachers here today that are also friends, Ms. 
Karen Howard and Mr. Brian Gatin. 
 
Ms. Karen Howard is an incredible teacher of course, but she’s 
also incredible in other aspects of her life. She was part of the 
Olympic team that went over for the Sochi Olympics and was a 
figure skating judge. Her husband, Brad, is an awesome 
principal as well in Regina. Her daughters are incredible 
students and basketball players, one daughter Kabree at the 
University of Saskatchewan and the other daughter Kylee at 
Brandon. I know my wife briefly got to know these girls as they 
were growing up, and I believe played a . . . coached them a 
little bit back in their elementary days. But it’s a real honour to 
welcome Karen to her Assembly. 
 
It’s also an honour to welcome Mr. Brian Gatin to his 
Assembly. His mother was here last week and I think I made a 
crack about his poor fishing and hunting skills, Mr. Speaker. 
You know, I guess to be fair, I have seen him catch a fish, Mr. 
Speaker, and he is an exceptional cook and teacher and coach 
and a good friend, Mr. Speaker. So they’re here today with 
students from Thom Collegiate. I had a brief chance to meet 
with them before the proceedings. I’ve had the chance to meet 
with them over at the school as well, and certainly they have 
good thoughts and ideas about how to better our province. 
 
But I’d also like to mention about Thom Collegiate, Mr. 
Speaker. This is a school that punches well above its weight. 
It’s recently raised $17,000 for cancer under the leadership of 
Ms. Bahia, Ms. Back, Ms. Gates. The principal, Mr. Steciuk, I 
know played a part in I think taking a pie, Mr. Speaker, and the 
SRC [student representative council] played a very important 
leadership role. So I know that it’s my honour to welcome these 
teachers, these students, and also to recognize the exceptional 
leadership of so many at Thom Collegiate. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

would like to join with the member from Rosetown-Elrose and 
welcome the school group from Eston to the legislature here 
this afternoon. It’s a very special occasion when the groups 
from Eston come down because there’s so few opportunities for 
them to travel as far as they did to come to the legislature here 
this afternoon. 
 
I wanted to single out one young student in that group, Quintin 
King. He is the younger brother of my son’s partner and 
girlfriend, and so Quintin, wave to everybody here so they 
know you. There you go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you would know, there’s a long-standing 
tradition around this Assembly that when a school group comes 
down, that the member that represents them provides them with 
some ice cream. So I’m sure the member from Rosetown will 
be happy to do that, and given the size of the group, I might 
have to chip in a few bucks myself. But I look forward to doing 
that. So, Mr. Speaker, I as well would like to welcome the 
students from Eston and their chaperones here this afternoon. 
And I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming 
them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, you 
might have noticed, and I‘ve got an introduction here, but you 
might have noticed that it’s going to take three or four of us to 
introduce the Eston group here today. On the east side of the 
province, it takes one MLA to represent a constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to welcome, along with the Minister of 
Municipal Government and the Minister of the Economy, but I 
want to single out one person that’s very special to me, my 
daughter Jodi, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Jodi has taken part in 
the SSTI [Saskatchewan Social Sciences Teachers’ Institute on 
Parliamentary Democracy] group of teachers that has come in 
here and got quite familiar how the legislature works in here 
and then has brought a number of school groups in.  
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what I’m most grateful about is that she’s 
provided me with three great grandchildren that I’m very, very 
proud of. And of course I’m very biased, Mr. Speaker, but very 
much appreciate what she’s done for me and just ask all 
members to welcome her here today. It might be my last 
opportunity. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with my 
colleagues as well to extend an invitation to the Eston group 
and, more specifically, my nephew Chris Toth who’s now a 
pastor in the community of Eston, and his daughter Julia and 
son Peter who are here with them as well. It’s unfortunate that 
Chris had to move his family to the west side to actually get a 
trip to the Legislative Building, so thank you so much. But I’d 
like to extend a welcome. And just one little note here: my 
nephew’s son Peter, while he’s quite young, is quite an avid 
cook. I’m amazed that a person that young would really enjoy 
being in the kitchen. So Peter, keep it up. And to all the students 
that are here, welcome to your Legislative Assembly. 
 



May 12, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7199 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I know, Mr. 
Speaker, I have no ties to the Eston group, but I certainly hope 
they will be enjoying their ice cream that the member from 
Rosetown-Elrose will be providing a little later on today. 
 
But what I’d like to do, Mr. Speaker, is introduce a long-time 
friend, a university friend of mine that’s seated in your gallery, 
Terry Martin. He’s somewhat behind the clock. If Terry would 
just give us a little bit of a wave. We met many years ago at the 
University of Saskatchewan, College of Agriculture, and have 
been friends ever since. Terry’s now retired from his 
employment and has become quite a world traveller. In fact, 
Mr. Speaker, probably a half a year may go by before I hear 
from him, and then one day my phone will ring and I see it’s 
Terry. And instead of saying hello, I just ask him now, so where 
did you just get back from, and he’s always had some adventure 
to relate to me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But besides travelling, doing a lot of travelling, Mr. Speaker, 
Terry’s very involved in charitable organizations that do a lot of 
good work in Third World countries, and he supports them in a 
very generous manner. And I think I wouldn’t be mistaking it if 
I would point out one charity in particular. It’s a charity 
headquartered in Vancouver called First Steps. The mission of 
First Steps is to provide food and nutrition to the starving 
children of North Korea, and Terry’s very involved with that 
organization. As a matter of fact, he travelled a few years back 
with the CEO [chief executive officer] of that organization to 
North Korea to see the good work that Terry and a number of 
very generous supporters from Canada and around the world are 
providing for those starving children in North Korea. So I 
would ask members of the legislature to welcome Terry Martin 
to his legislature. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to introduce to you and through the rest of the Assembly, seated 
in your gallery, three individuals associated with the Regina 
Symphony Orchestra. I would like to ask them to stand and be 
acknowledged. 
 
Today we have with us Tanya Derksen, the new executive 
director of the RSO [Regina Symphony Orchestra]. And seated 
beside Tanya is Jason Zhao, Chair of the RSO board of 
governors. And beside Jason is my good friend Kama Leier — 
hi, Kama — and Kama is a member of the board of governors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the RSO is Canada’s longest continuously 
performing symphony orchestra. It was established in 1908. 
They perform the masterworks series. They also do the 
Shumiatcher pops series. The RSO provides fine entertainment 
for the city of Regina and its residents. 
 
This year instead of doing a concert in the park, the RSO is 
moving their concert out to the Motherwell Homestead. So 
we’re encouraging everyone to pack a picnic basket, take a 

blanket, lots of bug spray, and go out to the Motherwell 
Homestead, enjoy the setting, and enjoy the RSO. We are so 
proud of them. Thank you very much for joining us today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Parks, Culture 
and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the 
member opposite, with my member here, and also welcome the 
group from the Regina Symphony Orchestra. I’ve had the 
opportunity on a few occasions this year to see the symphony 
and to be very proud of them. They’re absolutely an awesome 
group and this is amazing. 
 
I look forward to meeting again with them. I’ve met with all of 
them at one point or another here and I’m looking forward to 
more meetings because they’re a vibrant part of the culture of 
Saskatchewan. So I’d like everybody to join me in welcoming 
them to their Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join in the 
welcome of these representatives of the oldest continuing 
symphony in Canada. We often forget about how this Regina 
Symphony has the longest history of any symphony in Canada. 
So a special welcome to Tanya Derksen who is the new 
executive director. She’s already added a whole number of very 
positive aspects to the work. And Jason Zhao is the Chair of the 
board — they have a big task — and then also Kama Leier who 
is part of that board. It’s a very great honour to welcome you 
here. And as you know, I’ve been many, many years as a 
subscriber and I will continue to do that until I can no longer get 
to the Centre of the Arts. So thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to just 
follow up with a couple of introductions here to their 
Legislative Assembly. But first to a couple of constituents from 
Rosthern-Shellbrook, Jim and Kathy Buckingham who are 
down with Jim’s brother David. David and Jim grew up on the 
Cameo Buckingham Road — we’ve named a road after the 
Buckingham family in the rural community of Cameo — along 
with their other brothers. But I would like to welcome David 
and Karen but especially Jim and Kathy Buckingham to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, another constituent 
from the community of Parkside is Mr. Terry Martin. Terry and 
my late mother-in-law were first cousins, Mr. Speaker. They 
were formidable bridge opponents as they attended tournaments 
all over Western Canada and North America. Mr. Speaker, as 
the member from Cupar had noted, Terry travels a lot and is 
involved in a number of world charitable organizations. Mr. 
Speaker, he’s also involved . . . He’s an accomplished pianist, 
and he is involved in a number of local fundraisers and 
charities, Mr. Speaker, lending his talents to a number of 
different fundraisers in the community. So when he’s not 
travelling, Terry is a constituent of Rosthern-Shellbrook, and 
I’d like to also welcome him to his Legislative Assembly. 
 



7200 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2015 

The Speaker: — Well I’d like to take the opportunity to 
welcome the last three people in the House in the east gallery 
that were not introduced. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition in support of better schools here in Saskatchewan. We 
know that far too many of our classrooms are overcrowded and 
under-resourced and the Sask Party government has eliminated 
hundreds of educational assistant positions and that students 
often don’t get the one-on-one attention they need. And we 
know that the condition of many of our schools are rundown, 
unsafe, or uninspected, and this government refuses to release 
the information on the $1.5 billion of known repairs that are 
needed in our schools, and that the government’s plan to rent 
schools from private corporations is expensive and reckless. 
And none of this is acceptable given the record revenues this 
government has had over the last eight years. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
call on this government to immediately stop ignoring 
schools and start prioritizing students by capping 
classroom sizes, increasing support for students, and 
developing a transparent plan to build and repair our 
schools. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. Homelessness is a major problem in La Ronge and 
other parts of the North and is getting worse. Shelter is a basic 
need for everyone but under this government it’s getting harder 
and harder for people to find adequate housing, especially 
families, seniors, women and children who face abusive 
situations. The problem is getting worse because of the rising 
level of poverty, skyrocketing home ownership costs. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the Saskatchewan 
government to build a homeless shelter in the Lac la 
Ronge area to meet the needs of addressing homelessness 
in the Lac la Ronge area. 

 
It’s signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
proud to stand in my place today to present a petition on behalf 
of the many communities in the Far North and the Athabasca 
Basin. And this petition, Mr. Speaker, relates to calling for an 
increase in services for the Internet. And, Mr. Speaker, there is 
an incredible program called Mathletics that needs a good, solid 

Internet service support. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

To cause the provincial government to extend fibre optic 
cable to Points North and beyond and provide better 
Internet service in northern communities and provide 
equal learning opportunities for all of Saskatchewan’s 
children, and that includes the Far North [Mr. Speaker]. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 
from Fond-du-Lac, from Stony Rapids, Uranium City, Black 
Lake, and many other communities all throughout that region. 
And I’m very proud to present the petition as it relates to 
Internet services for the Far North. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition in support of adequate treatment for 
children living with autism. The petitioners point out, Mr. 
Speaker, that children ages zero to 19 diagnosed with autism 
spectrum disorder living in Saskatchewan do not have access to 
adequate treatment options through the public health system. 
 
They point out that current research indicates that early 
behavioural intervention for children with autism has best 
outcomes at about 20 to 40 hours per week. They point out that 
other Canadian provinces fund autism treatment services 
through the public system at levels of up to approximately 
$60,000 per child. They point out that Government of British 
Columbia provides individualized funding to families of autistic 
children in the amount of $22,000 per child age zero to six and 
6,000 per child age 6 to 18. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
provide families who have children diagnosed with autism 
spectrum disorder with individualized funding of a 
minimum of $22,000 per year per child age zero to six and 
a minimum of $6,000 per year for children age 7 to 18 in 
order to access adequate treatment services for their child 
through either the public or the private sector. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there are about 240 signatures on this petition 
from folks in Saskatoon, Hudson Bay, Viscount, Porcupine 
Plain, Yellow Quill, Englefeld, Humboldt, Watson, Muenster, 
Weekes, Spalding, Melfort, Southey, Yellow Creek, Luseland, 
Quill Lake, LeRoy, Naicam, Regina, St. Gregor, and Langham. 
I might add too that there’s 170 more signatures that weren’t 
done correctly so I won’t be submitting them, but I wanted to 
put it on the public record for the folks who are wondering what 
happened to their signatures. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Well it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition in support of maintaining hyperbaric services 
at the Moose Jaw Hospital: 



May 12, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7201 

In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners 
respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly require 
the Sask Party government to reverse its decision to scrap 
the hyperbaric chamber and to instead ensure that this 
service continues to be provided in the new Moose Jaw 
Hospital. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by good citizens of the city 
of Moose Jaw. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition in 
support of retaining Yarrow Youth Farm. As we know, the 
government has closed Yarrow Youth Farm, and they’ve 
created an open-custody wing in Kilburn Hall which is a secure 
custody unit for youth considered a greater risk to their 
communities. The provincial Advocate for Children and Youth 
has declared he can’t endorse such a rationalization as low-risk 
teens could be influenced and pressured by close proximity to 
high-risk youth who may be involved in serious crimes or 
gangs. Also, Mr. Speaker, Kilburn Hall is a more institutional 
environment that can intimidate and alienate teens that have 
committed minor offences. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the government to keep 
Yarrow Youth Farm open to ensure a caring home 
environment for youth who have committed minor 
offences and provide support to help these young people 
redirect their lives by setting more positive goals. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by individuals from Saskatoon. I so 
submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 

Ile-a-la-Crosse Nurse Honoured 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to rise in my place today, International Nurses Day, to 
recognize a remarkable nurse from my riding. Last week 
Marlene Thompson received the Nora Armstrong Award for 
Excellence in Mentorship from the Saskatchewan Registered 
Nurses’ Association. This award recognizes the investment of 
time, energy, and personal knowledge by nurse mentors in 
assisting new nurses in their professional growth and 
development. 
 
Marlene Thompson lives in Buffalo Narrows, and she is the 
patient care coordinator at the St. Joseph’s Health Centre in her 
hometown of Ile-a-la-Crosse. She began her first three years of 
work at St. Paul’s Hospital in Saskatoon as a CNA [certified 
nursing assistant] and then worked as an RN [registered nurse] 
for seven years. In 2006 she began working as an RN at St. 
Joseph’s Hospital until 2014 when she became the patient care 
coordinator. 

Marlene was nominated and recommended by her colleagues 
for her competence as an RN, her communication skills which 
includes the use of Cree, her compassion and her dedication to 
her patients, her excellent clinical teaching, and her 
professionalism, along with her humility. All these attributes 
make her an excellent role model for the nursing program who 
come to work and are mentored at St. Joseph’s. Marlene is a 
lifelong learner and continues her own professional 
development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate Marlene Thompson for her 
excellent work as a mentor and ask all members to join me in 
sending out our thanks for her commitment and dedication to 
serving the needs of northern residents. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 

Holodomor Statue Dedication 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, this morning I had the 
honour of joining Lieutenant Governor Vaughn Solomon 
Schofield, Senator Raynell Andreychuk, Mayor Michael 
Fougere, Ukrainian Canadian Congress National President Paul 
Grod, members of the clergy, and many members of our 
Ukrainian community to officially dedicate a statue that will 
serve as a reminder of the Holodomor. The bronze figure is 
located in Regina’s Wascana Park and is an exact copy of the 
Kiev statue entitled Bitter Memories of Childhood by sculptor 
Petro Drozdowsky. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an estimated seven to ten million Ukrainians 
became victims of Holodomor, a man-made famine that 
devastated Ukraine during the early 1930s. It is estimated that at 
one point people were dying at a rate of over 24,000 people a 
day. Mr. Speaker, that’s the combined population of the cities 
of Weyburn and North Battleford. 
 
The statue features a sombre peasant girl holding a wheat sheaf, 
and it will serve as a reminder of the devastation caused by the 
Holodomor. It will honour the memory of those who perished 
and the legacy of those who survived, including many who 
found refuge in Saskatchewan. 
 
Approximately 130,000 people in Saskatchewan are of 
Ukrainian descent, and projections indicate that last year we 
welcomed nearly 500 immigrants from Ukraine to 
Saskatchewan. So, Mr. Speaker, I encourage all members here 
to take time to visit the new statue as we honour the many 
people of Ukrainian descent who lost loved ones during 
Holodomor. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Upcoming Pride Events 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Every year, June is 
filled with pride events right across Saskatchewan. Pride 
parades are happening on May 30th in Moose Jaw, June 5th in 
Swift Current, June 13th in Saskatoon, and June 20th in Regina. 
 
Queen City Pride has asked that June be declared Gender and 



7202 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2015 

Sexual Diversity Celebration Month in Saskatchewan. They 
write: 
 

Although today lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and 
queer (LGBTQ) individuals enjoy most of the same rights 
and privileges as heterosexual or traditionally-gendered 
individuals, as a group, LGBTQ individuals are still 
working for equality and non-discrimination in the 
workplace, in business dealings, and in various other 
areas. We are lucky to live in a province which has 
embraced and continues to embrace diversity, regardless 
of gender or sexual identity, culture, ethnicity, or beliefs. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I always like to attend the Welcome to the 
Gaybourhood event only a few blocks from my office, this year 
on June 10th, and this year Saskatoon Pride is celebrating the 
15th anniversary of the Pride parade. It should be a good one. 
 
I’d like to end with a quote from Danny Papadatos, Chair of the 
Saskatoon Diversity Network: 
 

Pride is our opportunity to stand, walk, march and 
celebrate the people we were and are as an LGBTQ 
community united. We plan to bring you a festival that not 
only has you proud to be part of our community but gives 
you a chance to say: Look At Us Now. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to get out in their communities 
and take in some pride events, promote diversity, and celebrate 
Saskatchewan’s LGBTQ community. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Civil Service Response Team 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to inform the Assembly of the establishment of a 
57-member civil service reserve team that will assist our 
government’s emergency management and fire services branch 
to respond to emergency situations. This new 57-member team 
is comprised of current provincial government and Crown 
corporation employees from across this province. 
 
We know that being ready to respond to emergencies can 
protect lives and property. Our EMFS [emergency management 
and fire safety] staff and rapid responders do an amazing job of 
assisting municipalities in preparing for and during 
emergencies. The new CSRT [civil service response team] will 
be there to support their efforts at any time and anywhere in this 
province. These responders will help municipalities with 
everything from installing sandbags, creating fire barriers, 
equipment deployment, and assisting with evacuations. 
 
All 57 members of the CSRT recently completed three weeks of 
training at the emergency management and fire services base in 
Prince Albert, and several members have already put their 
training into practice. Some were deployed to my own 
constituency to assist in suppressing the wildfires in the North 
Battleford area. Their efforts helped to save lives and property, 
and we are so thankful for their support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the CSRT is a unique approach to building our 
province’s emergency response capacity. It reflects the nature 

of Saskatchewan people to pitch in and lend a hand when others 
are in need. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Lloydminster. 
 

National Nursing Week 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, May 
11th to the 17th is National Nursing Week. We set aside this 
time to recognize the outstanding contributions that nurses 
make to our health care system and to Saskatchewan residents. 
As part of these celebrations, we also recognize International 
Nurses Day on May 12th and Licensed Practical Nurses Day on 
May 13th. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re fortunate in Saskatchewan to have many 
dedicated registered nurses, nurse practitioners, registered 
psychiatric nurses, and licensed practical nurses. They are 
extremely important members of health care teams and often go 
above and beyond to serve their communities and make their 
patients receive the best care possible. Anyone who has come 
into contact with the health system can attest to their expert, 
compassionate, front-line care on some of people’s worst days. 
Nurses are also using their expertise in administration, 
education policy, and research in diverse health care settings 
across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I offer my heartfelt appreciation to all nurses 
currently working in Saskatchewan’s health care system for 
their hard work and commitment to patient- and family-centred 
care. I would ask all members join me to extend a warm 
welcome to nurses coming to the province as well as to new 
Saskatchewan nursing graduates. They’re making a real 
difference to our health system and to the lives of Saskatchewan 
residents. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 

Supporting Women in Leadership Roles 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last week 
was proclaimed Women Entrepreneurs Week in Saskatchewan. 
I also had the opportunity to host an event with the Sask Party 
candidate for Regina University and my colleague, the Minister 
Responsible for Corrections and Policing. With over 185 
attendees, it was an excellent opportunity to talk about the 
values of women in leadership. We had a future leadership 
speaker, Lilly Jedlic, 10 years old. Mr. Speaker, Lilly rocked 
the house. 
 
Working in a number of different fields, women bring their 
strong talents to the table. In education two very successful 
women stand out: Vianne Timmons, president and 
vice-chancellor of the U of R [University of Regina]; Kathleen 
McNutt, incoming executive director of Johnson-Shoyama 
Graduate School of Public Policy. And in the arts, I would like 
to recognize Tanya Derksen, the new executive director for the 
Regina Symphony. 
 
In business we have Nadia Williamson, a business owner and 
2015 Chair of Regina Chamber of Commerce; and Cathy 
Warner who runs the audit practice in private and public affairs 



May 12, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7203 

for Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba as a managing partner at 
Deloitte and also sits on the Canadian Deloitte board; and 
scientists such as Margaret-Anne Hodges, incoming president 
of the Association of Professional Engineers and Geoscientists 
of Saskatchewan. All these women keep Saskatchewan strong. 
 
Our government supports organizations like Women 
Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan dedicated to helping women 
achieve their entrepreneurial and business goals. Mr. Speaker, 
our government supports women in leadership roles. That is 
how we keep Saskatchewan strong. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Taxation in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House 
we’ve worked hard to keep taxes low and to ensure that families 
keep more of their money in their own pockets. About a year 
ago, the members opposite were really trying to convince the 
public that the government was making the cost of living 
unbearable. Well, Mr. Speaker, you don’t hear much of that 
anymore because maybe that’s because the Minister of Finance 
brought in another budget with no tax increases. 
 
This past weekend, the Canadian Federation of Independent 
Business released a breakdown of taxes and living expenses 
between Manitoba and Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 
CFIB [Canadian Federation of Independent Business] found 
that a dual-income family of five earning 75,000 per year will 
pay $3,311 more in personal income tax than the same family 
living in Saskatchewan. That same Manitoba family will also 
pay twice as much PST [provincial sales tax]. The amount of 
basic personal income tax to be exempted is still at 9,130 in 
Manitoba while Saskatchewan’s amount is closer to $16,000. 
Elliot Sims of the CFIB, Manitoba’s director, even says, and I 
quote, “The Manitoba advantage is our province’s biggest 
myth.” 
 
Well I’ll tell you what’s not a myth, Mr. Speaker. We believe in 
keeping more money in the people’s pocket in Saskatchewan. 
This government believes in keeping our economy strong, and 
this government believes that we can never go back to the days 
of the NDP and their tax-and-spend policies. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Buy Local Day Legislation 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this Assembly passed The Buy 
Local Day Act on March 12th. My question is for the Premier. 
When will the government finally agree to bring it to committee 
so it can pass the final stages and become law? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, in the very obvious absence 
of the Premier, I’ll be happy to take these questions. Local 

business in Saskatchewan is indeed big business in our 
province. We support the fact that people should be encouraged 
to shop locally, and the benefits to Saskatchewan communities 
are very real, no doubt about it. However, Mr. Speaker, we 
don’t think, given the common sense that people here in 
Saskatchewan have, we don’t think that there is legislation that 
is needed to encourage Saskatchewan people to shop locally, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this is ridiculous. First we have 
this government. They say, oh, the legislation isn’t needed. 
That’s their line, Mr. Speaker. The Health minister was 
probably saying those types of things as he beaks from his 
chair. Then they say, oh, we need this legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
They actually voted in support of this legislation. The minister 
went out to the rotunda and said that they support it. And now 
we have this minister flip-flop here, Mr. Speaker, being all 
wishy-washy, unwilling to pass this legislation — absolutely 
unacceptable — willing to let it die. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen for six straight months, six months, 
small business optimism has dropped in our province. We have 
the second worst small business optimism in the entire country. 
The Buy Local Day Act won’t fix that, but it is an important, 
common sense step that this legislature can take to help boost 
local businesses. 
 
The Canadian Federation of Independent Business supports this 
legislation, wants to see it passed. The Broadway Business 
Improvement District supports this legislation and wants to see 
it passed. A network of small businesses and local ownership 
through Sasklandia want to see this passed, and many other 
business owners want to see this passed. My question to the 
Premier: when will this government . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this government voted in favour 
of this legislation. We had a standing vote in this Assembly. 
The minister went and spoke out in favour of it in the rotunda, 
and now we see them allowing it to die on the papers. Mr. 
Speaker, my question to the Premier: when will this bill go to 
committee, and will he guarantee that it’s passed by the end of 
this week? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Given the fact that the Premier still isn’t 
here, I’d be happy to answer that question on behalf of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite likes to suggest that 
somehow he knows something about business here in 
Saskatchewan but yet, when they had the opportunity to be 
government of this province, they lost money outside of this 
province on venture after venture after venture. Whether it was 
Guyana where they would invest Saskatchewan taxpayers’ 
money, they weren’t buying anything local there, Mr. Speaker. 
They weren’t buying anything local in Guyana other than losing 



7204 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2015 

taxpayers’ money. 
 
When they were in Atlanta, Georgia, Mr. Speaker, what were 
they doing? They were spending more of Saskatchewan’s 
money, not in Saskatchewan but in Atlanta, Mr. Speaker. When 
they were in Manitoba spending money, there was nothing 
being spent in Saskatchewan, lots being spent in Manitoba, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition likes to suggest he knows a little 
bit about running a business here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. Well maybe he can explain venture after venture 
where they lost money outside of this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, this government needs to explain 
something here. When this legislation came before the House, 
every Sask Party government member that was present, Mr. 
Speaker, stood in the Assembly and supported it. My question 
to the Premier: what has changed? Why are they not supporting 
this legislation? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, when you give second 
reading approval, all that really means is in principle that you’re 
prepared to get their support for it. What the government is 
prepared to do, Mr. Speaker, is at some point in the near future, 
we’ll be making a proclamation around five Saskatchewan 
hearings in this province which will do the common sense thing 
here in the province and encourage people to invest and to buy 
locally here in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s one other thing that I would like to add 
about when it comes to running a business here in 
Saskatchewan. The NDP are so good at running a business here 
in Saskatchewan, they put on fundraising dinners here in the 
province. The only problem is, if you look at their last return, 
all of their fundraising activities around those kinds of things, 
they lost $12,000. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Provision of Hyperbaric Treatments 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, an absolutely pathetic answer 
from a senior member of that government, absolutely pathetic. 
 
Sandra Hassler had a double mastectomy and reconstructive 
surgery in 2011. She says: 
 

As a former hyperbaric patient, I can attest to how very 
important this treatment is. After major surgery, I 
developed three large and non-healing wounds. The hole 
in my abdomen was so large you could have dropped two 
golf balls into it. Hyperbaric treatment was key in healing 
that mess in six weeks. As a nurse with extensive 
experience in wound care, I can verify that it would have 
taken many months and repeated surgeries to remove 
dying tissue and grafting new in its place, if infection 
didn’t kill me first. 

 

My question to the Premier: what does he have to say to Sandra 
Hassler today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the absence 
of the Premier, I’ll take that question on behalf of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we certainly know 
that the hyperbaric unit has been used for a number of different 
reasons over the last 16 or 17 years that it’s been in operation, 
and problem wounds has been a large part of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can confirm what I did say publicly is that the 
hyperbaric unit will remain in the province of Saskatchewan. 
We did look at a number of options, a number of options, Mr. 
Speaker, including providing this service out of province. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we’re not going to do that, although keep in mind 
that some people, regardless of where it would be located in the 
province of Saskatchewan, some people may have to go out of 
the province for hyperbaric services just as they did under the 
NDP when we did have a hyperbaric unit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can say that we are looking at options, and I look 
forward to making a decision around that in the coming weeks 
and providing to the public where in fact that service will be 
provided going forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, Sandra needed 30 hyperbaric 
treatments, five days a week for six weeks, with each treatment 
lasting two hours. Here’s what else she says: 
 

For Mr. Michelson to say it’s no big deal shows a 
complete ignorance of what health care professionals do 
and why they do it. My dressing changes were anywhere 
from three to seven days a week, and the specialized 
products I needed cost hundreds of dollars per day and 
hours of nursing time. Hyperbarics actually save Sask 
Health a great deal of money. Tell that to the government 
bean-counters. For anyone who actually cares about 
people, tell them hyperbaric saves lives and alleviates 
needless suffering. 

 
My question to the Premier: does he recognize that the 
hyperbaric chamber provides critical medical treatment, or will 
he continue to downplay its importance to justify sticking it in a 
little private storefront somewhere? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I do want to be very clear that members on this side of 
the House, most particularly the members from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow and Moose Jaw North have been very active on this 
file and have been very engaged in terms of bringing forward 
the concerns of their constituents I think, and I thank them for 
their work on this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, certainly we know in terms of the numbers of 
times that it has been used, I think that in terms of the usage 



May 12, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7205 

over the last year, the numbers are down. But despite that fact, 
Mr. Speaker, we do want to see this chamber being able to 
provide services into the future for the people of this province. 
We are looking at where that location will be to best serve the 
people of this province going forward, Mr. Speaker, looking at 
a number of different options, as I said before. You know, I 
think that we’ll certainly be in a position over the coming weeks 
to make that decision and make that announcement and be able 
to provide for the public how in fact that service will be 
provided in the province now that it has been determined that 
the chamber will continue to be in use for many years to come. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if the Moose Jaw members have 
been so active in advocating for this for their city, why is the 
minister now at the 11th hour trying to scribble a plan on the 
back of a cocktail napkin? It simply doesn’t make any sense, 
Mr. Speaker, and we know we’ve had silence and we’ve had 
ineffective representation by those two Moose Jaw members. 
 
Dr. Amies, Mr. Speaker, is the foremost expert on hyperbaric 
treatment in our province. He says the hyperbaric chamber 
should be in a hospital. Virginia Mason Hospital in Seattle, a 
place this government is very fond of, Mr. Speaker, they’ve sent 
about 800 health care workers to Virginia Mason to tour. They 
have a hyperbaric chamber. Where is it, Mr. Speaker? In the 
hospital. In fact Virginia Mason brags about having a 24-hour 
critical care hyperbaric chamber in their hospital. And they 
brag, Mr. Speaker, “the only Northwest facility with physicians 
who are board certified in hyperbaric medicine.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the Premier won’t listen to experts like Dr. 
Amies, perhaps he will listen and look at the example of his 
beloved Virginia Mason Hospital and see that this type of 
treatment should be provided in the hospital. My question to the 
Premier: why won’t he follow that lead and put it in the new 
Moose Jaw Hospital? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I would just remind the 
public and remind members of the House that for a long time in 
this province there were two members on the government side 
of the House from Moose Jaw. It was when the NDP were the 
government. And what did the city of Moose Jaw get out of 
that? They didn’t get a new hospital. That took place under this 
government, Mr. Speaker. They didn’t get an MRI [magnetic 
resonance imaging] to serve the people of southern 
Saskatchewan in that new hospital. That’s thanks to the works 
of the two members on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 
members of this caucus, that we’re seeing that work being done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a variety of opinions on this in terms of 
where is the best place to put this chamber. We’re evaluating all 
of that. Certainly there are options within hospitals as is done in 
Edmonton, however Calgary doesn’t have an in-hospital 
hyperbaric chamber. It’s a clinic setting. 
 
The former CEO of Misericordia Hospital in Edmonton sent an 
email that says, when the only hyperbaric chamber between 
Vancouver and Toronto was installed, that’s when he was the 
CEO, and then concludes by saying that, “I concur with Five 

Hills’ decision not to move the hyperbaric chamber to the new 
hospital.” That’s one opinion. We’re looking at all those 
different opinions. We’re looking at the numbers in terms of 
what makes sense for the province, and we’ll be making a 
decision accordingly. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — We have two days left in this session, and we 
may be going to an election before we have another session. I 
have yet to have the pleasure of ejecting anyone on either side 
of the House from the House, but if we carry on as we have 
been today, over the next two days you may give me that 
privilege. I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it’s been like pulling teeth to get 
this government to recognize that the hyperbaric chamber 
should stay here in Saskatchewan, and now they need to realize 
that the hyperbaric chamber should stay in the hospital and it 
should be in the new Moose Jaw Hospital. It makes no sense for 
this government to take the hyperbaric chamber out of the 
hospital. It also makes no sense to take the hyperbaric chamber 
away from Moose Jaw, and we’ve heard this clearly from 
people in Moose Jaw and throughout the province. 
 
Moose Jaw has three physicians that have gone to the United 
States and been certified in hyperbaric medicine. Moose Jaw 
also has three full-time respiratory therapists that are certified in 
hyperbaric treatment. This is additional training and 
certification. 
 
My question to the Premier: does the Premier think that the 
trained and certified hyperbaric doctors and technicians should 
leave their job at the Moose Jaw Hospital? Is that his plan that 
he’s scribbling out now in the 11th hour? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, as I’ve said before, we are looking at a number of 
options when it comes to providing hyperbaric services here 
within the province. Mr. Speaker, I would note that in terms of 
its existing use, we know that the largest number of referrals 
come from the Moose Jaw area, so in that respect it probably is 
underutilized. We’re not seeing additional referrals in a great 
number coming from additional areas around the province, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s something that obviously we need to educate 
the system that this service in fact is provided in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would note that in the case of Alberta, in terms 
of both on the outpatient and the in-patient side, both are in 
tertiary centres, major tertiary centres. That’s one option that we 
have to look at if we actually want to see this unit being used to 
its greatest capacity. 
 
Those are all the things that we’re looking at as we’re 
evaluating this. As I said before, I expect to be in a position to 
make a decision on this in the coming weeks after all of that 
analysis is done, and look forward to making that 
announcement coming soon. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 



7206 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2015 

Gay-Straight Alliances 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is no legitimate 
reason for this government to refuse to implement legislation to 
enshrine the rights of students to form gay-straight alliances or 
gender sexuality alliances, and the explanation from the 
Premier, the Education minister, and the Sask Party MLAs just 
don’t add up. To the Education minister: what’s the real reason 
this government is so afraid to pass legislation on GSAs 
[gay-straight alliance]? Is it because the Sask Party is afraid to 
offend social conservatives? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite and I 
agree on the benefits and the values of having GSAs in our 
schools. Both of us have seen the benefit that that gives to 
students. This isn’t a matter about social conservatives or where 
you sit on the political spectrum. It’s a matter of doing the right 
thing for students. 
 
We have by policy directed that they shall exist in schools in 
each and every school where one has been requested by 
students. Everywhere we have checked, where there’s been one 
requested, we have determined that one has been provided. Mr. 
Speaker, if the members opposite know of a place where one 
has not been provided, we would be pleased to continue to look 
at that and verify whatever is taking place. If a student is unable 
or unwilling to come forward and do that, have them do it 
through second-hand . . . through information, and we can 
check and follow it up there, or use the online reporting tool 
which is totally anonymous. 
 
Our focus, Mr. Speaker, is and will continue to be to make sure 
that we do everything to ensure that our students have the 
supports that they need. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, here’s a quote from government’s 
own internal document, and I quote, “Sexual minority and 
gender-variant youth continue to experience discrimination, 
prejudice, and abuse.” And we know that over half of LGBTQ 
students have thought about suicide, yet for some reason the 
Premier argued last week that we have a happy circumstance in 
our province where students don’t need a legislated 
right-of-way to GSAs. Does the Education minister actually 
expect us to believe that he hasn’t heard about kids 
encountering problems when trying to set up GSAs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Whether 
GSAs are enshrined by way of policy or by way of legislation 
makes no difference. It’s difficult for a student to be willing to 
come forward and ask for it where they need it and where they 
require it. It is the goal of this government to ensure that it is 
required. Having it enshrined in legislation doesn’t make it any 
more easy or any more appropriate for a student to come 
forward if a student is having difficulty. We will continue to 
work to make sure that they are available in each and every 
school where a student has asked for it and, Mr. Speaker, we 
will reach out to students where we think that they’re not 

being heard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard the same kind of allegations that the 
member opposite has put forward. We have tried to follow up 
on any of those that we’ve heard. It would make no difference 
whether it’s by way of legislation or by way of policy. We 
intend to find any place where the GSAs are not made available 
and make sure that in fact they are made available. We have not 
yet in fact found such a situation but, Mr. Speaker, we will 
continue to work with students because that is the first priority 
of this government. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, Amanda Guthrie is the youth and 
education coordinator at the Avenue Community Centre in 
Saskatoon. She says, and I quote: 
 

A lot of students that I work with have needed the support 
of friends or teachers when asking for a GSA, and the 
addition of legislation would only help students to feel 
more confident in their ask. Having legislation sets a 
precedent and puts power on the side of the student rather 
than the school or school division. 

 
Amanda knows of students who have been denied or 
discouraged from establishing a GSA. Chandra McIvor has also 
worked in this area and knows of many students who’ve been 
denied or discouraged from establishing GSAs, and she says 
that this minister has heard about these circumstances too. Why 
is the minister bending over backwards to please social 
conservatives instead of the kids? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d indicated earlier this 
has nothing to do with social conservatives or a political 
spectrum. This has only to do with providing services that are 
necessary. Whether it’s enshrined legislation or otherwise 
makes no difference.  
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a quote from Dan Shier, Queen City Pride, 
Global News, March 12, 2015: “I don’t see it currently being a 
huge necessity just because students are getting the services and 
the spaces that they require.” Mr. Speaker, our goal is to make 
sure that we provide the services wherever they are provided. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite and I will agree on one 
thing. We’ve heard students speak. We’ve heard students talk 
about the need for it, and if students aren’t comfortable coming 
forward and raising the issue, we want to be able to reach out to 
them either through social media, through the online reporting 
tool, or whatever else. If a student isn’t willing to give us their 
name, if they will at least tell us the school, then we can go to 
the school and find out. 
 
Any time where we’ve heard the name of a school before, 
we’ve gone to that school and in fact found that a GSA existed. 
We haven’t found a situation where one has been refused. We 
have confidence in our schools that they’re compliant with the 
policy and, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to work that 
way. 
 



May 12, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7207 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — I would encourage the minister to read the 
whole quote when he’s quoting folks about this issue. It’s very, 
very important to do that. 
 
That minister and that Sask Party government needs to 
recognize it’s not good enough to leave this up to vulnerable 
youth to stand up and speak out. It’s up to us in this Assembly 
to take a stand and enshrine this right in legislation. That would 
make a big difference for our students in our province. The 
minister’s talk of possibly pulling funding is nothing but a ploy 
to avoid passing legislation. 
 
To the Education minister: what will it take for the Sask Party 
government to shelve the social conservative . . . the excuses 
and finally show some real leadership when it comes to GSAs 
and vulnerable youth? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite can 
talk about making a symbolic gesture, and I appreciate that they 
may wish to do that. Our goal, Mr. Speaker, is to reach out to 
the students that need help, that need support. That is the one 
thing I agree with the member opposite the most on, and it’s 
something that we want to do by finding the individuals that 
need help, working with them, making sure that supports are 
available in the school. 
 
We’ve had good support from the schools. I give the schools 
credit for it. I give the school divisions credit. I give the 
individual teachers that are participating in it . . . And, Mr. 
Speaker, we want to continue going down that road. 
 
Passing laws doesn’t make it any easier for a student to admit 
that that student needs help. What does help is that we know 
that the students can find the resources. The students have a 
method of accessing it. And, Mr. Speaker, we encourage 
students to use the online reporting tool to write to us, write to 
us anonymously. We at least need to know where the school is 
so that we can do something within that school. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue doing that and I would 
urge the members opposite if they know of situations, help us 
bring them forward so that we can identify if there are gaps in 
it. Passing a law isn’t going to make the gaps go away. 
Identifying where the gaps are and working with us will. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Health Quality Council and Long-Term Care Surveying 
 
Ms. Chartier: — When this government made the Health 
Quality Council its provincial kaizen promotion office, the 
HQC [Health Quality Council] said it would have a major 
impact on its other work. The transition plan warned that there 
could be a delay in implementing long-term care surveying. 
Last week the Premier and the Health minister said they didn’t 
know this. It’s concerning that they weren’t paying attention to 

the impact of their decision. Does the Health minister have an 
answer today? What is the status of long-term care surveying? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, first of all I want to thank the work of the Health 
Quality Council and their board. I do want to put on the record, 
I think it was indicated that half of the board members were 
appointed by this government, Mr. Speaker. Half of the current 
board members were actually appointed by the former NDP 
government, so I wouldn’t want anybody to think that they are 
simply mouthpieces to the Government of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is taking place is, in terms of an acute care 
survey that has been done over the past, what they’ve moved 
away from, they’ve changed the methodology because what had 
happened in the past was that was mailed out after the fact. That 
was really dated information. It didn’t tell us much. The people 
filled that information out many months after they actually were 
in the hospital. 
 
What is now being tested is, in five or six sites they’re testing, 
on the acute care side they’re testing a real-time survey that is 
done in the hospital in those locations. And they’ll be making a 
decision on whether or not that’s the decision that they want to 
go forward, knowing that real-time information is more 
valuable than dated information. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the Health Quality Council said 
they wanted to do long-term care surveying. When they 
released last year’s annual report, the Health Quality Council 
said their work was “. . . primarily focused on understanding 
and executing . . .” the functions of the provincial kaizen 
promotion office. 
 
We know that HQC is not readily making available any new 
research reports since early 2012, and they had to sideline their 
plans to undertake meaningful work that actually fits with their 
mandate, like surveying patients in senior care facilities. We’ve 
been told that HQC is still not doing any long-term care 
surveying, which is no surprise because they are consumed with 
promoting lean. To the minister: how is that acceptable? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well certainly, Mr. Speaker, the Health Quality Council is 
engaged on significant work that is outside of the work that 
they’re doing as our provincial kaizen promotion office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are doing work as it relates to the emergency 
department initiative. They’ve also been tasked to do data 
collection as it relates to our Connecting to Care, or our 
hot-spotting program, so they’ve helped to identify, looking at 
the data, looking at the tracking of which patients were high-use 
users of the emergency department. Mr. Speaker, they’ve also 
been engaged in helping health regions on a number of other 
projects. There was research that was done as it relates to 



7208 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2015 

dementia and Alzheimer’s. That was research that was done by 
the Health Quality Council. 
 
As I’ve indicated in committee, Mr. Speaker, the work of lean 
in the Health Quality Council is a part of the work that they’re 
doing, but certainly they are engaging with significant work that 
is a part of their original mandate, and that work continues. 
More than half of their staff are engaged in that work. They’re 
not engaged in lean activity. But, Mr. Speaker, this is work that 
not only the board members that we appointed but board 
members appointed under the NDP actually embraced this work 
and they wanted this work and they voted as a board to accept 
this work. We’ll let them do their work. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, it’s astonishing that this 
minister doesn’t have an answer. He’s had a week to find the 
answer about what has happened with long-term care surveying. 
 
There is a crisis in seniors’ care. We’ve heard major concerns 
from seniors and their families and care aids. The government’s 
own CEO tour report identified major problems. The 
Ombudsman has been inundated with serious concerns about 
seniors’ care since the start of our investigation. 
 
You’d think this government would take this seriously and have 
the Health Quality Council looking into seniors’ care and 
recommending improvements. That’s what the Health Quality 
Council wanted to do, according to internal documents, but now 
the HQC is consumed with promoting lean. How can the Health 
minister keep justifying such messed-up priorities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I wonder how the members 
opposite can justify, when they were in government, 19 
long-term care facilities in this province closed. Twelve 
hundred long-term care beds in this province were closed at a 
time when our population was aging and at a time when the 
young people of this province and their families were being 
driven out to other provinces to look for work, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s the record of the NDP. 
 
It’s also the record of the NDP, the ability for the Ministry of 
Health to actually inspect long-term care facilities, Mr. Speaker, 
what they won’t tell you is they actually stopped doing that. 
They didn’t have the money to do it. Then they took it out of 
the legislation about six years after they actually stopped doing 
their work, so they weren’t even following their own 
legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have invested in long-term care. We have invested in 
seniors’ care and, Mr. Speaker, the long-term surveys will be 
beginning this fall by the Health Quality Council. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice Committee. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice to report that it has considered certain 
estimates and to present its eighth report. I move: 
 

That the eighth report of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now concurred 
in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Chair of the 
Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice: 
 

That the eighth report of the standing committee be now 
concurred in. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to table the answers to 
questions 934 through 938. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 934 through 938. I recognize the Government 
Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answer to question 939. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered responses 
to question 939. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers 940 to 943. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 940 through 943. I recognize the Government 
Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answer to question 944. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered a 
response to question 944. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answer to question 945. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to question 945. 
 
 



May 12, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7209 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 179 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 179 — The MRI 
Facilities Licensing Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to stand in my place today to give my initial comments 
on Bill 179. Mr. Speaker, the process behind Bill 179 is 
obviously the Saskatchewan Party government’s efforts to try 
and bring in private MRI services to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And what I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, is that in this 11th 
hour, as mentioned by my colleague from Saskatoon Centre, the 
Saskatchewan Party government is bringing this bill forward in 
the dying days of the Assembly sitting for this year. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s consistent with the trend of the Saskatchewan 
Party government to try and put a lot of the legislation and their 
philosophical ideals before the interests of the people of 
Saskatchewan. And one of the biggest philosophical ideals that 
I see evidenced on a continual daily basis, Mr. Speaker, is the 
Saskatchewan Party being ideologically attached to things like 
private health care, to making sure that the Crowns are sold, and 
to making sure that they get their way when it comes to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to spend a few moments if I can to 
talk a bit about what Bill 179 would do. Basically what the title 
of Bill 179 is is The MRI Facilities Licensing Act. And what the 
facilities licensing Act does, Mr. Speaker, very basic and very 
straight and very straightforward, is it allows private companies 
to come into Saskatchewan to provide MRI services to the 
people of Saskatchewan that could afford it. And the 
government contends, the government contends that this is the 
way of reducing the backlog of people looking for MRI 
services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we on the opposition side, we want to explain to the people 
of Saskatchewan what our perspective is. So as you’re sitting at 
home listening to this, you’re going to basically assume that the 
government is pushing this agenda forward to try and get 
people that need MRI services to be provided those services at a 
quicker pace. 
 
What’s happening with this particular bill, Mr. Speaker, as I 
said at the outset of my comments, that Bill 179 is allowing for 
private MRI services. And by that we mean that people that are 
able to go and get their MRI done at their own cost now have 
the option of doing that. That’s what the bill is intended to do. 
 
So right at the outset people would say, well if people are 
willing to pay for their MRI, shouldn’t they have that 
opportunity or choice? That’s the question people are asking out 
in Saskatchewanland. Well, Mr. Speaker, what we contend in 

the opposition is, you got to be very, very careful when you 
introduce bills of this sort because what happens is the whole 
debate and the whole notion and the whole argument and the 
whole fight around private health care versus public health care 
begins, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as we said at the outset, it’s strange that the Saskatchewan 
Party government is introducing this bill in the dying days of 
the session, where we’ve got two or three days left in this 
session and all of a sudden this bill comes forward. And, Mr. 
Speaker, as my colleague from Saskatoon Centre has indicated, 
and I certainly concur, that this debate between public health 
care and private health care is a debate that the NDP would love 
to have over a number of weeks, not just two or three days. 
 
So what’s happening here, Mr. Speaker, is that Saskatchewan 
Party are afraid to have the public debate in the Assembly, in 
the eyes of . . . in front of the Saskatchewan people to be able to 
prove to the Saskatchewan people that what the Saskatchewan 
Party is going to try and do is begin the process of providing 
private health care service where people with the money are 
able to afford to do a lot more, or provide and have access to a 
lot more health services than those that do not have the 
resources, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What Bill 179 does, it begins the process. Now I’m going to try 
and do my very best to explain how we see this Bill 179, that 
allows private MRIs to come to Saskatchewan, is beginning to 
spell a troubling trend for the people of Saskatchewan. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I want to go back a bit just to give some reference 
to the point that I’ve raised and will continue to raise during this 
debate: that is, we look at the Saskatchewan Party government; 
we know that they love to sell our Crowns. And the people of 
Saskatchewan are watching very, very closely. 
 
That is an ideological position that they have taken, that the 
Crowns need to be sold, and all of sudden with great fanfare, 
they said, oh no, we’re not going to sell our Crowns. But now 
as you fast-forward to 2015, Mr. Speaker, what is gone so far? 
Information Services Corporation has now been sold. The 
publicly owned liquor stores are now in the process of being 
devalued, and of course, Mr. Speaker, they’re allowing the 
private sector to also compete with the publicly owned liquor 
stores. And the reason why we talk about the publicly owned 
liquor stores, Mr. Speaker, is these liquor stores generate a huge 
amount of profit for the people of Saskatchewan. So they’re 
starting that process, Mr. Speaker, as well. 
 
[14:45] 
 
So you see some of the other things that are occurring with our 
Crown corporations, you’re slowly but surely seeing a trend, 
that the Saskatchewan Party always goes back to the 
philosophical beliefs that we need to sell the Crowns. We’re 
seeing evidence of how they’re doing that, and it really refers to 
our issue around Bill 179, that we also believe that the 
Saskatchewan Party government is also going to be advocating 
and supporting and building a private health care system where 
people are allowed to jump the waiting line if they have the 
cash, Mr. Speaker. We see evidence of that on a continual, 
continual basis. 
 
And this is one of the debates that we wanted to have a huge 



7210 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2015 

argument on, Mr. Speaker. The fight was on over Bill 179, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s why the Saskatchewan Party government 
only introduced this bill in the dying days of the session. 
Because, Mr. Speaker, they knew that the NDP would stand up 
for Saskatchewan families by making sure that there was an 
equal opportunity for all people in Saskatchewan to access 
health services, to access health services regardless of their 
income. And once again, Mr. Speaker, based on their 
philosophical beliefs, you’ve seen them do it with the Crowns, 
and now they’re starting their process with the health care 
system, Mr. Speaker.  
 
Now I want to point out that one of the challenges that I see 
with many of the older people that are accessing some of these 
services — I’m not necessarily saying it’s only the older people, 
but a lot of the older people that we know are going to do the 
MRIs or doing the knee surgery — that they have a most 
difficult time in their latter years in terms of trying to find the 
quality of life, a day that doesn’t have pain. These are some of 
the things that many of the elders look forward to and that 
they’re always constantly worrying about health care, Mr. 
Speaker. And we want to point out that we understand where 
their argument is coming from. And what I would say to many 
of the elders that are listening to this particular program as it 
relates to health care, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that this 
government, the Saskatchewan Party government is making it 
more and more difficult on many of our elders that are 
accessing health care services on a number of fronts. 
 
The first front that I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that 
they have taken 6,000 senior citizens off the drug plan. And at 
the outset people would say, well if they have the income — 
then the argument would be from many of those people’s 
perspectives — they could afford their own medicine. But, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s not the only cost that’s also been heaped on 
some of the seniors that have been taken off the drug plan 
program. They also have to pay increased cost of food. They 
have to pay the increased costs of heating their homes. They 
have to pay a lot of increased costs with everything from bigger 
power bills or larger power bills, and the list goes on. 
 
So bit by bit by bit, Mr. Speaker, you’re seeing many senior 
citizens, regardless of some of their incomes, they’re having a 
more and more difficult time in making ends meet because the 
Saskatchewan Party government is not only taking away some 
of their benefits when it comes to health care. They’re also 
increasing costs for their power bills, for their food costs, the 
gas costs, and the list goes on. 
 
So we know that while some would argue that some of these 
seniors do have the resources to meet their own medical or their 
own drug costs, what we would say on that front is that many of 
the seniors that are being taken off the drug plan are finding 
many more challenges to their budget because of the increased 
costs that the Saskatchewan Party has provided and will 
continue giving them as time goes on. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is the reason why . . . You look at the 
MRI licensing Act, Bill 179. Are we seeing a trend here where 
it’s going to be a system where the Saskatchewan Party has put 
in place only the people that have the financial resources are 
now able to access services? We are very concerned about that, 
and this is the reason why we wanted to have a thorough debate, 

the longer time in the Assembly to argue these points, that once 
again we’re seeing that the Saskatchewan Party, like a little 
mole sticking out their head to do some trial balloons on the 
whole notion of the privately funded MRI service, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s a trial balloon. And now what’s going to happen with this 
trial balloon, Mr. Speaker, is that they didn’t give the 
opportunity for the people of Saskatchewan to debate this, Mr. 
Speaker. They also didn’t give the opportunity to the NDP to 
come along and to argue against this particular bill and the 
actions that this bill will cause later on. 
 
Now what happens, Mr. Speaker, as you look at some of their 
campaign pamphlets of the past, and guess what, Mr. Speaker? 
There was no private MRIs as part as their platform, and now 
they’re providing that opportunity today, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s exactly why, on this side of the Assembly, we’ll never 
ever trust the conservatives because they’re tied to their 
ideology. They will never, ever get away from that.  
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we all know that they’re closely tied to the 
Conservatives, and that is their federal cousins. And, Mr. 
Speaker, many of the provincial Sask Party MLAs hold 
Conservative memberships, so we know that they get great 
advice from the Conservative government on many fronts. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we’re finding more and more and more they’ve 
got to go further and further and further to get some of that 
advice because there’s less and less Conservatives, even in the 
West, Mr. Speaker. And this is one of the reasons why I think 
people in Saskatchewan are starting to wake up to the fact that 
they want to bring in private health care, that they want to sell 
the Crowns, and they want to put the people of Saskatchewan in 
debt for years and years and years. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is another prime example, another prime 
example of why these bills, Bill 179, an Act that’ll provide, The 
MRI Facilities Licensing Act which will allow private firms to 
set up MRI services here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I want to shift gears again, Mr. Speaker, a bit towards the 
argument that we have made, where we had pointed out that 
there are opportunities. I’ll give you an example. Alberta now 
allows, allows the private MRI service there. So people that do 
have the money, instead of waiting for a public MRI service, 
they could actually go to a private one and pay money out of 
their own pocket to get that particular service. 
 
Now some people would argue, and we hear that argument from 
the government now and then, that that service, if they’re 
willing to pay for it, they should have the opportunity and 
option of doing that. Now, Mr. Speaker, what we’re seeing 
happening in Alberta is that as you introduce the user-pay MRI 
services and clinics, what happens is it creates longer wait times 
for everyone else. Now how does that work? The average 
person would say, well how does that work? If you were to, if 
you have two MRI services, wouldn’t you deal with twice as 
many people? Now what happens, Mr. Speaker, is that, as you 
set up this private MRI service and you’ve got this publicly 
funded MRI service, Mr. Speaker, as the richer go to the private 
MRI services, Mr. Speaker, what they do is they get their 
service. They pay their money upfront, and the costs are pretty 
expensive, Mr. Speaker. They pay for that service upfront. 
 
But what happens is that, as a result of the private service being 



May 12, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7211 

in place, what happens is many of those that work in the 
publicly funded MRI service sector, Mr. Speaker, they tend to 
go to the private sector because obviously the private sector 
may provide better benefits. They may provide lesser hours. 
They may provide a number of other incentives. And, Mr. 
Speaker, what happens is, as you move the resources from the 
publicly funded MRI service and a lot of the staff and the 
resources begin shifting to the private MRI service, that creates 
an even longer wait at the publicly funded MRI clinics because 
they don’t have the necessary staffing and resources. And thus, 
Mr. Speaker, those that cannot afford to pay, that cannot afford 
to pay are subjected to longer wait lists through the publicly 
owned MRI service. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is really . . . As I pointed out at the 
outset, is you look at the habits of the right wing governments 
throughout the history of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They 
always continually do two or three things. Number one is 
anything that’s publicly owned like our Crowns, they want to 
sell them right away. We know that, that it’s in part of the 
Saskatchewan Party plan. Somewhere along the line they want 
to get rid of the Crowns, Mr. Speaker. We know that the people 
of Saskatchewan want to keep the Crowns. 
 
But eventually they’ll stick their head out of that little hole there 
and say, well does anybody want to sell the Crowns as part of 
their mandate? They’ll try those trial balloons, and we see 
evidence of that already. And, Mr. Speaker, as soon as the 
people of Saskatchewan are ready to whack that mole back into 
that hole there, Mr. Speaker, they retreat right away. But rest 
assured that they will come back again and do a few more trial 
balloons because their ideology is such that they want to get rid 
of the Crowns. They want to sell these Crowns. It’s burning in 
their stomachs. It’s their desire to sell them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So they cannot hide who they are. And what they think about 
the Crowns, Mr. Speaker, will eventually become words 
because what they think, certainly in my opinion, will 
eventually surface, and then they will be certainly viewed by 
the Saskatchewan people as a right wing government that wants 
to sell the Crowns. 
 
And the other thing that the conservatives love to do, Mr. 
Speaker, they love talking about private health care system, 
basically saying, bring more private services to our region 
because that’s the answer. That’s the solution to all the health 
care challenges that our people face. Well, Mr. Speaker, that 
creates more trouble. That creates more challenges for the 
publicly funded health care system, as now you’re competing 
for staff and resources between two systems, a publicly funded 
system and a private system, Mr. Speaker. And as the private 
system gets more work and more recognition from the 
government, it’ll begin to suck our resources and staff from the 
public system and thus the public system in health care delivery 
will begin to suffer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this is what Bill 179, The MRI Facilities Licensing Act, it is 
the start of a long process that the Saskatchewan Party 
government are going to try and implement for Saskatchewan 
people. So I think it’s really, really important that we pay very 
close attention to how this bill is going to proceed through the 
Assembly and how the people of Saskatchewan react. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the people that may be 
listening to this particular program, some of the elders and some 
of the people in some of the rural parts of the province as well 
as northern Saskatchewan, that I’m originally from northern 
Saskatchewan, as I’ve indicated time and time again. And what 
I see, Mr. Speaker, is that a lot of our people in northern 
Saskatchewan have a most difficult time in accessing services. 
They have an incredible challenge of coming out of northern 
Saskatchewan, as other parts of the province as well will have. 
There’s many parts of rural Saskatchewan that do have 
difficulty in accessing services. I understand that, that there are 
many small villages and towns that also have this difficulty 
where they have to go to the city. So many parts of the 
province, whether it’s northern Saskatchewan or the remote 
parts of rural Saskatchewan, there are challenges enough to try 
and access services from where they live to some of the services 
that may be located in our larger centres. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s a fact that we chose where we want to 
live but the premise of the health Canada Act, and I think it’s 
something that’s really important, is there’s three or four 
principles that’s really, really important. One of them is 
affordability, that people should not have to pay to get proper 
health care. The other one of course is the transferability of 
services where you’re able to get a variety of services in a 
variety of locations, Mr. Speaker, and that it be universal, that 
this health care system be open to everyone. That’s what we 
fought for, Mr. Speaker, over the years, and we’ll continue 
fighting for that. 
 
There’s a number of key principles behind the Canada Health 
Act in which we want to ensure that many people from many 
areas have affordable, equal access to health care. And this is 
one of the challenges that I see from the area that I live, is that 
often you will find senior citizens travelling south, travelling 
south for many medical appointments, and the cost to many of 
these trips are borne by many of these senior citizens, Mr. 
Speaker. Many occasions there are family members that help 
the elders get to their appointments. But, Mr. Speaker, the least, 
the very least the elders know that this is a challenge but they 
have to go. 
 
And many times, and many times when they travel to southern 
Saskatchewan for medical appointments, you’ve often got to 
spend a night. You’ve often got to go with a companion. 
You’ve got to pay for the gas. You’ve got to buy a room. And 
the list goes on as to the incredible cost that many seniors, not 
only from northern Saskatchewan but many parts of the 
province where it’s far away, it’s a long ways from the major 
centres, many of our senior citizens have to travel to these 
larger centres for these services. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that cost is borne, that cost is borne by 
senior citizens living on a fixed income. Now my argument that 
if there is money available through the health care system, 
something should be addressed, something should be provided 
to address this challenge that many of these people are facing 
not only in rural Saskatchewan but northern Saskatchewan as 
well. And instead of putting a lot of money and time on 
providing or improving the venue for the private sector to come 
in and provide health care services, Mr. Speaker, perhaps the 
government should use some of their resources and time to 
figure out a good system of support for senior citizens 



7212 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2015 

throughout this province, Mr. Speaker, because they definitely, 
most assuredly need that kind of support. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Now I bump into taxicabs a lot when I’m travelling, Mr. 
Speaker. I bump into families that are transporting their loved 
ones or the seniors from some of the northern communities that 
I represent, Mr. Speaker. And some of them express the 
frustration of (a) we don’t have very much help. Nobody seems 
to be helping us out for these trips. It’s a lot money coming out 
of our pockets, and it’s getting less and less affordable to do so. 
And (b), the second point they make is sometimes they’ll go 
south for a series of appointments, and they may only see the 
doctor for 20 minutes or 25 minutes and then they’re done. And 
all the cost to go and see the doctor, Mr. Speaker, is borne by 
many of these seniors living on fixed income. 
 
So you see the incredible challenge, the incredible challenge of 
affordability by some of these seniors. And that’s exactly my 
point around the affordability aspect when it comes to the 
Canada Health Act, Mr. Speaker, that there are many costs not 
covered to ensure the affordability of the health care system for 
the people of Saskatchewan. And some of these costs add 
tremendous strain. 
 
So whether it’s 6,000 or 60,000 seniors off the drug plan that 
the Saskatchewan Party recently implemented, Mr. Speaker, 
and then you increase the cost of them going to their medical 
appointments, you look at their increased costs. You look at 
their increased cost for their power bills, food, the list goes on 
as to how many of these seniors are really struggling to make 
ends meet, Mr. Speaker, and then we have the Saskatchewan 
Party government coming along and introducing more health 
care bills that are going to cost them more money if they want 
access to good health care services. And this is where it gets 
awfully frustrating, Mr. Speaker, from our perspective as an 
opposition, when we see our seniors struggling, and many 
northern people and families struggling because they have to 
pay a lot of extra money to travel to the major centres for 
services. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s not only the seniors that are struggling. 
There are, as I mentioned, families as well. I know there are a 
number of people that have travelled from northern 
Saskatchewan for services, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s cancer 
treatment or whether it’s surgery or whether it’s a sudden 
emergency. You often see these families in these hospitals in 
the larger centres and, Mr. Speaker, they get very, very little 
support. And it gets awfully tiring to hear some of the lack of 
responses that this government has used as excuses when many 
northern leaders, mayors and chiefs and councillors and some 
of the health support staff, when they ask is there any help for 
these type of families in these type of emergencies, Mr. 
Speaker. And all you hear is a mute response from the 
Saskatchewan Party representatives. 
 
Except when it comes to providing private health care, Mr. 
Speaker, all of a sudden they’re willing to put forward this Bill 
No. 179 which allows private companies to provide MRI 
services to those people that can afford it. And, Mr. Speaker, 
that is patently unfair because the people of Saskatchewan need 
support from the health care system in other areas, in other 

regions, in other challenges that they have when it comes to 
their own health care. So we really have to begin to pay 
attention to some of these issues. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the NDP believe in a properly funded public 
health care system. We’ve always maintained that. We’ll 
continue defending that. Now what’s really important, Mr. 
Speaker, is that when people ask about our position as the New 
Democratic Party, Mr. Speaker, as a government-in-waiting, 
Mr. Speaker, what I want to tell the people of Saskatchewan is 
this, is that the Saskatchewan Party has had almost double, 
they’ve had almost double the amount of revenues than the last 
NDP government that served in ’07, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In 2007 when the NDP were in government, they had an $8 
billion budget. That was their budget, Mr. Speaker. Now you 
fast forward to 2014-2015, Mr. Speaker. Their budget now is 
$14.2 billion. So it’s almost twice the amount of money that 
they have at their use, Mr. Speaker, almost twice as much 
money that they have at their disposal than the last NDP 
government had. So on this side of the House we say, you’ve 
had record revenue and you can’t even build an adequate health 
care system. This is where you’re going to go off and ask your 
private buddies to come on in, set up a bunch of clinics that 
only the rich can access, Mr. Speaker. And that’s a crying 
shame, given the fact that you have all this money available, 
almost twice the money that the NDP had when they last 
formed government in 2007. 
 
And yet every second answer coming out of that government’s 
mouth, Mr. Speaker, is they tend to blame the NDP. On this 
side of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, we tell them, you’ve got 
twice the revenue. You should have twice the good service in 
health care, Mr. Speaker. And wherever we see, Mr. Speaker, 
wherever we see, wherever we see problems, all you hear is a 
big quiet, a big silence, no response from the government, Mr. 
Speaker. All you hear is silence. 
 
Now I want to give you another good example, the hyperbaric 
chamber, Mr. Speaker. When the people of Moose Jaw were 
fighting for the hyperbaric chamber, which we have heard tons 
of stories of the people that have been saved by that particular 
service, Mr. Speaker, and the people of Moose Jaw, including 
the firefighters, were all getting up and they’re advocating the 
fact that the new hospital in Moose Jaw should have the 
hyperbaric chamber included, and it should stay, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what happened when they come to Regina here, the Moose 
Jaw MLAs that were in Regina, now we call them the Regina, 
basically the Regina MLAs. They wouldn’t stand up for Moose 
Jaw. Both members from Moose Jaw, they were absolutely 
crying, and guess what, Mr. Speaker? That hyperbaric chamber 
will not be in the new Moose Jaw Hospital. It will not be in the 
Moose Jaw Hospital, Mr. Speaker. Why? Because the Moose 
Jaw MLAs, they sat on their hands and didn’t say a peep. They 
didn’t say a word, Mr. Speaker. And the people of Moose Jaw 
have been fighting on their own. They’ve been speaking up for 
themselves, Mr. Speaker, and they’ve been telling people that 
we want to keep the hyperbaric chamber in Moose Jaw, the 
Moose Jaw Hospital, because it provided an essential service 
and it saved so many people’s lives. 
 
But what did the Moose Jaw MLAs say, Mr. Speaker? Exactly. 



May 12, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7213 

They didn’t say a word. They sat on their hands and they just 
simply applauded the plan by the minister to either move that 
service right out of the city of Moose Jaw and not have it at all, 
Mr. Speaker. So we’re sitting there thinking, okay, well if 
they’re not going to put the hyperbaric chamber back into the 
Moose Jaw Hospital, then they must be providing a service 
somewhere. Well, Mr. Speaker, again, the Minister of Health’s 
response was, well we’ll fly them to Edmonton. So a lot of 
these people that are fighting for this hyperbaric chamber, 
they’re saying, well wouldn’t that cost more money? And 
they’re absolutely right, Mr. Speaker. It’s going to cost a lot 
more money by having to fly people a long distance, a long 
distance to get a service that they could easily have gotten in 
Moose Jaw. 
 
And that’s why their plan for the hyperbaric chamber, their lack 
of support for seniors, their plan around getting 6,000 less 
seniors on the drug plan, their lack of action on the hyperbaric 
chamber, Mr. Speaker, everywhere you look, the Sask Party is 
making a big mess of our health care system, Mr. Speaker, 
despite the fact that they’ve had record revenues. 
 
And that’s my point today. They’ve had record revenues, Mr. 
Speaker. They blew all that money, Mr. Speaker. There’s 
nothing there to help Moose Jaw accommodate the continued 
service of a hyperbaric chamber, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why 
the NDP are asking, where has all the money gone? Where has 
all the money gone when you depleted the rainy day fund that 
was set aside, Mr. Speaker, when you’ve had twice the 
revenues, twice the revenues? 
 
The last eight years they’ve been in government, Mr. Speaker, I 
can almost guarantee they would have over $100 billion at their 
disposal, $100 billion in their last number of budgets, Mr. 
Speaker, since they’re government, 100 billion. And you’d 
think out of the $100 billion that they can at least get the most 
functional, the most responsive, the most respectful health care 
system in the whole country, Mr. Speaker. The answer is they 
failed miserably at that. They have failed miserably, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’re seeing evidence of that on a daily basis, 
whether it’s seniors’ care, Mr. Speaker, or whether it’s the 
ambulance fees that are going through the roof for many people 
that are using ambulances. The list goes on and on and on as to 
how the Saskatchewan Party has underperformed. They have 
underperformed despite having record revenue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this is where, from the NDP perspective, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve got a fresh theme. We’ve got some new leaders, Mr. 
Speaker, and they’re going to have a great vision for the future 
of the people of Saskatchewan. And the one thing that they’re 
going to continue building on, Mr. Speaker, is to make sure 
people out there know that they’re going to continue protecting 
the Crowns. The NDP will protect the Crowns from sale to the 
private sector by the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to 
continue building a solid health care, Mr. Speaker, so that the 
people of Saskatchewan can get service when they want service 
without having to fork over thousands of dollars, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re going to put a system in place that responds to the needs 
for basic sanitation, basic water and sewer, and decent housing 
for many families that are struggling with homes that are not 
properly insulated. These are some of the health challenges and 
must be incorporated in our overall health thinking, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s very basic and it’s very straightforward, but the 

Saskatchewan Party can’t figure it out. 
 
And for one particular project . . . I go back to the hyperbaric 
chamber, Mr. Speaker. For one particular project, there’s two 
MLAs in Moose Jaw sitting over there, sitting over there, sitting 
on their hands, Mr. Speaker, when they should be getting up 
and they should be fighting for Moose Jaw and telling this 
minister and that Premier, put the hyperbaric chamber back in 
Moose Jaw where it always was and should stay, Mr. Speaker. 
And what we’re seeing is that those backbenchers over there, 
the Moose Jaw, they sit on their hands and they don’t say a 
word. And I say, shame on them, Mr. Speaker. I say, shame on 
them. 
 
We need a backbench with a backbone, and perhaps the Moose 
Jaw MLAs should stand up in their place and start defending 
Moose Jaw’s interests instead of making excuses for the Sask 
Party government, and this despite . . . [inaudible] . . . don’t 
ever forget, in all our arguments, this despite the fact that 
they’ve had record revenue. Over $100 billion in the last eight 
years and they can’t even get the hyperbaric chamber to stay in 
Moose Jaw at that new facility. How impossible is that task, 
Mr. Speaker? It’s pretty easy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now you look at some of the other arguments that they’ve 
raised. And this is where, from our perspective, we also talk 
about the third component of what the conservative movement 
is all about, Mr. Speaker, and that is tying the future of our 
province. And I look at the debt issue. I spoke about this earlier, 
Mr. Speaker. I spoke about the incredible debt that’s being 
absorbed by our cities and by our towns and villages, Mr. 
Speaker, debt that people of Saskatchewan have to pay. 
 
And now we see this year’s budget. They borrowed $700 
million to balance this year’s budget, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
well-known fact. The Minister of Finance has said, we’re 
borrowing 700 million, but it’s still a balanced budget. Well 
how in the heck could you borrow $700 million and call it a 
balanced budget? It’s totally beyond us on this side of the 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But that being said, that being said, Mr. Speaker, what 
challenge that we see as well, that it relates to health care, Mr. 
Speaker, is that as you burden the future generations and the 
future of the people of Saskatchewan with this debt . . . And 
there is debt, Mr. Speaker. I make no bones about it. They are 
piling up debt faster than we know, Mr. Speaker, and what’s 
going to happen is that’s going to tie the future of people of 
Saskatchewan to this ongoing debt. 
 
Now I look from my vantage point where the Premier and 
where most of the cabinet ministers will be in three or four 
years, Mr. Speaker. They’ll be gone. They’ll be off to greener 
pastures, but what they will leave behind is a legacy of debt. 
And we’ve seen this act before, Mr. Speaker, and that act is 
called the 1980s. And we’re going to continue seeing this debt 
piled up on us. The people of Saskatchewan begin to pay very 
close attention to what the Sask Party is doing. 
 
Now where is the debt going, Mr. Speaker? This is our 
argument. It’s not going to the health care system because 
obviously Bill 179 here, they’re bringing private people in to do 
this kind of service. So it’s not costing them any money. The 



7214 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2015 

private people are coming in and they’re giving other people 
that have the cash, they’re giving them the opportunity to come 
use their service. It’s not costing the government any money. 
 
But what the government is doing, Mr. Speaker, is they’re 
ratcheting up that debt at incredible levels. And I’ll go back to 
my earlier point. $700 million, $700 million to balance this 
year’s budget, Mr. Speaker. That’s debt, Mr. Speaker. And then 
you look at the whole notion of, as we’ve pointed out, is the 
forgone revenues from some of the Crown corporations that the 
Sask Party recently sold. And a good example of that is the 
Information Services Corporation. It was generating $14 
million there per year, Mr. Speaker, and that has been sold. That 
asset is now gone. And guess what? The $14 million that it 
generated for us, well guess what? It’s not going to be there in 
future years. 
 
The other part I think is really important on the affordability of 
health care in the province, Mr. Speaker, is the whole notion 
around the government-owned liquor stores, Mr. Speaker. We 
owned those liquor outlets. They generate a profit, Mr. Speaker. 
Every liquor store in the province generates a profit and that 
profit is used for health care, for highways, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
used for a variety of services that the people of Saskatchewan, 
that the people of Saskatchewan enjoy, Mr. Speaker. So that 
revenues to SLGA, the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority, I think the revenue’s around half a billion dollars per 
year. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Now that revenue, at the rate that they’re really debasing the 
liquor stores, the publicly owned liquor stores, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
going to cost us a lot of money in the future. Because what 
happens is the liquor stores are making less profit, and the 
bottom line affects how governments operate from the services 
perspective, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So you look at some of the revenues that are being forgone. 
Information Services Corporation sold off. No more revenues 
from that particular entity. The Saskatchewan liquor stores, Mr. 
Speaker, at the rate they’re going, they’re going to let the 
private companies set that up. They’re going to let some of the 
grocery chains and stores set that up. And guess what, Mr. 
Speaker? When some of these private stores sell the liquor in 
their stores, well the money’s not coming back to the people of 
Saskatchewan. The money’s going to their American bases or 
Eastern Canadian bases. It’s not staying here in Saskatchewan. 
So this is what the liquor store, the publicly owned liquor store 
advocates are saying: keep the liquor stores public in the 
province of Saskatchewan because they generate revenues for 
the people of Saskatchewan, thereby not needing to do any tax 
increases. You’re actually generating revenues through the 
publicly owned liquor stores, Mr. Speaker. So all these 
arguments that people are making, the Saskatchewan Party is 
simply not paying any attention, so you lose revenues. You lose 
revenues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I often talk about my background as a hockey player. I 
don’t have any background in accounting, Mr. Speaker. I’m not 
any manager by any stretch of the imagination. But there’s one 
thing I know: when you sell an asset, when you sell an asset, 
when you sell an asset, you get revenues as a result of the sale. 

You can’t go back a year later and say, well can I get some of 
that profit from that asset? You sold it. That I understand, Mr. 
Speaker, and a lot of people in Saskatchewan understand that as 
well. 
 
So while they have forgone revenues in not only Information 
Services Corporation, Mr. Speaker, but now the liquor stores, 
you can see a trend that the conservatives cannot help 
themselves. They’re tied to their ideology. What they’re going 
to do at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, is you’re going to have 
a two-tiered health care system, Mr. Speaker. There’s going to 
be an effort to sell the Crowns, Mr. Speaker, and as a result of 
that, we’re all going to see an increased debt, an increased debt 
as a result of the Saskatchewan Party government, for all of us 
to share for the next 20, 30, 40 years, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 
the legacy that that front bench and that Premier is going to 
leave the people of Saskatchewan for years and years to come. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, that’s why we in the opposition 
will continue fighting them and will continue standing up 
because we know what they’re doing is wrong. What they’re 
doing is absolutely wrong. And this bill, Bill No. 179, begins 
the process of promoting a two-tiered health care system where 
people with money can afford health care services faster and 
better than those with no money. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s a 
crying shame in this year, and the Saskatchewan Party 
government, they are the ones responsible for this, Mr. Speaker. 
They are the ones responsible for this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I want to go around a few other of the examples of what 
the Saskatchewan Party has done. And you look at the notion of 
all these projects, and I look at the North Battleford hospital, 
Mr. Speaker, as an example. Now that’s going to be built 
through a P3 [public-private partnership] process, Mr. Speaker. 
And we applaud the fact that North Battleford is getting a new 
hospital, Mr. Speaker. We applaud that. But, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
being done through a P3 process, and this is what our argument 
is. Despite the record revenue, Mr. Speaker, the record revenue, 
the government could have afforded to build it on their own, 
Mr. Speaker, because they’ve got twice the revenues. They have 
twice the revenues than the last NDP government eight years 
ago. They have over $14.2 billion, and what did they do, instead 
of managing the money well, Mr. Speaker, to build their own 
Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford? They’re going 
through a P3 process, and I’ll tell you what . . . or to a P3 
partner. 
 
And I’ll tell you why that’s wrong, Mr. Speaker. It’s wrong 
because (a) you’re going to have to pay to have that thing built. 
We understand that. Because companies are going to come 
here, they’re going to build it, Mr. Speaker, but they’re going to 
also use the option of charging interest, charging interest on the 
money they put forward. So we’re paying that interest. The 
taxpayer, the people of Saskatchewan are paying that interest on 
that project, Mr. Speaker. You’re also paying the maintenance 
contract on that project. So you’re paying three ways, Mr. 
Speaker. You’re paying to have it built, you’re paying interest 
on that project, and you’re paying maintenance on that project, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s much the same way, it’s much the same way as the Regina 
bypass, Mr. Speaker. The Regina bypass is another example of 
how this government has wasted money. They’ve wasted 



May 12, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7215 

money foolishly, Mr. Speaker. The Regina bypass could have 
easily gone around Regina but instead no, they come back into 
the city, Mr. Speaker. Why Tower Road? That’s what people 
are arguing about. You can save 2 or $300 million on the 
Regina bypass if you would bypass the city, Mr. Speaker. 
Another example of how this government has messed up the 
finances of the province of Saskatchewan horribly, Mr. 
Speaker. They have messed it up horribly. 
 
So through expensive P3s to some of the wasted money that 
they’re going to have on a bypass that doesn’t bypass the city, 
Mr. Speaker, this is some of the issues that we raise in the NDP 
opposition, that despite their record revenue . . . I’ll go back to 
my earlier point. The last NDP government had $8 billion as 
their budget. These guys have over 14 billion, almost twice the 
revenues. Yet they have underperformed, and yet you see the 
incredible debt that people are, we are putting ourselves under. 
Our cities are in debt. The municipalities are in debt, 
universities are in debt, Mr. Speaker. All this debt, all this debt, 
we turn around and we ask the question: where’s all the money 
gone? Where has it all gone, Mr. Speaker? That’s the thing. 
This is exactly the point. 
 
And I go back to the MRI facilities, Mr. Speaker. We should 
have the top-notch health care system in the province because 
the province of Saskatchewan enjoyed record revenue the last 
eight years. And yet, Mr. Speaker, we see more debt and we see 
in the health care system that needs a lot of work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now this is where I go back to my earlier point. The 
Saskatchewan Party can’t figure it out, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
tied to their ideology of three principles. Number one is, let’s 
sell the Crowns. That’s what they want to do. Sask Party wants 
to sell the Crowns, make no bones about that. Number two is 
they want private health care, Mr. Speaker. We see evidence of 
that through this bill, Bill 179. They’re starting that process of 
private health care, Mr. Speaker. And then when they’re all 
done governing, which I hope ends very soon, all we’ll be left 
with, Mr. Speaker, is another whack of debt, another whack of 
debt. And there’s another 10, 15 years where some 
government’s got to come along and clean up their mess, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And that’s where I go back to my earlier point, Mr. Speaker, 
where I go back to my earlier point, Mr. Speaker, is that despite 
the record revenue, they have underperformed on every front, 
Mr. Speaker, on absolutely every front. Now health care’s 
another good example. Now that the money’s gone out we ask, 
on the opposition side, where’s the money gone? It hasn’t gone 
to help northern Saskatchewan with their highways. It hasn’t 
gone with helping seniors cover some of their drug plan 
challenges, Mr. Speaker. It hasn’t gone to reduce debt. It hasn’t 
gone towards helping people meet their everyday costs of high 
food costs, of paying more on their power bills. Like some of 
the people in Saskatchewan it’s becoming an affordability issue. 
They’re having a tough time making rent, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
having a tough time making rent. They’re having a tough time 
paying their power bill and yet this government keeps racking 
up the debt. They keep racking up the debt. 
 
And this is the amazing part, Mr. Speaker. Despite the 
incredible debt that they have, Mr. Speaker, that they put us 
under, they’ve had record revenue. So how does it work? How 

does it work, Mr. Speaker, where you’ve had record revenue? 
You’ve had record revenue. It’s all in the books. You can see 
the books. They’ve had close to $100 billion in their last eight 
years they’ve been in government — $100 billion, Mr. Speaker. 
And yet today we’re seeing the debt increase on a phenomenal 
rate, on a phenomenal basis. 
 
And yet you look at some of the whole notions around the 
health care stuff, Mr. Speaker. I go back to my earlier point on 
this particular bill. They’re getting the private companies to 
come in and provide these services, Bill 179. So how is it you 
have record revenue, yet you have record debt, and yet you’re 
getting private companies to provide health care? And the 
reason why, Mr. Speaker, is because they have not managed the 
economy well. They have not managed our finances well. And 
their philosophical beliefs keep coming back. They keep 
creeping back into their psyche, Mr. Speaker. And what 
happens is exactly what you see happening from our side, Mr. 
Speaker, is we see when there’s a big issue that comes forward, 
a good example is the hyperbaric chamber issue, Mr. Speaker, 
the Moose Jaw MLAs sit on their hands. They don’t say a word. 
They don’t say a word, Mr. Speaker. And yet the people of 
Moose Jaw are left to fight for themselves. The people of 
Moose Jaw are left to make their argument. 
 
And when you have firemen from Moose Jaw come here to 
fight for the hyperbaric chamber, Mr. Speaker, it shows us, it 
shows and it proves to us as an opposition that the 
Saskatchewan Party government really want to bring in private 
health care. And some of the services that are required in these 
new facilities, including the hyperbaric chamber, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s not important to the two Moose Jaw MLAs that they 
continue sitting on their hands while Moose Jaw suffers from 
their lack of leadership, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to the people of Moose Jaw, enough of that. It’s time 
to send people here that are going to make a difference in your 
community, going to make the best health system, going to 
build the best health care system possible right across the 
country, Mr. Speaker, that is respectful of seniors and respectful 
of the fact that everyone should have access to health care 
services, not just the ones that have the money to do so. So Bill 
179, Mr. Speaker, it is a start. It is a start towards a slippery 
slope of private health care system that the provincial Sask 
Party government wants to implement. 
 
Now I go back to my earlier points, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to 
why this bill needs to be fought, why the NDP are going to 
stand up and fight against this particular bill. First of all, the 
Saskatchewan Party brought the bill in on the dying days of the 
Assembly, as my associate from Saskatoon Centre has pointed 
out. Why would they bring it in in the last two or three days of a 
legislative sitting, Mr. Speaker? Why didn’t they have the 
nerve, the nerve and the fight in them to bring it in at the start of 
the session, Mr. Speaker, not at the end of the session? 
 
And I’ll tell you why, Mr. Speaker. I’ll tell you why. I’ll tell 
you why they didn’t want to have this debate at the start of the 
session. Because the people of Saskatchewan would have 
scolded them. The people of Saskatchewan would have got up 
and they would have started telling these guys, we don’t want 
your private health care system. We want a publicly funded 
health care system that serves everyone regardless of their 



7216 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2015 

income, Mr. Speaker. That is a basic fundamental principle here 
in Saskatchewan that has been fought for over the years, Mr. 
Speaker, and the only ones that don’t seem to get that message 
is the Saskatchewan Party government. 
 
Well once again the manipulation, once again the manipulation 
of the Saskatchewan Party government, they’re bringing, 
they’re bringing this bill forward three days before the session 
ends because they don’t have the courage to debate this thing 
over a number of weeks in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. They’d 
rather try and sneak it in at the end of the session, and that 
certainly displays to me the lack of courage that the 
Saskatchewan Party has as it relates to the debate around a 
publicly funded health care system versus their model of private 
health care, Mr. Speaker. They do not have the courage to have 
that debate over the number of weeks here in the Assembly, and 
that’s why they introduced it with three days left in the sitting, 
Mr. Speaker. They just don’t have the courage to have that 
debate, because they know that they are wrong on that side. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan are going to stand up, Mr. 
Speaker, and they’re going to send these guys a message. Not 
only the Moose Jaw MLAs, but they’re going to send the entire 
Sask Party a message that we don’t want a two-tiered health 
care system where the rich get served first and the rest of us, it’s 
either farewell, be well . . . it’s either be well or farewell. That 
was one of the phrases that was used, Mr. Speaker. This is one 
of the arguments that was made. Clearly, Mr. Speaker, is that 
under a publicly funded health care system, they could have 
developed the best system in the country, given the resources 
that they had. And, Mr. Speaker, they underperformed 
miserably. They have underperformed on every front. We see 
that time and time and day after day in this Assembly. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the people of Saskatchewan 
one particular thing. I think the people of Saskatchewan, they 
want to have a pragmatic government. They want to have a 
government that manages their resources well. They want to 
have a government that keeps their costs low, Mr. Speaker. 
They want to have a government that really protects their 
Crown corporations. And they want the health care system, 
especially those that are senior to us, they want the health care 
system to be a responsive system and to be there for their 
family, their children, the parents or the young adults or the 
seniors. They want a health care system that’ll be there for 
them, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s very basic. It’s very basic in 
terms of what the people of Saskatchewan want their 
government to be. They want it to be a hard-working 
government that’s pragmatic, common sense, manages the 
money well, and develops a top-notch education and health care 
system for the people of Saskatchewan. That’s what the people 
of Saskatchewan want, Mr. Speaker. I really, truly believe that. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Now I look at that and I tell the people in Saskatchewan, if you 
look at what the Saskatchewan Party has done, whether it’s 
through their P3s or their wild spending ways, Saskatchewan 
now, they have gone through $100 billion the last eight years 
they were government. It’s $100 billion the last eight years 
they’ve been government, Mr. Speaker, and yet today we see 
the Minister of Finance saying, well we need another $700 
million to balance this year’s budget. So they borrowed $700 

million and every single one of the Sask Party MLAs chirped 
up and said, yes we’re so proud we have a balanced budget. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when you borrow 700 million to balance 
your budget, guess what? It’s not balanced. And that’s my 
fundamental argument today is the people of Saskatchewan 
don’t want anyone monkeying around with the whole notion of 
having a balanced budget. If you want to have a balanced 
budget, it’s got to be a true balanced budget. They want to 
know where the money went, Mr. Speaker. They want to know 
if you’ve got twice the amount of revenues and then you sit 
here and you can’t perform on any front, especially on the front 
of health care, Mr. Speaker. You underperformed steady and 
that you have failed miserably on that front, well then the 
people of Saskatchewan are going to take notice. They’re going 
to pay attention to that stuff. They’re going to make sure that 
people out there are going to be made aware, through our 
process here in the Assembly, that this is what the 
Saskatchewan Party’s doing. 
 
Now you look at this argument we’re having today, and I tell 
the people of northern Saskatchewan this as well, that as we go 
from our communities, as we travel into the cities for health 
services, and I see tons of people and, Mr. Speaker, they pay a 
lot of money out of their own pockets, especially the seniors. 
They pay a lot of money. And they have to go to these 
appointments, and sometimes, as I indicated, when they go to 
their appointments, Mr. Speaker, they often see the doctor, 20 
minutes, and then the doctor says, okay, it’s fine; I’m glad you 
came in. And that’s it. So they have to then travel all the way 
home, and that costs money for gas, for hotel room, for food, 
and so on and so forth. And many of these senior citizens live 
on fixed incomes, Mr. Speaker. It’s a very, very low level 
income that they have. 
 
Now why couldn’t the government do something for them, Mr. 
Speaker? They’ve had $100 billion. They had $100 billion. 
Why couldn’t they use some of that money, some of that money 
to help seniors in northern Saskatchewan to come here, to travel 
to some of the urban centres for their medical appointments, 
Mr. Speaker? Why couldn’t they help the seniors, say maybe 
once every few years like they do in the territories or like they 
do in Nunavut, I believe, where they provide a set of glasses for 
senior citizens once every two years or they help them with 
dentures or they help them with drug costs, Mr. Speaker? They 
couldn’t do any of that for the seniors of northern 
Saskatchewan, much less the seniors of all of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s what the NDP always contends, Mr. Speaker. With 
the amount of revenues that the Sask Party has enjoyed for the 
last eight years — and I say, $100 billion — they couldn’t get 
some of the basic things done, the basic things done, providing 
decent services for our senior citizens. And I look at the 
example in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, where they 
could’ve easily afforded buying dentures or buying a pair of 
eyeglasses for the seniors, as long as they’re a certain age and 
they had this threshold of income. You want to income test it? 
That’s fine. But, Mr. Speaker, they couldn’t even do that. They 
couldn’t even do that with their record revenue. 
 
And that’s why whenever they get up and brag about some of 
their stats, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House we say, 



May 12, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7217 

you’ve had twice the amount of money and you’ve 
underperformed miserably. And I can tell you, if the NDP had 
$100 billion at their disposal over a period of eight years, Mr. 
Speaker, we would have the best health care system. We would 
have the best education system in the country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what we’re finding with the Saskatchewan Party is they 
can’t get this thing figured out. They simply cannot figure it 
out, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why you have all these issues. We 
have all these people coming to the Assembly. They’re angry. 
They’re upset. They want to see a decent health care system, 
Mr. Speaker, a decent, respectful, responsive health care 
system. The health care system’s got to be there for them, Mr. 
Speaker, because that’s their form of stability. And yet the Sask 
Party government has failed to deliver, full stop, period, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now what the Saskatchewan Party is doing now is they’ve 
failed to deliver on the publicly funded health care system, so 
now they’re going to the private sector. Because the 
Saskatchewan Party can’t figure out how to run a public health 
care system, they run back to their philosophical belief, saying, 
can the private health care system deliver what we aren’t able to 
do? And of course the private health care system is going to 
say, well we’ll come to Saskatchewan but we’re only going to 
deal with those that can afford our services. And what did the 
Saskatchewan Party do? They clapped. They applaud that. 
 
Only the ones that can afford the private MRI service, that’s the 
target audience of some of these private firms coming in to 
provide MRI service. Now I go back to my argument earlier, 
Mr. Speaker. If the average layperson would sit here and they’d 
say, well if we have a publicly funded MRI system and we have 
a privately funded MRI system, well could both these systems 
handle people and make the MRI service wait a lot lesser? 
That’s what they would think, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the problem here is that those that have the money get to 
jump in front of the line. So if you don’t have the money, guess 
what? The line gets longer on the publicly offered MRI 
services. But if you have cash, you can get an MRI service right 
now, Mr. Speaker. If you’ve got the money, you can get it 
ahead of everyone else. But what happens because you have 
two MRI lines, a private one and a public one, there’s still only 
one publicly funded health care system that you have to go to. 
So what happens is, that’s where the logjam happens. That’s 
where the logjam happens. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as you look at the other effect that occurs 
when you have this private health care system delivery agent 
and you have a publicly funded delivery agent, Mr. Speaker, is 
that a lot of times the private sector will try and woo a lot of the 
medical, professional people to their system. So as they give 
them better benefits, or they give them longer holidays, or they 
give them less hours of work, Mr. Speaker, Then they get to 
move from the publicly funded health care system to the private 
system, thus making the publicly funded system under strain. 
They have less staff and they have less time. They have less 
benefits, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now what happens is you have these two systems competing 
with each other, where you have the rich system and then you 
have the publicly funded system — you see that in the States, 

Mr. Speaker — what happens is the publicly funded health care 
system begins to deteriorate and begins to have challenges.  
 
And this is where, Mr. Speaker, the argument that we make 
within the NDP, that’s why you should never begin the process 
of private health care because what’s going to happen is only 
those that could afford health care are the ones that are going to 
be at the head of the line. Mr. Speaker, they’re going to get 
better care because they have the money. And the rest of you, 
the whole argument that, the old argument that was made one 
day is stay well, be well, or farewell. That’s kind of their 
argument around health care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you would wonder, I go back to my point again, you would 
wonder how could they, how could they go through all that 
money, go through all that money in their last eight years and 
they can’t figure out health care, Mr. Speaker? How could they 
go through all that money in eight years and still have all this 
debt? And how could you go through all that money in the last 
eight years and still want to have private MRI service? And the 
solution and the answer in front of all of us Saskatchewan 
people is that they have underperformed. They have not 
delivered at all. 
 
And that’s what I tell the people of Saskatchewan, that you 
watch very carefully on this particular debate, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve got three days to debate this bill, and we will debate this 
bill. But I tell the people of Saskatchewan that the 
Saskatchewan Party themselves, they are tied to their ideology 
around private health care. They are tied to their ideology of 
selling off our Crowns, Mr. Speaker. They are tied to their 
ideology of using debt, going to the debt as opposed to what 
they would blame the NDP for, of increasing taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re giving away our future and they’re putting 
us into debt. Each and every single day that I sat in this 
Assembly, I see debt being ratcheted up, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s why when we had the debate around the budget, Mr. 
Speaker, when the Finance minister indicated very publicly, 
when he indicated very publicly that this was his last budget, I 
said thank goodness it’s your last budget because we can’t 
afford any more of those particular budgets for the future of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That was what I argued, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’ll continue arguing. 
 
Now the member from Estevan is chirping from her chair, Mr. 
Speaker. She is chirping from her chair, and I really wouldn’t 
mind asking that member some specific questions of what 
happened in 1980. She would know, Mr. Speaker. She would 
know. She was working in Grant Devine’s office at the time, 
and she would have a rich history, rich history of how this 
province was put on the brink of bankruptcy, Mr. Speaker, 
when the New Democrats took over in the early 1990s. She 
would have an idea of how that future was squandered under 
that premier, Mr. Speaker — the same fashion, the same fashion 
which the Saskatchewan Party is squandering our future 
through expensive P3s. 
 
We’re asking for advice. We’re asking for information. We’re 
asking for accountability and transparency saying, how much 
are those P3s costing us? Can you tell us what interest rate 
you’re paying? Can you tell us how much profit you’re giving 
these companies? Can you tell us how much maintenance 



7218 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2015 

contracts you’re giving these companies? The people of 
Saskatchewan have a right to know. The people of 
Saskatchewan have a right to know what the P3s are costing us. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the same fashion in which the member from 
Estevan’s quiet about the 1980s, they’re not quiet about the 
2015s and beyond, Mr. Speaker, because, Mr. Speaker, that is a 
history of the Saskatchewan Party conservative government. 
They have never, ever delivered for the people of 
Saskatchewan. And that’s why on this side of the House we will 
continue challenging them because they have failed us 
miserably in managing our finances. They have failed us 
miserably in managing the publicly health care funded because 
they only want the rich to have access, Mr. Speaker, and for the 
rest of us — stay well, be well, or farewell. That’s their attitude 
to those that cannot afford the proper medical attention, Mr. 
Speaker, and you see evidence of that galore. 
 
And this Bill 179 that we’re debating today, Bill 179 that we are 
debating today, we only got three days to debate it. Why, Mr. 
Speaker? I go back to my earlier point: because they didn’t have 
the courage to bring this bill at the start of the session to give 
the people of Saskatchewan the opportunity to view this bill and 
the opposition the opportunity to debate them on this bill 
because we want to have a fight on this bill, Mr. Speaker. We 
want to have a fight on Bill 179 because it represents to us the 
first step in the Sask Party’s grand plan, grand plan to bring in 
two-tiered health care system: one for the rich that can afford to 
get services and, for the rest of us, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to 
have a long lineup, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And once again the member from Moose Jaw is chirping up. 
Why didn’t the member from Moose Jaw chirp up when they 
pulled the hyperbaric chamber? Why didn’t he stand up? Why 
didn’t he speak up when they pulled the hyperbaric chamber, 
Mr. Speaker? He sat on his hands. And I wish, Mr. Speaker, he 
should have spoke up then. He should have been really loud 
like he’s loud now, defending Moose Jaw’s interest in the 
hyperbaric chamber. But, Mr. Speaker, he was quiet as his 
colleague from Moose Jaw was quiet too. They were both quiet. 
They were both quiet. And you know why we know they were 
quiet, Mr. Speaker? The reason why we know they were quiet 
because the hyperbaric chamber is not in the new Moose Jaw 
Hospital. Had they spoken up, Mr. Speaker, it would be there 
today. 
 
So to the people of Moose Jaw, your two MLAs failed you 
miserably on the hyperbaric chamber. Your firemen come here 
to advocate for that. A retired nurse came here. A couple from 
North Battleford came here to fight for the hyperbaric chamber. 
And I commend that couple from North Battleford because they 
travelled here on their own dime to fight for the hyperbaric 
chamber for Moose Jaw. Why? Because it helped them heal. It 
helped them in the health care perspective. 
 
Of all the people that rallied around the hyperbaric chamber, 
there’s only two people absent from that whole process: the two 
members from Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. The two members 
from Moose Jaw who are busy sitting in here advocating and 
supporting the private health care bill that we’re speaking about 
today, Bill 179. That’s where they were. They were here 
defending the privatization of our health care, Mr. Speaker. 
They weren’t fighting for the hyperbaric chamber. They were 

fighting for their desire as conservatives to have a publicly 
funded health care system. And I say to them, shame on them. 
Shame on them for not standing up for the people that they 
should be representing and should be fighting for them. They 
should be advocating for them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what you’ve seen from my perspective, I’ll say it again. 
From my perspective, Mr. Speaker, what I’ve seen, as a result 
of the two members from Moose Jaw’s performance to try and 
defend Moose Jaw’s interest as it relates to the hyperbaric 
chamber, we gave them a big fat F, Mr. Speaker. That’s how we 
graded them on standing up, on standing up for Moose Jaw, Mr. 
Speaker. They couldn’t get it figured out. And now today, you 
sit there. You sit there, Mr. Speaker. I tell the people of Moose 
Jaw, had they had the courage to stand up, had they had the 
courage to stand up, Mr. Speaker, and speak on behalf of 
Moose Jaw, Moose Jaw would have the hyperbaric chamber in 
the new hospital right now. But they don’t have it, Mr. Speaker, 
because those two members did not stand up. And I say shame 
on them. I say shame on them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:45] 
 
And the people of Moose Jaw are going to send them a message 
next time because we want people there that are going to come 
here with courage and conviction to make sure that our health 
care system is kept public and that any effort to try and bring 
the private sector in, where the rich get services before and 
above anyone else, Mr. Speaker, they should stand up again. 
This is their opportunity. Stand up and vote against Bill 179, 
because if they’re going to sit on their hands, if they’re going to 
sit on their hands and not do anything, then, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
why on this side of the Assembly, we argue it’s time to change 
the government. 
 
They’ve had record revenue. They’re leaving us with a record 
debt, and they’re also trying to sell the Crowns. Worst of all, 
Mr. Speaker, they are now promoting and advocating a 
two-tiered health care system, which we know eventually they 
will show, they will show, Mr. Speaker, their true colours. Their 
true colours are . . . There are no liberals over there, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re all conservatives, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And how do we know they’re conservatives? Well because of 
the amount of debt they’re putting us under. How do we know 
they’re conservatives? Because they’re selling our assets, Mr. 
Speaker. How do we know they’re conservatives? Because 
they’re racking up the province with debt. We’ve seen this act 
before, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen this act before and once again 
they’re back. Here’s act two, Mr. Speaker. And I’d tell the 
people of Saskatchewan we cannot afford four more years of 
Sask Party rule, Mr. Speaker. We cannot afford four more years 
of Sask Party rule. That’s why we’re going to continue working 
and building and arguing on behalf of the Saskatchewan people 
that are saying no to two-tiered health care, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
saying no to Bill 179. 
 
And what’s really frustrating, Mr. Speaker, as I said at the 
outset, is they introduced this bill at the end of the session. 
We’ve got three days left here. And, Mr. Speaker, to introduce 
the bill at the end of the session, to me that says one thing. That 
says one thing — that they never had the courage to debate this 
bill. They never had the courage to defend their ideology 



May 12, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7219 

around this bill. They never had the courage, Mr. Speaker, to 
stand up to fight for what they believe because they know the 
Saskatchewan people don’t want this two-tiered health care 
system. They don’t want a system that treats the rich different 
from the poor, Mr. Speaker, or they don’t want a system that 
treats the rich as opposed to the middle class. We’re in this all 
together. No special deals for anyone, Mr. Speaker. That was 
their language. That was their language, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I say today, from my perspective, that Bill 179 is harkening 
an era under the Sask Party watch, Mr. Speaker, to advocate 
and support and direct Saskatchewan towards a two-tiered 
health care system. This is evidence right here, Mr. Speaker. It 
is their first step. It is their trial balloon. And like I said at the 
outset, their trial balloon was floated out with three days left in 
the Assembly. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if there’s any indication of how much, of 
how much that the Saskatchewan Party backbench is going to 
fight against the publicly . . . fight to defend the publicly funded 
health care system, Mr. Speaker, that’s the reason why I’m 
using the two Moose Jaw MLAs as examples. Because when it 
comes to something as dear as the hyperbaric chamber is, as 
dear and as important as that service is to Moose Jaw and area 
and the province overall, Mr. Speaker, those two MLAs sat in 
the back in their chairs, sat on their hands. And the only time 
they lifted their hands, the only time they lifted their hands to 
support anything is when they’re instructed to do so, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We need, we need a backbench with a backbone to say no, 
we’re not going to support a privately funded health care 
system where the rich get preferential treatment. Absolutely 
not, Mr. Speaker. That’ll put many regions — rural 
Saskatchewan, the remote parts of Saskatchewan, rural 
Saskatchewan, northern Saskatchewan — a lot of people would 
be at a disadvantage then. 
 
And we can’t figure out, we can’t figure out why would they 
want to go to this route when they’ve had record revenue. I 
always go back to that point. They’ve had record revenue. The 
last NDP government had $8 billion for their budget, Mr. 
Speaker. These guys have almost half of that — $14.4 billion 
— and they still can’t, and they still can’t figure it out, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s why, that’s why, Mr. Speaker, that is why, 
Mr. Speaker, half of them are quitting. Half of them are heading 
out of Dodge, Mr. Speaker. Half of them are heading out of 
Dodge. 
 
And I’ll tell the people of Saskatchewan this. If the NDP had 
the opportunity to have $100 billion, $100 billion over eight 
years, Mr. Speaker, we would have the best health care system 
in the country. We would not have . . . We would have had the 
best education system in the country, Mr. Speaker. We would 
not have our kids going to school wearing parkas because the 
air quality was so poor in the one school that they had to open 
the windows in the middle of winter. That’s the Sask Party 
record, Mr. Speaker. That’s the Sask Party record, Mr. Speaker. 
They’ve had record revenue, and yet they’ve failed miserably 
on many fronts. 
 
And Bill 179 is one bill that I say to the people of 
Saskatchewan, they’re back. They’re back. The conservatives 

are back. They want their private health care system for those 
that can afford to pay for it. They want to sell off the Crowns, 
Mr. Speaker. They want to leave a whole whack of debt, a 
whole whack of debt for the future generations that’ll have to 
pay that debt down. We’ve seen this act before, and that’s why 
the member from Estevan is pretty quiet now, Mr. Speaker, 
pretty quiet because we’ve seen that show before. We’ve seen 
that problem before, Mr. Speaker. I can certainly go on on the 
history. If people want to go back to the history, I’ll certainly go 
back to the history. 
 
And that’s why, that’s why, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the 
Assembly, the New Democrats will be standing up to the 
Saskatchewan Party. And as an opposition we’re going to tell 
the people of Saskatchewan, that’s what these guys are doing to 
your future. That’s what these guys are doing to our finances. 
That’s what these guys are doing to our health care system. 
Because, Mr. Speaker, I say, shame on them. I say, shame on 
them because the people of Saskatchewan expected better. The 
people of Saskatchewan expected better, especially because the 
economy was going so good. 
 
We had record revenue, and what we’re seeing now, Mr. 
Speaker, is the wheels are coming off the Saskatchewan Party, 
Mr. Speaker. People are starting to pay attention to the amount 
of debt that we see in not only our provincial government, Mr. 
Speaker, but the amount of debt the universities have today, the 
amount of debt the municipalities have today, Mr. Speaker. The 
list goes on until all these different organizations are assuming 
greater debt because the Saskatchewan Party is opening up the 
opportunity for them to get into debt. And, Mr. Speaker, 
eventually, eventually if you look at it, that debt has to be paid. 
 
And I say to the taxpayers out there in Saskatchewanland, to the 
taxpayers out there, either way you’re going to have to look at 
the whole challenge of those future costs. It’s going to be the 
debt left behind that’s going to cost all of us, including the 
taxpayers. All the taxpayers, that debt, we have to pay. We have 
to pay, Mr. Speaker. I pay a lot of taxes each year and I enjoy 
the health care system that we have the opportunity to access in 
a publicly funded way, Mr. Speaker. So I look at the education 
opportunity my grandchildren and my children have, Mr. 
Speaker, so some of those taxes I pay. I understand that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as a taxpayer, I also know that in the future 
I’m going to have to pay more taxes. My children are going to 
have to pay those taxes, and my grandchildren are going to have 
to pay those taxes. So no matter what you are in terms of your 
background or your history or what region you’re from, those 
taxes, those taxes you’re going to have to pay for years and 
years. Because while the Saskatchewan Party doesn’t call them 
taxes, Mr. Speaker, what they have given us is debt for years 
and years to come. And to me that’s a new phrase right over 
there for the Saskatchewan Party. You may not want to call 
them taxes. We call it debt, and eventually who’s paying that 
debt? The taxpayers are paying that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The taxpayers are paying the debt that’s being ratcheted up by 
the Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker, and this despite the 
fact that they’ve had record revenue in the last eight years. 
That’s what’s the most phenomenally insane thing that I’ve 
seen in my years in politics here. How could a party, how could 
a party inherit a booming economy? How can a party inherit 



7220 Saskatchewan Hansard May 12, 2015 

billions in the bank? How can a party inherit a growing 
population? Then eight years later, they’re broke, and then eight 
years later, they’re asking for a private health care system, Mr. 
Speaker. Eight years later, despite selling Crowns, they still 
have a lot of trouble making ends meet. 
 
We just can’t figure it out from this side of the House. And 
that’s why we say, where has the money gone? Where has the 
money gone, Mr. Speaker? That’s one of the arguments that . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Oh half of the schools they’re 
talking about is being built under P3s. These are rent-a-schools. 
You’re getting a private company . . . I want to explain the P3 
argument, Mr. Speaker. You’re getting a private company to 
build you a school. 
 
This private company will build a school. Okay? And they’ll 
make a profit from building that school, which is fair enough. 
That’s what you’re in business for, is to make a profit. We’re 
not arguing about that. But, Mr. Speaker, they’re also going to 
charge us interest, interest on the money they use to build that 
private school. So we’re paying interest, the taxpayers are 
paying interest, and not only are we paying the interest, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re also paying the maintenance costs of that 
particular school. So we’re paying three ways. We’re paying to 
construct it, we’re paying the interest on their contribution as P3 
partners, and we’re paying on the maintenance. 
 
So we ask the question, what is the cost to our P3 accountability 
and transparency bill that we introduced? We said, what is the 
cost of these projects? Can you tell us? The people of 
Saskatchewan have a right to know. And all we hear from the 
Saskatchewan Party government is silence. They wouldn’t give 
us that information, Mr. Speaker, and that will catch up to them, 
Mr. Speaker. That will catch up to them in a sense of the people 
of Saskatchewan will demand to know how much are we 
paying for some of these P3 projects. 
 
And I want to go to the, you know, to the bypass project. The 
Regina bypass project is another example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
as it relates to affordability and to health care. My whole 
argument around Bill 179 is that the Regina bypass project, Mr. 
Speaker, is going to be $1.2 billion. It’s the biggest 
infrastructure project in the history of Highways. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, there are a number of groups and organizations in the 
province that are saying, well we need a bypass in Regina. We 
agree. The NDP agree. The bypass has to happen. We certainly 
agree with that. 
 
Number two is that we need interchanges in Balgonie and 
White City. We agree with that as well, Mr. Speaker. But why 
Tower Road? Why Tower Road, Mr. Speaker? Why Tower 
Road? That’s the biggest argument that many people are 
arguing about. And then why don’t you go to highway, I believe 
it’s 46, which will save a lot of money? And there are people 
out there arguing about that, Mr. Speaker. They suspect that you 
could save 2 or $300 million on doing the actual route that 
would bypass the city as opposed to coming into the city. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, again the Saskatchewan Party government is 
simply not going to change their mind, they’re saying. Well 
these people have put forward a very credible argument, and 
that’s our argument within the NDP benches is these guys have 
become so out of touch that they’re spending money at a fast, 

fast rate, Mr. Speaker, and they’re not getting it right. Health 
care is a good example, Mr. Speaker. The bypass is a good 
example. Their rent-a-school projects are good examples. This 
is the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, and I think the people 
of Saskatchewan are going to wake up to the fact that in the 
future we’re going to be faced with a lot of debt and we cannot 
afford any more time with the Saskatchewan Party government. 
 
So I tell the people of Saskatchewan one simple point, Mr. 
Speaker — that if we had $100 billion in eight years, I’ll tell 
you today that Saskatchewan would be much better off than 
what we are under the Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. 
Speaker. We know historically that every bit of good news that 
they have, they inherited from the previous administration and 
the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And now we’re 
seeing their true colours. We’re seeing their true colours, Mr. 
Speaker, and not only do they want to sell the Crowns, not only 
wanting to sell the Crowns, Mr. Speaker, but to also bring in 
private health care, a two-tiered health care system, and to 
saddle future generations with debt. What kind of government 
is that, Mr. Speaker? That is a sad government, and the people 
of Saskatchewan need to get rid of them now, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s why we’ll continue fighting and advocating on this side 
of the House. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the most important point I would raise is that 
any time in history, any time in the history of Saskatchewan 
where the economy was going so well — people were working; 
things were going so well — the NDP were the government of 
the time, Mr. Speaker. History will show that on a continual 
basis when things were going well, Mr. Speaker, the NDP were 
in charge. Now what happened, Mr. Speaker? What happens is 
now in the Sask Party, they inherited all that great news and 
now they’re claiming they built the economy when they had 
absolutely nothing to do with it. 
 
Now I look at the Alberta example, Mr. Speaker, and the new 
premier, Premier Notley. She is going to prove to the people of 
Saskatchewan and the people of Canada that it’s not the 
conservatives that know how to build a solid future, Mr. 
Speaker, that New Democrats can do that just even better, Mr. 
Speaker, than the conservatives. I think that she will prove, she 
will prove, Mr. Speaker, that at the end of the day that the 
conservatives really don’t know how to run the economy. They 
really don’t. They really do not, Mr. Speaker. And they mock, 
but the bottom line is, Mr. Speaker, is that she will prove to 
them once and for all that they don’t have a clue when it comes 
to the economy. It’s all a big pretend game, Mr. Speaker, and 
this is another example of how the pretend game is further 
aggravated, aggravated by the fact that they’re bringing their 
ideology in such as a two-tiered health care system as 
evidenced by Bill 179. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the Assembly, we 
don’t for one minute buy any of the Sask Party logic. $100 
billion over eight years equals record revenue, and yet you put 
this province in record debt and yet you sold some Crowns and 
now you’re bringing in two-tiered health care system. What 
kind of government is that, Mr. Speaker? It’s a failing 
government, and I tell the people of Saskatchewan that we can’t 
afford four more years of these guys. We simply cannot afford 
four more years. 
 



May 12, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7221 

[16:00] 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, as I look at their benches, half of 
them are quitting. They’re heading out of Dodge, and we all see 
that from our vantage point, Mr. Speaker. Half of them are 
heading out of Dodge. Time to pull the pin because it’s going to 
get a little tougher around here. And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, 
at the end of the day, at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, at the 
end of the day when the people of Saskatchewan begin to see, 
begin to see their true colours and when the people of 
Saskatchewan begin to see some of our Crowns up for sale and 
when the people of Saskatchewan begin seeing the debt being 
racked up and when the people of Saskatchewan start seeing 
evidence of the two-tiered health care, Mr. Speaker, I’m going 
to tell them that it may be too late because the Saskatchewan 
Party will have done their job well by privatizing everything, 
including our health care system. 
 
But we can stop them, Mr. Speaker. We can develop a 
prosperous future for everyone, Mr. Speaker. And I often steal 
this line, which I think it’s a great line — but I heard it once and 
I’ll use it time and time again, Mr. Speaker — that this whole 
notion of this province isn’t a good province for any of us 
unless it’s a good province for all of us, Mr. Speaker. That 
includes people in rural Saskatchewan. That includes people 
from northern Saskatchewan. That includes people from all 
throughout Saskatchewanland. And that’s the important thing, 
Mr. Speaker, is that we’ve got to make sure that people know 
out there the dangers, the dangers that the Sask Party is putting 
us in. And Bill No. 179, I don’t know whose silly idea it is to 
bring in private health care. I don’t know who’s pulling the 
strings over there. We know it’s not the backbenchers because 
they don’t have a backbone, because if they had a backbone 
they’d stand up and they’d say no; the people of Saskatchewan 
don’t want that. But we’ve seen evidence that they’re not 
standing up and speaking for their constituents. 
 
So who is pulling, who is pulling the strings for the Sask Party? 
Who is the puppet master over there, Mr. Speaker? We know 
that half of them are quitting, but there still must be two or three 
puppet masters over there that are pushing the agenda for the 
conservative movement which includes a lot of debt, private 
health care and, Mr. Speaker, and worst of all is the effort to 
sell our Crowns, which generate great profit. 
 
So I tell the people quite frankly that if you look at this bill. . . 
I’ll close on this point, Mr. Speaker. If you look at this bill, the 
Saskatchewan Party didn’t have the courage to debate this all 
session. They brought it, they brought it the last three days of 
the session, and to me that shows the character of the 
Saskatchewan Party government, the Premier and his cabinet 
and the backbench. They didn’t have the courage to debate this 
all session long. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan don’t want a two-tiered health care system. As I 
said at the outset, they want a pragmatic government that is 
going to move Saskatchewan forward in the most ambitious yet 
compassionate way. And part of the compassion that’s 
necessary to build a future includes taking care of our seniors, 
our children, and the adults of our province through a good 
health care system and a functioning educational system. And 
every corner of our province should be treated fairly and with 

respect, Mr. Speaker. We don’t see no evidence of that 
whatsoever from the Sask Party government. 
 
So despite record revenue, we’re now heading towards record 
debt. We’re now heading towards selling our Crowns, and 
we’re now looking at a two-tiered health care system. That’s 
how bad the Saskatchewan Party has managed our province the 
late years. I say it’s time to get rid of them once and for all. On 
that notion, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 179. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 179, The MRI Facilities 
Licensing Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. In light of the work that has to be done in committees 
and other work that has to take place today, I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:04.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7197 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7197 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7198 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7198 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7198 
  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7198 
  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7199 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7199 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7199 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7199 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7199 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7200 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7200 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7200 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7200 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7200 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7201 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Ile-a-la-Crosse Nurse Honoured 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7201 
 Holodomor Statue Dedication 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7201 
 Upcoming Pride Events 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7201 
 Civil Service Response Team 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7202 
 National Nursing Week 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7202 
 Supporting Women in Leadership Roles 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7202 
 Taxation in Saskatchewan 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7203 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Buy Local Day Legislation 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7203 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7203 
 Provision of Hyperbaric Treatments 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7204 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7204 
 Gay-Straight Alliances 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7206 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7206 
 Health Quality Council and Long-Term Care Surveying 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7207 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7207 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7208 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7208 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 179 — The MRI Facilities Licensing Act 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7209 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


