
























































Hansard: October 26, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 73A  MONDAY, OCTOBER 26, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Hon. Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7457 
 October 26, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask for leave to make 
an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is it the pleasure of the House to accept? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Mr. Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
thanks to members for the leave to make a very special 
introduction to someone that has joined us in the Speaker’s 
gallery. Last week he was re-elected, I think for the eighth 
consecutive time, as the Member of Parliament for the 
constituency of Wascana. Ralph Goodale has joined us in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He’s obviously no stranger to the province, to political life in 
the province. He’s no stranger to this particular Chamber, as he 
was also the member for I think Assiniboia-Gravelbourg, 
looking over at the member for Wood River. When the member 
for Wood River was still flying Snowbirds, I think he was an 
MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] here and the 
leader of the Liberal Party in the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He has handled a number of files in the national government, 
including agriculture, natural resources. He’s been the House 
leader for the national government and for his party I think in 
opposition, as well as Finance minister for our country, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
He has served this province very well and we’re hopeful . . . 
Well we know that that service will continue, that service will 
continue, we would argue, in a senior role. It certainly should 
be a very senior role in the new government. I had a chance to 
meet with Mr. Goodale just before the session, and we talked 
about a number of issues, federal-provincial issues. We look 
forward to working on those issues in the weeks and months 
ahead. 
 
And mostly we want to congratulate him on his victory. We 
want to thank him for his leadership in the province past, 
present, and future. And we want to welcome him here to his 
Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to join 
with the Premier in welcoming Mr. Goodale to the Assembly 
and, first of all, congratulate him on his re-election and to 
congratulate his party on their election to government, Mr. 

Speaker. It was not Mr. Goodale’s only election. He’s been in a 
few. But I imagine being re-elected is not something that grows 
old. 
 
And people in Regina know, Mr. Speaker, that he’s a fixture 
around the city at events and works hard for Saskatchewan’s 
interests. And so I wish him all the best over the next four years 
as he continues to serve the people of this province, and I’m 
sure that he’ll be a strong voice on the issues that matter here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. So I ask all members in joining me 
in also welcoming Mr. Goodale to the Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
is my pleasure to introduce to you and through you to 
colleagues here in the legislature, some important guests that 
have joined us here today, Mr. Speaker. With us today are 
members of the western chapter of the American Chamber of 
Commerce in Canada which, just a few weeks ago, opened a 
Saskatchewan office located right here in Regina. 
 
I had the opportunity to have lunch with a group of business 
people and government officials and these gentlemen earlier 
today. And I know that the chairman of the board, Mr. Tom 
Mudry, will be joining us shortly. He’s not here quite yet, Mr. 
Speaker; his flight’s been delayed in Calgary but he’s on his 
way. But joining us today is Mr. Norman Leach, a native 
Saskatchewanian from Weyburn, Saskatchewan. Mr. Leach 
lives in Calgary now but he is the chapter’s executive director. 
And along with Mr. Leach is Mr. Rick Mantey, and Rick is the 
Chair of the chamber’s new Saskatchewan chapter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, trade is very important to this province, and the 
advocacy work that the American chapter of the chamber of 
commerce can do to assist our province and the business in our 
province is very welcome. So welcome to the Legislative 
Assembly here today on the opening of your new chapter in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the Finance minister and welcome these leaders to their 
Chamber here today, and welcome their chapter. Certainly we 
look forward to engaging and meeting in due course as well, 
and thank them for their leadership within our province. 
 
I’d also like to very briefly welcome the member from 
Wascana. It’s certainly an experienced and effective cabinet 
minister, somebody who’s been a very strong parliamentarian. 
And anyone in and around Regina knows that Ralph Goodale is 
somebody that is dedicated to his service, the people, the 
groups, the events that strengthen our community in so many 
good ways. Of course his wife, Pam, has also served her 
province in so many ways, as an educator and also supporting 
very important causes within this community. So I thank Hon. 
Member Goodale for his continued service, and look forward to 
working co-operatively towards those matters that are in the 
best interests of Saskatchewan people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 



7458 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2015 

Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — I request leave for an extended 
introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to 
take the time to introduce the rest of your gallery here. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to introduce some of Saskatchewan’s 
accomplished young athletes seated in the gallery today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in May, Saskatchewan water polo athletes 
travelled to Calgary, Alberta to participate in the 2015 National 
Championship League. The Regina Armada water polo 
under-14 boys team went undefeated in winning the first-ever 
under-14 NCL [National Championship League] Western 
Canadian championships. 
 
Two members of the team received special recognition: Brody 
McKnight won the Best Goaltender of the Tournament Award; 
Callin Chimilar won the Best Offensive Player of the 
Tournament Award. Just one week later, Team Saskatchewan 
under-16 boys travelled to Calgary and won gold and the title of 
2015 NCL Canadian National champions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to you and through you, I’d like to introduce the 
athletes and coaches that are seated in the gallery today. From 
the under-14 boys Regina Armada water polo, our Western 
Canadian champions are Brody McKnight, Callin Chimilar, 
Noah Katchuk, Josh Teichroeb, Keller Woloshyn, Nathaniel 
Eidsness, Jacob Brentnell, Coach Eric Graham, as well as 
Assistant Coach Auriel Bill. From the under-14 team but not 
here today is Josh McKnight. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have with us members of the 
Saskatchewan 16-and-under boys, Canadian national 
champions already mentioned: Brody McKnight, Callin 
Chimilar, Jake Morris, Bryden Goosen, Stephen Gloade, Jaime 
Flaman, Connor Sunley, Hunter Kelly, Bruno Marunica, Tyler 
Grieve, Ben Guest, Coach Cyril Dorgigne, and Assistant Coach 
Dave Boan. Although he could not be with us today, I also 
recognize Drew Barsness who is from Weyburn. 
 
Thank you to the Regina Armada water polo 14-and-under 
boys’ team and team Saskatchewan under-16 boys’ team, the 
coaches, volunteers, and families for your dedication to the 
sport. I ask, Mr. Speaker, that all members please join me in 
congratulating and welcoming these guests to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to recognize 
four members from the Western Development Museum here 
with us, and I’d like to thank them for all their great work. And 
with us today is Susan Lamb, Diana Ireland, Janice Hobbs, and 
Dennis Naphin. And again, Mr. Speaker, there’ll be a reception 
a little later today and we thank them for all their work. 

And while I’m still on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to . . . 
I’m pleased to introduce sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, 
Roz Kelsey from the Faculty of Kinesiology and Health 
Studies, and Dena McMartin, the associate vice-president of 
academic and research. They’re involved in the Man Up 
Against Violence and plus the other initiative that we were at 
today, sir, which was . . . They invited me and the Minister of 
Advanced Education and a number of other of my colleagues 
again to remind us to remain vigilant in the cause to spread 
awareness against domestic violence. And again, the Man Up 
Against Violence initiative is very important. 
 
I’d like all members to join with me in applauding the initiative 
and to welcome them to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I guess 
first off I’d just like to say a quick word of welcome to the 
guests that are here for Man Up Against Violence, and certainly 
Professor McMartin comes from a family of folks that are very 
interested in education matters but certainly in the betterment of 
the community around them. So I want to say a special word of 
welcome to Professor McMartin. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it’s always with a lot of pride to look up and 
see a gallery full of water polo players come to the Legislative 
Assembly. And we’ve had national championship teams come 
in before for a greeting but it’s been a while. 
 
We’re here today to acknowledge that this is a team that’s not 
won just one national championship but two national 
championships, Mr. Speaker. It’s quite an event. It is quite an 
achievement. Great work to the players. I’ve seen some of them 
in action and they’re a pretty tough calibre of player. 
 
And I want to say a special word of thanks, of course, to the 
coaches, Coach Graham, Coach Bill, but also to Coach Boan 
and certainly Cyril Dorgigne who’s come here from France. 
And it’s safe to say that he’s kind of turned Saskatchewan water 
polo on its ear in a lot of ways. There’s been a strong tradition 
in this province, Mr. Speaker, but this is an individual that’s 
really done some amazing things and really spread the reach of 
water polo throughout the province and not just in Regina. 
 
But lastly I’ll say this, Mr. Speaker. The Lawson Aquatic 
Centre is the home of the Armada and it’s going to be, you 
know, the additional championship banners that they’re 
bringing to hang on the wall of that pool, which is of course 
located in Regina Elphinstone-Centre, something we’re very 
proud of. It’s a great thing. 
 
So again I join with the minister in welcoming these champions 
to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to join 
with the Minister of Parks and introduce one member that’s 
with the Western Development Museum up there, but also his 
wife, very good friends of mine and also constituents, Mr. 



October 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7459 

Speaker. 
 
Linda Hydamacka is a 35-year administrative person with the 
RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] and has done a great 
amount of work with them in the local area for those many 
years. I was kidding with her earlier, since she was about 10 
years old, Mr. Speaker. And Dennis is also a 10-year employee 
with the Government of Saskatchewan under a couple of 
different governments, but also a 30-year businessman, has 
Manitou Concessions out at Good Spirit Lake Provincial Park. 
Him and Linda have run that together for 30 years and very 
appreciative members of the community, very supportive of the 
community, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d also like to give a special thank you to both of them. In their 
community spirit, together have helped contribute tens of 
thousands of dollars to Brayden Ottenbreit Close Cuts for 
Cancer local initiatives fund, and very appreciative of all the 
work they do locally. So, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to 
welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First off I just 
wanted to also extend congratulations to Mr. Goodale. When he 
was a provincial politician, he used to bravely come to our 
home, which is notably an NDP [New Democratic Party] home. 
But my grandmother was living there at the time and she would 
say, “Who are you for?” And he’d say, “Liberals.” And she’d 
say, “I’m voting for you.” So that was my grandma. So I think 
he’ll remember those days. 
 
But especially I’d like to also welcome the individuals here 
representing the Western Development Museum and 
congratulate them for all the work that they do. Certainly the 
Saskatoon Western Development Museum is part of my riding 
and Boomtown is a cherished part of Saskatoon’s fabric, and I 
even took a blacksmithing course there a few years ago. And so 
I can actually forge a chain link if anybody’s interested. 
 
But certainly the stories they tell and the new logo that they’ve 
come out with is very impressive. We look forward to meeting 
with them later today. But on behalf of the official opposition, 
we’d like to welcome all of you to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce today a group of 52 grade 6, 7, and 8 students from 
Lakeview Elementary School, and they’re accompanied by their 
teachers, Mr. Jared Clarke and Mrs. Tanya Friske-Welburn. 
And I ask all members to welcome them here to the legislature. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just want 
to take a moment and join the many other folks who’ve 
welcomed the Western Development Museum folks here, 
especially if I could single out one, is Susan Lamb, a good 
friend who I’ve worked with many years at the Meewasin 
Valley Authority. And she’s such a booster of conservation in 

Saskatchewan, but particularly along the river systems. And I 
just want to ask all members here to join me in welcoming 
Susan to her legislature. Thank you very much. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
just want to make special recognition to Diana Ireland, in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. She is a constituent of mine and been very 
involved with Moose Jaw. One of the reasons Moose Jaw is 
doing as well as it is, is because Diana Ireland was the 
economic development officer for a number of years, and I see 
she’s still very active in the community. And we’re certainly 
proud to have her here and I’d ask everybody to recognize 
Diana. Thank you. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate the opportunity to stand today and present a petition 
in support of GSAs [gender and sexuality alliance] in 
Saskatchewan schools. We know that this government is not 
doing enough to create safe spaces in our schools for sexually 
diverse students or students who are being bullied because of 
their sexual identity or sexual orientation. And we know that 
gender and sexual alliances offer opportunities for gender- and 
sexually diverse students to assert their needs and have their 
voices heard. And we know this government must act so that 
under no circumstances are gender- and sexually diverse 
students denied the right to form GSAs within their schools. 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on this 
government to take immediate and meaningful action to 
pass The Respect for Diversity — Student Bill of Rights Act 
and enshrine in legislation the right of Saskatchewan 
students to form GSAs within their schools in order to 
foster caring, accepting, inclusive environments and deliver 
equal opportunities for all students to reach their full 
potential. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing the petition today come 
from Regina and Moose Jaw. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
pleased to stand in my place today to present a petition on 
highway construction in northern Saskatchewan. And we 
presented petitions for highway construction through all of the 
province but, Mr. Speaker, this petition is in relation to 
Highway 155, which is the primary highway that serves 
northwestern Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the people want to 
see this highway repaired and therefore their prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

To cause the provincial government to finally commit to 
requiring and upgrading Highway 155. 



7460 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2015 

And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are 
primarily from Ile-a-la-Crosse, and I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today again to present a petition in support of better seniors’ 
care. The petitioners point out that we continue to hear an 
increasing number of stories about the adverse effects of 
chronic understaffing in seniors’ care facilities, including things 
like unanswered calls for help, seniors being left unattended on 
toilets for hours, and seniors not receiving baths for weeks at a 
time. We heard some stories last week again, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the provincial government to 
immediately undertake meaningful steps to improve the 
quality of seniors’ care in our province, including creating 
more spaces and more choices for seniors; ensuring higher 
standards of care in public facilities, private facilities, and 
for home care; ensuring appropriate staffing levels in senior 
care facilities; and providing more support to help seniors 
remain independent in their own homes for as long as they 
desire. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of Regina and 
Yorkton. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition from citizens concerned with the high cost of 
post-secondary education in Saskatchewan. They point out that 
in 2014-15, Saskatchewan led the nation in terms of the highest 
increase in tuition overall, and they also point out, Mr. Speaker, 
that the average Canadian student in 2014 graduated with debt 
of $27,000, not including credit card and other private debt. In 
the prayer that reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

They respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 
provincial government to immediately increase the funding 
for post-secondary education in this province, with a 
legislated provision that this increase in funding be used to 
lower tuition rates. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens in Regina. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition in support of better schools: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on this 
government to immediately stop ignoring schools and start 
prioritizing students by capping classroom sizes, increasing 
support for students, and developing a transparent plan to 
build and repair our schools. 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by residents of Regina. I 
so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 

Violence Prevention Week 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the 
unfortunate distinction of having the highest rates of violence in 
our country. To bring awareness and to work to eliminate 
physical and sexual assault in our province, we are once again 
proclaiming this week Violence Prevention Week. 
 
Earlier today I, along with the ministers for Parks, Culture, 
Sport, Advanced Education, Social Services, as well as the 
member from Qu’Appelle Valley, attended the announcement 
of a new sexual assault policy at the University of Regina. 
Along with that, the Man Up Against Violence initiative on 
campus will help challenge mindsets and behaviours with 
regard to the social construction of masculinity and its 
relationship with violence. Policies like these are important for 
staff, students, and faculty on all of our campuses. While we 
hope these policies prevent these life-changing incidents from 
occurring, they are also crucial in helping all those affected 
when they do happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we realize that bringing awareness to this issue is 
what will make the biggest change. This is why this government 
recently launched the Who Will You Help? campaign. This 
campaign highlights the realities of interpersonal violence and 
abuse in our province and what you can do to help when these 
situations occur. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in thanking the University 
of Regina for taking this step forward and making the 
prevention of sexual assault a priority. Domestic violence and 
assault is not something that should be ignored. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Installation of New University of Saskatchewan President 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, on Saturday I had the pleasure of 
attending the University of Saskatchewan’s fall convocation 
ceremony. Although every convocation marks an important 
milestone for the graduates and their families, this year’s 
ceremony also marked an important milestone for our 
province’s oldest university. It was at this ceremony that Dr. 
Peter Stoicheff was installed as the 11th president of the 
University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Dr. Stoicheff is certainly no stranger to the U of S [University 
of Saskatchewan], having served for many years as the dean of 
the College of Arts and Science. From his extensive experience, 
Dr. Stoicheff shared with us that he views the university’s role 
as threefold: to inquire, to inform, and to innovate. And he 
pledged to continue the important work of indigenizing the 
university and making it more inclusive and welcoming for 
everyone. 
 
As a proud U of S grad, I am pleased that Dr. Stoicheff has 



October 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7461 

taken on this vital role. I’m excited by his vision and his desire 
to indigenize the university and I’m confident that his 
leadership will serve the University of Saskatchewan and our 
entire province well. So, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join 
me in congratulating Dr. Stoicheff on his appointment as the U 
of S president and in wishing him all the best as he begins the 
important work that lies ahead. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Greystone. 
 
Mr. Norris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this last 
Saturday I was very pleased and honoured to be able to join the 
Minister of Advanced Education, among others, for a terrific 
and important historical moment for the University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This past Saturday the University of Saskatchewan installed Dr. 
Peter Stoicheff as its 11th president and vice-chancellor. 
Ushering in a new era of innovation and inclusion, the 
installation took place as part of the university’s fall 
convocation held at TCU Place in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, prior to being appointed president of the 
university, Dr. Stoicheff was the distinguished dean of the 
College of Arts and Science. He takes over from Dr. Gordon 
Barnhart, former lieutenant governor of Saskatchewan, who 
served as interim president for more than a year. Dr. Barnhart 
helped guide the university through a time of transition, and we 
appreciate his service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the University of Saskatchewan is in a strong 
position to continue moving forward under its new leader, Peter 
Stoicheff. In his address on Saturday, Dr. Stoicheff pledged that 
as president, students, faculty, and alumni, among others, can 
look forward to a redoubled commitment to academic freedom 
and to increased efforts to engage Aboriginal peoples both on 
and beyond campus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Dr. Peter Stoicheff on being installed as president of the 
University of Saskatchewan and also in thanking Dr. Gordon 
Barnhart for his important work. I’m sure members would also 
like to join me in wishing the University of Saskatchewan 
continued success as it begins its new chapter along its 
esteemed history. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Queen City Pride Festival 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I once again 
had the honour this June to support and participate in the Queen 
City Pride Festival. The festival is an annual week-long 
celebration of the LGBTQ [lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, 
queer and/or questioning] community of Regina and the greater 
region of south Saskatchewan. The festival, held during Pride 
Month in Saskatchewan, features a series of events highlighting 
the culture, history, achievements, and struggles of the LGBTQ 
community. 
 
This year there were 30 unique events throughout the Queen 
City. Each event in the festival strives to educate, entertain, and 

inform participants. This festival offers opportunities to 
celebrate gender and sexual diversity as well as to raise 
awareness within the larger community. 
 
On June 20th I marched in the Queen City Pride parade. It was 
great to be joined by my own family along with many other 
members and allies of the LGBT [lesbian, gay, bisexual, 
transgender] community, including the member for Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre as well as the member for Coronation Park, 
the federal MP [Member of Parliament] for Wascana, and the 
new MP for Lewvan. The streets were filled with bright colours 
and people showing their pride and support for diversity. 
 
I ask all members to join with me to extend thanks to the 
sponsors of the events as well as to thank the 2015 Pride board 
for all their tireless work planning and executing this festival. 
Without a doubt, their efforts strengthen our community and 
help build our bright future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Prince Albert to Host World Softball Championship 
 
Ms. Jurgens: — Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to rise today to 
congratulate Prince Albert on being awarded the 2018 WBSC 
[World Baseball Softball Confederation] junior men’s softball 
world championships. The announcement made last week by 
the World Baseball Softball Confederation and today by 
Aallcann Developmental Fastball Organization and Project 
Triple Play is an exciting opportunity for the people in my 
constituency, in Prince Albert, and indeed in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ian Litzenberger, one of the Co-Chairs of the 
event, talked about the impact that hosting such a prestigious 
international tournament would have on our community. Not 
only is the tournament notable in terms of the talent it attracts, 
but also the economic benefits it will bring to our region. 
According to Mr. Litzenberger, the tournament will have an 
economic impact to Saskatchewan of about $12 million with 8 
of those million staying in P.A. [Prince Albert]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would invite members of this House to 
commend all the volunteers, athletes, and organizers who have 
worked tirelessly to attract this major tournament to Prince 
Albert. The 14 teams that will gather in P.A. in 2018 will not be 
disappointed by our city’s hospitality. This championship 
softball tournament is sure to have some hard-hitting action. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Team Canada Shows Well at 2015 Special Olympics 
World Games 

 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
2015 Special Olympics World Games were held in Los Angeles 
from July 25th to August 2nd. Sixty-five hundred athletes, 
2,000 coaches from 165 countries, along with 30,000 volunteers 
and 500,000 spectators made it the largest sport and 
humanitarian event of 2015. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Special Olympics World Games celebrates 



7462 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2015 

those with intellectual disabilities. It unites a world through 
sports while celebrating the abilities and accomplishments of 
people with intellectual disabilities to form a new global vision 
of acceptance through sport. 
 
This year Team Canada consists of 11 mission staff, 32 
coaches, and 115 athletes from 10 different sports. This 
includes, Mr. Speaker, some very talented Saskatchewan 
residents: Michael Qing, member of the swim team; Lindsay 
Kinnear, member of the athletics team; and Jackie Powell, one 
of the swim team coaches. 
 
Mr. Speaker, both Michael and Lindsay earned three medals 
each. Michael won gold in the 4 x 100, silver in the 200-metre 
individual, and bronze in the 400 freestyle. Lindsay won gold in 
the 4 x 100 relay, gold in the 200-metre run, and bronze in the 
long jump. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate Michael, Lindsay, and 
coach Jackie and all of Team Canada for an incredible showing 
at this year’s World Games. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
[14:00] 
 

Health Care Providers Week 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
in the House today and recognize October 25th to November 
1st as Health Care Providers Week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, health care providers are highly skilled 
professionals who work tirelessly to provide their patients with 
high-quality care. They are dedicated to the people of 
Saskatchewan and help keep the health system focused where it 
should be — on the patients and the families they serve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are 26 self-regulating health professions in 
Saskatchewan, ranging from speech-language pathologists, 
dietitians, lab technicians, dentists, doctors, and nurses, just to 
name a few. 
 
Our government is working to ensure we have the right mix of 
health care providers to offer the best possible care for citizens 
across Saskatchewan. Over the past eight years, Saskatchewan 
has seen significant increases in the number of physicians and 
nurses working here, and our government is working hard to 
ensure we have the many other health care providers that 
patients and families across our province need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly to join 
me in thanking the tens of thousands of health care providers 
that work tirelessly across our province each and every day to 
keep patients safe. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Surgical Wait Times and Provision of Health Care 
 
Mr. Broten: — We learned last week that this government has 
cut funding for surgeries. In fact just here in our capital city, the 
Sask Party has cut $8 million for surgeries. Internal documents 
show that this means 1,000 fewer surgeries in Regina alone. 
Not surprisingly, as a direct result of these cuts, we now see 
wait times for surgeries getting worse. Since March, when the 
Sask Party cut funding for surgeries, the number of people 
waiting more than three months for their surgery has jumped by 
50 per cent. What does the Premier have to the say about this 50 
per cent increase since March? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is that, 
as a result of the Government of Saskatchewan’s surgical wait 
times initiative where we’re now deploying some private 
surgery clinics in the public system, 91 per cent of 
Saskatchewan people are receiving their surgery within three 
months, 91 per cent within three months. Mr. Speaker, this is a 
marked change, a marked contrast from what used to happen 
here in Saskatchewan when members opposite were the 
governing party. In fact when the member for Lakeview, who’s 
still with us, was the minister of Health, he presided over the 
longest surgical wait-lists in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we’ve been working, through the deployment of additional 
surgical resources, additional specialists, more doctors, more 
nurses, more resources, more theatres frankly, offered through 
some of the private clinics, we’ve been working to deal with 
this backlog, Mr. Speaker. Some of the reductions that the hon. 
member would be referring to is the fact that we are slowly 
making our way through backlogs across the system with more 
work that is needed. But 91 per cent of Saskatchewan people 
today receive their surgery within three months. And the 
question today is again for the member opposite: will he 
eliminate private surgeries? Will he end the surgical wait times 
initiative should he be elected on the 4th of April next year? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, similar answers from last week, 
and what the Premier needs to do is update his numbers and 
update the speaking notes that he has because back in March, 
1,664 people waited longer than three months per surgery in our 
two largest health regions. The most recent numbers show that 
has now jumped to 2,485. 
 
Now of course, Mr. Speaker, that’s not what the Health minister 
said last week. He claimed that the government is, “doing a 
much better job of matching up real-time supply and demand 
for surgeries.” And he said, Mr. Speaker, they’ve reduced the 
number of people waiting in Regina to, “a couple of hundred.” 
Mr. Speaker, that is so far from reality that it is offensive. He 
said a couple hundred, but the real number is at least four times 
that. 
 
So my question to the Premier: why isn’t the Sask Party just 
being upfront about surgical wait times getting worse since 
March as a direct result of the Sask Party cuts? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 



October 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7463 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to have this debate 
with my hon. friend because, again for ideological reasons, the 
NDP have said they will wipe out the surgical wait times 
initiative of the government. They’ll shut down the private 
clinics currently operating within the public system. Mr. 
Speaker, when they do that . . . Well they won’t be able to do 
that, Mr. Speaker, but were they ever to get the chance to do 
that, here’s what might happen, Mr. Speaker. Because when 
members opposite sat on this side of the House and when they 
were in government, with their ideological government public 
sector approach only, 6,000 people in the Regina Qu’Appelle 
Health District — 6,000 people — were waiting for surgery 
longer than three months, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the number is somewhere between 3 and 400. We’ll put 
that record against their record any day of the week. And 
moreover, I ask the member again, will he stand up and confirm 
for this Assembly and the people of the province that, should he 
form the next government next April, that he will eliminate the 
surgical wait times initiative, that he’ll shut down the private 
clinics and drive up the wait times like they did before when 
they were in government, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, similar to last week, we see the 
volume. We see the agitation, Mr. Speaker, but we see no 
comment, Mr. Speaker, about this 50 per cent increase for those 
waiting longer than three months, a direct result of this Sask 
Party cut. 
 
You know, last week, Mr. Speaker, the Health minister just 
didn’t give wrong information about the number of people 
waiting for more than three months for surgery. They also said 
the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region is “comfortable with 
removing the dollars from the surgical budget.” But that’s 
actually not what senior health officials said. They said that 
because of the Sask Party cuts, “There is a risk that patients will 
experience longer wait times.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, they were talking about the risks associated and 
the longer waits. That sure doesn’t sound like they were 
comfortable, Mr. Speaker, with the cuts. And they were right. 
We have seen, we have seen — and it’s very clear in the 
numbers — a 50 per cent increase in the number of people 
waiting more than three months for surgery. So to the Premier: 
why would the Sask Party say senior health officials were 
comfortable with these cuts when officials were actually 
sounding the alarm about longer surgical waits? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the facts are 
pretty clear with respect to this debate. When members opposite 
were the government, when they had this ideologically 
hidebound approach to only using the public system . . . Well 
the Leader of the Opposition is laughing. I mean he’s asked this 
question. These are pretty important facts, especially if you’re 
waiting for surgery. 
 
And the fact of the matter is that when they were in office, in 
their last full year in office, 6,000 people in the Regina 
Qu’Appelle Health District alone were waiting for three months 

or longer for surgery. It was the worst record in all of Canada, 
right here in the birthplace of medicare, presided over by 
members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how many people are waiting today longer than 
three months? Well it’s around 400. In fact, 91 per cent of the 
people of this province are getting their surgery within three 
months because we’ve deployed private clinics in the public 
system. They’ve said, you know, Mr. Speaker, in a choice 
between NDP ideology and actual results for people, we’ll 
choose results. That’s what people across the province have 
been saying. Mr. Speaker, across Saskatchewan it . . . Across 
Saskatchewan, in terms of cases waiting more than three 
months, as of March the 31st, 2010, the number was 15,291. 
The numbers today, July 31st, 2015, is 2,270, Mr. Speaker. This 
is progress by any reasonable measure, made in part because 
we’re using the public system but we’re allowing the private 
system. 
 
And so I say again to my hon. friend, why is he ideologically 
opposed to using private clinics in the public system — no 
queue jumping — but just as a matter of increasing resources? 
Why would he be opposed to that when we see real results for 
Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier doesn’t have his facts 
correct. Right now he just said there’s 400 waiting, Mr. 
Speaker. In reality, 820 are waiting. As I said, he needs to 
update his numbers. And this is the question: they decided to 
cut $8 million from surgeries. They said everyone’s fine with it, 
Mr. Speaker — officials are good with it; regions are good with 
it. In reality, we had health officials sounding the alarm saying 
that these are concerns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that this government, because of cuts, 
Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region’s looking at 38 million less 
in funding this year, $38 million in health care cuts just in 
Regina. And with specific reference to the government’s 
surgical initiative, the official said, “The goal has changed from 
one of growth to one where contraction of services in order to 
meet a reduced target is the overall goal.” 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, despite the over-the-top rhetoric that we 
see from the Premier and from the Health minister, we are 
seeing the result. We are seeing the outcome of the Sask Party’s 
cuts. The number of people waiting more than three months for 
surgeries has jumped by 50 per cent just since March. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after a decade of record prosperity, how on earth 
can the Premier justify cutting health care funding, slashing 
surgeries, and reducing targets? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, to be fair to the debate in 
terms of looking at the columns, the member’s right. There was 
800 people waiting for the surgery in this particular district. But 
again, the comparison stands. Even if that’s the number — and 
we readily admit we need to do better — the numbers when 
members opposite were the government, because of their 
ideological, hidebound policies to delivery of surgeries, the fact 



7464 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2015 

that they were under-resourcing nurses and doctors and 
specialists in the province, there were 6,000 people on the list, 
6,000 people, in their last full year in office. 
 
And now what’s inferred by the member’s question is, let’s just 
go back to those days. Let’s go back to the days where we 
didn’t bring any innovation, and heaven forbid we allowed any 
private sector involvement in the health care system. Let’s go 
back to those days where we had the dubious distinction in this 
province, under the New Democrats, under the NDP, of the 
longest surgical wait times in the country. He would say, let’s 
go back to those days, versus the innovation that we brought 
which will provide around 85,000 surgeries in the district this 
year alone. Much, much higher than was ever provided by the 
members opposite across the province. Much, much higher than 
was ever provided by members opposite when they were the 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan, given a choice 
between tired, old ideology and surgery, will choose timely 
surgery. They’ll choose innovation. They’ll choose targets. 
They’re never going to go back to the longest surgical wait 
times in Canada. That was the NDP gift to them and it’s been 
soundly rejected, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, you’d think you might see a bit 
more contrition when the Premier’s caught right there with the 
incorrect numbers. We had the Health minister, Mr. Speaker, 
saying 200 was the waiting list. We had the Premier say, 3 to 
400; 400 in this question period, Mr. Speaker, and the reality is 
800. Only when caught would they admit, Mr. Speaker, that 
that is the reality. We need a major fact check when they were 
talking about their numbers and the notes that they’re using, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
When the Health Minister was asked last week about the cuts, 
Mr. Speaker, this is what he said: 
 

We’ll be watching that. We’ll see what wait times look like 
and whether or not we’re seeing that three month wait 
getting longer, but we’ll be paying a lot of attention to that. 
But we’re comfortable with the decision. 

 
But, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party clearly has not been paying 
attention to surgical wait times since they cut that funding in 
March. Or perhaps, Mr. Speaker, they’ve been paying attention 
but they just did not want Saskatchewan people to know the 
truth about the outcomes. Mr. Speaker, either way that is 
completely unacceptable. 
 
Last week, Mr. Speaker, the Premier was boasting about 
surgical wait times here in the Assembly. Was he aware that 
there’s a 50 per cent increase that we’ve seen since March? Did 
he know and choose not to share that information, or did he 
simply not know? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been hiding all of 
this information right there on the Internet, right there on the 
website, right there on the website, on the Saskatchewan 

surgical initiative website. And you know, Mr. Speaker, I invite 
the member to read all of the facts on the website. And then 
maybe he wants to be a bit introspective about his own policies 
that he’s proposing to Saskatchewan people. Because let’s be 
very clear. He’s pointing out what he sees to be problems in the 
system and it’s true that more work needs to be done, Mr. 
Speaker. But the record of the NDP’s ideological approach gave 
us the longest surgical wait times in the country, and we’ll keep 
repeating it because those are the facts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And now we have the shortest surgical wait times in the 
country. In fact, if he looked at that same sheet, the same 
statistics also hidden away on the Internet, he would find that 
surgeries performed within three months, Mr. Speaker, in terms 
of access to surgery, 90.7 per cent. Ninety-one per cent of 
people are getting their surgery within three months. 
 
So I think it’s fair, by the way, for the member to be critical, to 
say, you know, you need to do a little bit better and in certain 
regions maybe need to do a little bit better. But here’s what also 
might be fair. It might be fair for the hon. member to stand up 
and say, you know, we were wrong. We were wrong. These 
private clinics in the public system, the surgical wait times 
initiative, it is delivering results. He could say, we’d like you to 
do more. But if he was fair, if he wanted to actually relate to 
Saskatchewan people, he might say, I think progress has been 
made here using these private clinics, and we’ll continue that or 
we’ll support it as a matter of public policy. 
 
But you won’t hear that from them, Mr. Speaker. You won’t 
hear that from them because for the member opposite especially 
and for his colleagues, ideology is way more important than 
actual results. That’s not the way it is on this side of the House, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Will the Premier admit that there has been a 50 
per cent increase for those waiting for surgeries since they have 
made the cuts in March? Yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that 
the people of this province know that the surgical initiative, 
since 2010, we’ve invested nearly $300 million in the surgical 
initiative that has seen a reduction in wait times. For those 
waiting three months for surgery, has gone from 15,291 waiting 
three months for surgery down to 2,270 across the province, an 
85 per cent reduction across the province. And those waiting 
longer than six months has gone from 9,871 down to 487, a 95 
per cent reduction. 
 
[14:15] 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we do know that there are some people that 
are still waiting longer than three months, but let’s put this in 
context. Your surgical date may not be within three months. It 
may be within four months. It may be within four and a half 
months. And we recognize that we’re still trying to keep to the 
three-month goal, but that is a far cry from when people waited 
18 and 23 and 30 months for joint replacement in this province. 
They’re waiting three months and four months in this province, 



October 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7465 

and that is a record we will defend every day of the week in this 
province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know why it’s so difficult 
for the Premier to get up and say, yes or no, whether or not he 
admits that there’s been a 50 per cent increase in the waits, Mr. 
Speaker. I don’t understand. 
 
I also don’t hear any reference, as we’ve talked on previous 
days, Mr. Speaker, about the huge waits we have actually to see 
specialists. The Premier promised one week, Mr. Speaker. We 
know it’s like 11 months now. So it’s far out of step with what 
the reality is. 
 
The Premier should have known, Mr. Speaker, that surgical 
wait times are getting worse. In fact he should have known that 
this would happen before, before he cut the funding for 
surgeries. Here’s a quote from an internal document: “The 
ministry by their own calculations realizes that maintaining a 
strict three-month target is going to be a challenge based on 
projected availability of surgical resources.” 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Health knew that this cut 
would put at risk the gains that have been made. And this 
government knew that wait times for surgeries will get longer. 
 
But the Premier, Mr. Speaker, still just chose to plow ahead 
with this funding cut for surgeries. He could have, Mr. Speaker, 
cut his own government’s waste, but instead he chose to cut 
funding for surgeries. 
 
My question to the Premier: will he admit that cutting funding 
for surgeries was indeed a mistake? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well let me talk a little bit about the gains that were made. 
Because this is what was reported in the Leader-Post in 2001 
. . . sorry, pardon me, The StarPhoenix in 2001, November, 
2001. In 1999 the waiting list for joint replacement in this 
province was 18 months. And at the time in the ’99 platform, 
the NDP promised a 30 per cent reduction in wait times for 
surgeries. What happened in that term of government? Wait 
times went up in this province 61 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the story goes on to say that the wait list for joint 
replacement was 18 months. But the head of surgery in Regina 
says, “The numbers don’t surprise me. Critical cases are 
handled quickly, but others may wait up to three years.” And 
the member opposite wants to talk in this House about the waits 
going from three months to perhaps four months in this 
province. 
 
Nine times out of ten, in this region, in this province, people are 
getting their surgery within three months. I would ask the 
Leader of the Opposition to show me any other province in the 
Dominion of Canada where that’s happening. I don’t think it’s 
happening anywhere else. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 
 

Carbon Capture and Storage Agreement 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve long had concerns about 
the economics of this government’s carbon capture experiment 
because the calculations show a huge net loss to Saskatchewan 
families and a massive financial gain to a Calgary-based oil 
company called Cenovus. 
 
But it turns out that the Sask Party has handed even more public 
money to Cenovus than we knew about. Internal documents 
show that SaskPower cut a cheque for $12 million to Cenovus 
as part of its top secret agreement. And those internal 
documents clearly call into question whether this massive 
payment was even necessary. 
 
So what is the minister’s explanation for this highly 
questionable $12 million payment to Cenovus? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the carbon capture and 
storage project down at Boundary dam 3 is getting accolades 
from around the world. People from all over the globe came to 
Regina here just recently, Mr. Speaker, to attend a symposium 
here. 
 
They were most appreciative of the fact that SaskPower was 
hosting it, first of all, but they also went on to say about how 
important the innovation was on a global scale. They were 
simply saying that this is setting the stage throughout the world 
for carbon capture and storage, a very, very important project, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Indeed there is a component of it where the carbon, CO2, that is 
sequestered is sold to an oil company for sequestering to help 
with enhanced oil recovery here in Saskatchewan. That’s a very 
important part of the economics that support the project, Mr. 
Speaker, and that project will continue because of the success 
that it enjoys. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, a briefing note was given to that 
minister on February 17th of this year, and it says that 
SaskPower paid a $12 million penalty to Cenovus for 
supposedly failing to deliver the amount of carbon dioxide 
specified in that contract. But that doesn’t make sense because a 
briefing note written by SaskPower’s head of carbon capture on 
November 13th, 2014 says, “The carbon capture facility has not 
been run at full capacity at this point, partially due to Cenovus 
not needing the CO2 to that level . . .” 
 
And that briefing note makes it clear that SaskPower was 
meeting their contractual obligations. So how can the minister 
possibly justify handing a $12 million cheque to Cenovus when 
internal documents show that it wasn’t necessary? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — As I have said earlier, the project is 



7466 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2015 

enjoying accolades from around the world. It’s a very, very 
important project for Saskatchewan and for the advancement of 
CCS [carbon capture and storage] technology worldwide. 
 
As a part of that symposium, SaskPower was very happy to sign 
an agreement with BHP Billiton around this very subject, about 
advancing the technology going forward. Within the contract, 
when it comes to the sale of CO2 to Cenovus, there are 
exceptions and there are penalties, provisions if we are not able 
to . . . SaskPower is not able to provide CO2 for some reason, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s a part of the contractual agreement that we 
have in place with Cenovus. So there’s nothing unusual about 
that whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The good news is is that since the project has been up and 
running, it’s the equivalent of taking about 250,000 cars off of 
the highways of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is going to have to 
explain much better than that because this is very disturbing. In 
mid-November of last year, SaskPower’s head of carbon 
capture wrote a briefing note saying Cenovus didn’t need the 
level of CO2 required under the contract and that’s one of the 
reasons the carbon capture facility was not yet running at full 
capacity. 
 
But six weeks later the Sask Party still gave Cenovus a cheque 
for a whopping $12 million as a supposed penalty for failing to 
deliver enough CO2, despite the fact that one of the main 
reasons why the carbon capture facility was not running at full 
capacity is that Cenovus didn’t need the full level of CO2. 
What’s the minister’s explanation for this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, the BD3 [Boundary 
dam 3] project will reduce emissions by 90 per cent, the 
equivalent of taking about 250,000 cars off the road annually 
here in our province. SaskPower is the leading company in 
terms of carbon capture solutions. BD3 powers the equivalent 
of half the city of Regina while removing the equivalent CO2 
produced by all the cars and houses in the city of Regina, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The contract has provisions in it. It was a publicly tendered 
contract, Mr. Speaker, something that is done on a regular basis 
by SaskPower, a completely transparent and open project, Mr. 
Speaker. Obviously there are benefits to the province of 
Saskatchewan when it comes to CO2 capture here in the 
province, Mr. Speaker. And obviously as a result of the project, 
we are seeing tremendous benefits to our province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, here’s what the briefing note 
from February 17th of this year says: 
 

As a result of capture plant schedule delays caused by 
SNC-Lavalin and other contractors, SaskPower was unable 

to commence CO2 deliveries to Cenovus until October 1st, 
2014. Since that time, the BD3 capture plant has been 
operating at approximately 45 per cent capacity. 
 
As SaskPower was unable to make up the shortfall product 
by 2014 year-end, Cenovus invoiced SaskPower for the 
penalty amount of $11,791,329.17 plus GST. 

 
But here’s what Mike Monea wrote on November 13th of last 
year: “The carbon capture facility has not been run at full 
capacity at this point, partially due to Cenovus not needing CO2 
to that level . . .” 
 
So Cenovus didn’t need the CO2 to the specified level and, as a 
result, they didn’t run it at full capacity. But they still cut a 
cheque to Cenovus? What’s the real reason for the $12 million 
cheque to Cenovus? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, the project is up and 
running. It’s working very well. There were some initial 
problems with a scrubber, I believe it was, in one of the vessels, 
the pressure vessels at the facility. I understand that that has 
been corrected, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The fact is is that yes, there has been some delays in the 
delivery of the CO2 to Cenovus, who was the company who was 
the bidder, a successful bidder in the open project that there was 
there, Mr. Speaker. As a result of that, there were some penalty 
clauses. I understand SaskPower is having some discussions 
right now with Cenovus with respect to that, Mr. Speaker. I 
think the really good news here in this project is that it’s up and 
running. It’s proving to be very, very successful, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There were maybe some initial start-up problems associated 
with CO2 capture, Mr. Speaker, but now the project is very, 
very successfully running. We’re seeing that it is capturing a 
large amount of CO2. The projections are even better as we go 
forward, Mr. Speaker, for the project. We are hopeful that we 
will see somewhere in the range of about 97 per cent of the 
carbon . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — This is what we know, Mr. Speaker. Under the 
Saskatchewan Party, power rates for Saskatchewan families 
have increased by an incredible 42 per cent. So when 
SaskPower cuts massive cheques to out-of-province 
corporations, I think Saskatchewan people have a right to know, 
especially when internal documents are questioning the 
rationale for that massive payment. And let’s not forget that 
Cenovus is the top corporate donor to the Sask Party. So it’s 
hard not to see this questionable massive payment as a special 
gift to Sask Party friends, especially when the minister refuses 
to give proper answers. 
 
Why won’t the minister just be fully transparent with 
Saskatchewan people so we can get to the bottom of this and 
find out the truth? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 



October 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7467 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the topic that the member 
raises, opposite, is very interesting because all of the 
information that the member is raising is in the annual report, 
hidden away, hidden away on the Internet for everyone to see. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has provisions in it for the start-up of the 
facility. It has provisions for going forward, Mr. Speaker. It has 
provisions if SaskPower isn’t able to deliver, as was the case 
initially, Mr. Speaker. But now the project is up and running. 
It’s working very well. And I would say, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
why we are getting, SaskPower that is, is getting accolades 
from around the world. International agencies around the world 
are recognizing that it’s an exceptional project, and that’s why 
we are very, very pleased to see how it’s working out so far. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 188 — The Best Value in Procurement Act, 2015 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my privilege to rise and move second reading of Bill No. 
188, the best value in procurement amendment Act. The best 
value in procurement amendment Act amends The Highways 
and Transportation Act, 1997 and The Public Works and 
Services Act by establishing best value as the foundation for 
government purchasing of construction services. 
 
This is a significant change, Mr. Speaker. Until now, the 
legislation restricted the Ministry of Highways and Central 
Services to select proponents based on the lowest priced 
technically compliant bid. Yet every Saskatchewan family 
knows choosing a certain product only because of its lowest 
price does not always mean it’s the smartest purchase. 
 
Obviously the purchase price of a product matters. However, 
the problem with looking at only the price is that it overlooks a 
number of other important factors that will affect the usefulness 
and the long-term viability of any product. This might include 
price; product quality; vendor experience, including their 
performance history and their demonstrated ability to deliver 
what’s being promised; a vendor’s safety practices; the 
potential for innovation, creativity and originality of design; the 
vendor’s knowledge of local conditions such as Saskatchewan’s 
geotechnical and environmental conditions, local laws and 
building codes; and overall how these and other factors affect 
the cost of operating and maintaining an asset over its lifetime. 
 
Criteria for each competition are selected in advance by 
knowledgeable staff to meet the specific needs of each project. 
Taking this approach promises to benefit both the taxpayer and 
those businesses who work with government. Not only will 
government have high-performing products to serve the public 
well, but a more holistic view of value as the best way to be 
respectful of taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
[14:30] 

I want to be clear, Mr. Speaker, that while this is a shift in the 
way Highways and Central Services procure 
construction-related services, best-value procurement is already 
in practice. It is widely used by ministries and Crown 
corporations purchasing other goods and services, as well as 
used by many other Canadian and international jurisdictions. 
 
P3s [public-private partnership], Mr. Speaker, are the best form 
of best-value procurement, and are delivering some of the most 
ambitious and promising infrastructure products this province 
has seen. 
 
Credit for beginning this process, Mr. Speaker, begins with the 
Premier. It was him who listened to the concerns of local 
businesses and responded by creating Priority Saskatchewan as 
a branch of SaskBuilds in June of 2014. The next stage was our 
early meetings. Under the leadership of Lionel LaBelle, Priority 
Saskatchewan then took more than 160 meetings with local 
companies, industry associations, public sector partners in the 
MASH [municipalities, academic institutions, schools, and 
hospitals] sector, and government ministries and Crowns. 
 
This informed a 13-point action plan that we unveiled at the 
North Saskatoon Business Association event this spring. 
Responses from stakeholders at the time was encouraging. The 
Saskatchewan Construction Association said, and I quote, “The 
provincial government is demonstrating its commitment to 
global best practices in developing a fair, balanced, and vibrant 
Saskatchewan economy.” 
 
The Saskatchewan Manufacturing Council issued a media 
release that read: 
 

I commend . . . [the minister] and the Government of 
Saskatchewan on their initial steps towards the 
development of a strategic procurement policy that 
promotes fairness and competitive reciprocity for 
Saskatchewan manufacturers, as well as best value for 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. 

 
It goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Procurement is both a large and delicate file to navigate. 
While there is much more work to be done, the action plan 
set out by . . . [the minister] through Priority Saskatchewan 
addresses the core recommendations CME has made to 
government, and charts a clear path forward for timely 
implementation. 

 
And that’s only a snapshot of the positive feedback. But, Mr. 
Speaker, the consultations did not end with the announcement 
of our action plan. We continue to solicit feedback to this day, 
hosting workshops and inviting correspondence to ensure our 
efforts are in line with industry needs. 
 
The best-value approach contained in Bill 188 is supported by 
industry and serves the needs of Saskatchewan taxpayers. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that this bill, along with 
everything in our Priority Saskatchewan action plan, is 100 per 
cent compliant with our trade agreements. Mr. Speaker, you 
will recall when I introduced the bill on October 21st, we were 
joined in the gallery by several representatives of 
Saskatchewan’s largest industry associations. There to support 



7468 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2015 

the bill were the Canadian Manufacturers & Exporters, the 
North Saskatoon Business Association, Carol Morsky of the 
Morsky Group of Companies on behalf of Merit, the 
Saskatchewan Construction Association and Heavy 
Construction Association, and the Association of Consulting 
Engineering Companies of Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s clear that Saskatchewan businesses support our government 
bill, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the changes proposed in this 
legislation will promote innovation by expanding the selection 
criteria to more appropriately balance cost and value. I look 
forward to receiving the support of all members on this 
Assembly as we take this important step forward. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I’ll therefore conclude my remarks and move second 
reading of Bill 188, The Best Value in Procurement Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 
Bill No. 188, The Best Value in Procurement Act, 2015. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to stand in my place today to speak about Bill 188. 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is a very interesting bill coming from the 
Saskatchewan Party government because this really is a bill that 
really speaks about the incredible need for us to pay attention to 
all our trade agreements, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And one of the things that’s really, really important and I want 
to say at the outset, that as the minister introduced Bill 188, the 
best-value approach, I wanted to share with the people of 
Saskatchewan, particularly those that might be watching this 
afternoon, how trade affects the province of Saskatchewan. And 
certainly from our perspective, as a New Democratic opposition 
team, we want to make sure that we are very, very . . . we take 
our time and we are very, very studious in terms of making sure 
that we understand what these trade agreements are all about, 
how these bills impact certain agreements, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s very interesting as to the reaction from the 
Saskatchewan Party on their Bill 188. In a sense they’re 
basically telling people that, look, when we’re looking at 
procuring services or products from the people of 
Saskatchewan, we want to have a new approach. And that’s 
called the best-value approach, 188, to give Saskatchewan 
people and businesses opportunities to provide service to the 
government overall. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a very interesting bill, very 
interesting indeed. Because not more than several years ago 
there was great fanfare under the Premier’s initiative called the 
New West Partnership, Mr. Speaker, in which he talked about 
mobility of investment, mobility of services and working 
together in the western part of Canada and being good trading 
partners and so on and so forth, Mr. Speaker. And this bill, 
again it’s a bill that really, I think, doesn’t really coincide with 
what the Premier said at the time that the New West Partnership 
was all about, and that’s opening up the borders, opening up 
opportunities, and so on and so forth. 
 
We also know, Mr. Speaker, that there is a little thing called 
agreement on interprovincial trade. And what that agreement is, 
as we all know, there’s a number of provinces that have agreed 

not to put barriers, and certainly not to put up walls in terms of 
being able to freely pursue business opportunity in each 
jurisdiction. They’re talking about . . . a lot of the business 
community is saying that we don’t need to have protectionist 
measures, Mr. Speaker. And I’m certain that some in the 
business community outside of our borders would certainly 
view Bill 188 as a protectionist measure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now one of the things that’s also important is the most recent 
example that I would use, Mr. Speaker, is the TPP 
[Trans-Pacific Partnership] agreement in which they asked us 
information and they wouldn’t share with us the information 
that they received as a government as to what outgoing Prime 
Minister Harper was talking about under the TPP agreement. 
And, Mr. Speaker, all the details in that particular agreement we 
are not privy to yet. And certainly as a caucus we’re asking for 
more information on that particular agreement because you 
want to know how it impacts and how it affects 
Saskatchewan-based businesses. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, at the outset, best-value approach Bill 188 
really talks about local knowledge and local conditions and 
local intelligence, if you will, as to allow the local people to 
compete with out-of-province and perhaps out-of-country 
businesses when it comes to providing services to the provincial 
government. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we in the NDP certainly saw that this was 
an issue for the small-business community and for the larger 
corporations as well. And this is why we introduced the buy 
local Act in which we are encouraging not only the province or 
the government, Mr. Speaker, but the entire province — the 
consumers, other businesses, other communities, and other 
people that buy goods — to look at Saskatchewan’s businesses 
first because they do create an incredible amount of opportunity 
for not only employment, Mr. Speaker, but services that the 
people of Saskatchewan need. And that money of course is 
being kept here and kept within the communities and certainly 
kept within the spending patterns of the whole area, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So there’s been study after study that shows that if you do buy 
local, Mr. Speaker, that that money certainly is recycled seven 
or eight or nine or ten times within the local communities. So 
it’s really advantageous. It’s really good that we see that when 
you encourage people to buy local, it does have a positive, 
positive effect on the economy overall. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this particular bill, Bill 188, goes beyond 
that. We’ve got to really make sure that some of our trade 
agreements . . . And this is what I kind of take a bit of exception 
when the minister indicates to us that this Bill 188 is compliant 
with our trade agreements and when we all know that most 
recently one of the biggest things that they were speaking about 
— I’m talking about the Conservatives, Mr. Speaker — and 
Harper was talking about the TPP agreement, and we didn’t 
have any information yet. And so for the minister, a week later 
after that announcement was made as it relates to the TPP 
agreement, Mr. Speaker, saying that this Bill 188 is compliant 
with our trade agreements, we need to make certain that is the 
case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And my point is, I don’t believe that they have done their 



October 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7469 

homework. They haven’t properly researched exactly the 
impacts of all these major agreements and how we can position, 
as they are trying to do under Bill 188, how we can position our 
local businesses, our local people to be able to provide services 
to the government without impacting some of the trade 
agreements that we have and some of the constitutional 
agreements we have as a country. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, one of the biggest things I would encourage 
people out there is to pay very close attention to what the 
Saskatchewan Party is trying to do. And this is where it goes 
back to my earlier statement, as I spoke on a number of bills, 
Mr. Speaker. And I really don’t think that the Saskatchewan 
Party have a clue what they’re doing on Bill 188, as evidenced 
under other bills, Mr. Speaker. And this is where I get to my 
point that the people of Saskatchewanland ought to know that 
some of these efforts by the Saskatchewan Party is just for 
posturing, that there is no real intent to change how they’re 
doing business, which is unfortunate. 
 
And the reason why I say that, Mr. Speaker, is the past 
behaviours and patterns of the Saskatchewan Party government, 
when it comes to positioning our business community better to 
be able to take advantage of some of the projects here in the 
province of Saskatchewan, you look at some of their record, 
Mr. Speaker. It is just an abysmal record. And I’m going to go 
down the list, Mr. Speaker, of some of the deals and some of 
the agreements and some of the failures of the Saskatchewan 
Party when we should be trying as a government to try and 
position Saskatchewan-based companies better, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party has failed on a regular basis as to what 
they say they’re trying to achieve today under Bill 188, Mr. 
Speaker. And I’m going to share with the public of 
Saskatchewan some of the examples of what the Saskatchewan 
Party done to outsource the work, outsource the work that many 
Saskatchewan people and many families benefited from in the 
past. 
 
And I’m going to go through a laundry list, Mr. Speaker, of the 
services sent out of province. These are the services sent out of 
province by the Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. Speaker. 
The biggest one is in Prince Albert. The laundry services in 
Prince Albert to K-Bro Linens in Edmonton, Alberta, Mr. 
Speaker. How many people they put out of work in Prince 
Albert area. That’s one of the most glaring, recent examples, 
Mr. Speaker, where the Saskatchewan Party said we’re shutting 
down laundry services in Prince Albert.  
 
And all the people that have worked in those laundry services, 
the men and women of Prince Albert that had families, Mr. 
Speaker, that had children going to school, that were paying 
their municipal taxes, Mr. Speaker, that were contributing to the 
local economy, and the list goes on and on and on, what did the 
Saskatchewan Party do, Mr. Speaker? They turned around and 
they told the people of the Prince Albert area that your work is 
not good enough. We’re now going to take your jobs away. 
We’re going to have K-Bro out of Edmonton, Alberta start 
doing the laundry services in Prince Albert. 
 
And the mayor said, remember April 4th and what they done in 
Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. And then you come along with Bill 
188. You come along with Bill 188, which to us isn’t worth the 

paper it’s written on, Mr. Speaker. It’s a day late and hundreds 
of millions of dollars short for the people of Prince Albert. 
 
So again, the laundry services in Prince Albert to K-Bro Linens 
in Edmonton, Mr. Speaker, is what the Saskatchewan Party 
done most recently to try and protect the workers. Instead, Mr. 
Speaker, they fired those workers. They said their work wasn’t 
good enough. And as a result of that, Mr. Speaker, that’s going 
to have an economic downturn, an incredible economic 
downturn for the city of Prince Albert, for the families of Prince 
Albert, for the business community of Prince Albert, and 
especially for those that lost their jobs. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t know how many times the Saskatchewan Party has to be 
told by the New Democratic Party of Saskatchewan that those 
jobs in P.A. were needed. 
 
It’s all about the economy. This is something that people have 
to understand. You’ve got to protect Saskatchewan jobs. If you 
don’t protect them, then you’re not doing your job as the 
government. And that’s why I think the people of Saskatchewan 
are looking forward to laying off and firing the Saskatchewan 
Party MLAs that come out of Prince Albert because they refuse 
to stand up to their political masters in protecting P.A.’s 
interests, Mr. Speaker. And that’s an example of why Bill 188 
today that we’re talking about procurement, Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
day late and hundreds of dollars short for the people of Prince 
Albert. And that’s a crying shame. 
 
[14:45] 
 
And I’d like to echo the mayor of Prince Albert’s comments. 
Remember that, Prince Albert, on April 4th. These are the 
people that ship jobs out of your community and they headed 
west to Edmonton. And now these people attempt under Bill 
188, Mr. Speaker, to try and reverse that tide. It’s exactly what 
is described as a dollar short and a day late. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the most glaring example we’ve been 
speaking about most recently the last several months has been 
the $1.8 billion bypass, Mr. Speaker. And the Regina south 
bypass, this bypass, $1.8 billion was awarded to build this 
bypass, Mr. Speaker. And which company got that, Mr. 
Speaker? It wasn’t a Saskatchewan-based company. It wasn’t a 
Canadian-based company, Mr. Speaker. It wasn’t a North 
American-based company, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan 
Party dug far and wide and made many phone calls and they 
found a contractor out of Paris, Mr. Speaker, out of France. This 
is exactly where they got this contractor, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say again, and I hope the media picks up on this, Mr. 
Speaker, in due time, in due time . . . We have some 
information, Mr. Speaker, that I don’t want to say too much 
about. But in due time the Saskatchewan Party is going to 
realize that they have been played big time on the Regina 
bypass, Mr. Speaker. They have been played big time and now 
we’re sending $1.8 billion, $1.8 billion to a France-based 
company to do highways work, Mr. Speaker. And they have 
mismanaged that file completely. 
 
We see, we see, Mr. Speaker, that as a result of some of the 
planning, not only the design work that they stubbornly insist is 
correct, Mr. Speaker, that’s why people out there in 
Saskatchewanland should listen very carefully and watch the 



7470 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2015 

advertisements around why Tower Road. There are people out 
there that are running advertisements saying, why Tower Road, 
and there’s hundreds and thousands of people that are very 
angry, Mr. Speaker, because the bypass doesn’t bypass the city, 
and they are quite angry about that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we want a bypass, and I want to make that absolutely 
clear. The Saskatchewan Party certainly wants to have their 
bypass, but they ship all the money to France. The 
Saskatchewan New Democratic Party supports the bypass. We 
started the bypass up in the Northwest, Mr. Speaker. We’re the 
ones that brought the bypass into place. And then we handed 
over to the Saskatchewan Party and they made a big mess of it. 
 
And just to add insult to injury, Mr. Speaker, they searched 
throughout the whole world and they found a Paris-based 
company called Vinci, Vinci Group. And, Mr. Speaker, they’re 
going to come along and not only are they going to build a 
bypass, but they’re going to own the bypass. They are going to 
put a higher interest cost on this P3 model that the 
Saskatchewan Party put in place, and to add insult to injury, Mr. 
Speaker, they are going to maintain that bypass for the next 30 
years, Mr. Speaker — 30 years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now we sit here, and the working people of Saskatchewan are 
looking at this saying, well why couldn’t that investment be 
made here in Saskatchewan? Why couldn’t they get a 
conglomerate of companies to build that bypass? There’s 
nobody else in the province that’s able to position themselves 
well to do this work, Mr. Speaker? 
 
They didn’t take the time to look. They didn’t take the time to 
think out the route. They certainly didn’t take the time to 
protect Saskatchewan’s investment, Mr. Speaker, and 
Saskatchewan companies. And that’s exactly why you look at 
some of the examples. The $1.8 billion bypass to a Paris-based 
company to me doesn’t talk about supporting local people, to 
me doesn’t talk about what was mentioned in Bill 188, to talk 
about local knowledge, to talk about local experience, Mr. 
Speaker. We had companies that could have been used. Had the 
bypass been designed correctly and financed correctly, Mr. 
Speaker, we would have had the Saskatchewan-based 
companies positioned much better than we have under this 
current Saskatchewan Party government. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the $1.8 billion bypass boondoggle to the 
Paris-based Vinci, Mr. Speaker, is exactly why we in the NDP 
do not believe for one minute that Bill 188 is going to achieve 
any of the objectives outlined by the minister. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what’s really important, what’s really 
important to this is that we know that there’s three particular 
benefits of the bypass. And this is where Bill 188 is so 
applicable, Mr. Speaker, because there’s three tranches of 
opportunity, three main sections of the bypass that would really 
have companies interested in doing this work, but a Paris-based 
company got the benefit. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, they get to build the bypass at a profit. 
And, Mr. Speaker, nothing’s wrong with that. If you run 
businesses in the province of Saskatchewan, well profit is a 
word that every business community and every business 
member knows, and we certainly support that notion. In order 

to be in business, you have to have profit. We understand that, 
Mr. Speaker. So we’re not arguing about the profit aspect of 
building that bypass. We understand that’s part of how the 
economy should work. 
 
But the second part is where we also have some very basic 
difficulties, Mr. Speaker. One of the basic difficulties is around 
the interest that the company is charging, the interest that the 
company is charging to the Saskatchewan taxpayers for using 
their money, Mr. Speaker, for using their money to build this 
bypass. So the Saskatchewan Party is not putting any money 
into it. They’re borrowing off this company that’s building it. 
So the company gets to build it. They determine their profit. 
And yes, okay, we’re not saying profit is bad for building roads, 
but, Mr. Speaker, what is the interest rate on that particular loan 
that this Vinci Group is giving to the Saskatchewan Party? 
 
And then to add insult to injury, the third component, Mr. 
Speaker, is the Saskatchewan Party awarded the maintenance 
contract for the bypass for 30 years to this particular group. So 
the two added costs, Mr. Speaker, of the interest on the Regina 
bypass cost is going to be higher through this group than 
traditional sources of us going to the bank. And the third 
component, Mr. Speaker, is they’re giving this company a 
30-year maintenance agreement. 
 
Now imagine for a moment, Mr. Speaker, if our working men 
and women, the working men and women in the Highways 
department, if they had job security for 30 years. That would be 
a phenomenal opportunity for them, Mr. Speaker. But the 
Saskatchewan Party instead has laid off many of these workers. 
They have disregarded the Highways workers on a continual 
basis. And as my colleague from Regina said, Mr. Speaker, that 
now, as a result of this group from France getting the 
maintenance contract on the ill-designed bypass, now our 
workers from Saskatchewan, our men and women that work in 
the Highways department, when they come to the bypass area 
they’re going to have to lift their blades, drive by the bypass, 
and once they’re past the bypass, Mr. Speaker, they can put 
their blades down again and start maintaining the other part of 
the bypass. 
 
So that’s the second example. First of all, Prince Albert loses 
their laundry service to an Edmonton-based company — not a 
peep from the Saskatchewan Party representatives. The $1.8 
billion bypass to a Paris-based group, Vinci, Mr. Speaker, once 
again the Saskatchewan Party stubbornly insist that’s a good 
deal for Saskatchewan. We say absolutely not. 
 
The most recent example, the SaskPower outsourced meter 
installation on our homes throughout Saskatchewan to Grid 
One, and we see trucks going all throughout Saskatchewan with 
Texas plates, Mr. Speaker. Grid One were the ones that got the 
installation contract to quite frankly put the meters on the 
homes throughout Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, the smart 
meters that were installed, some of them actually caught fire. I 
think there was a number of homes that were impacted, Mr. 
Speaker, again because quite frankly there was not due 
diligence on the Minister of the Economy’s part, who is the 
Minister Responsible for SaskPower. He didn’t pay attention to 
a memo and as a result of that, SaskPower ended up having to 
pay millions of dollars. And, Mr. Speaker, the people that 
installed these meters, these smart meters, Mr. Speaker, were 



October 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7471 

Grid One and they’re a company, I believe, out of Texas. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, another good example was the prison food 
services where we had again another dubious example of the 
Saskatchewan Party’s ineptness as a government. So, Mr. 
Speaker, what they’ve done recently is they have now provided 
or have given the prison food services to Compass, which is 
based out of the UK [United Kingdom]. So they found another 
country that they can send our money to, Mr. Speaker, and 
those are people that are working for Saskatchewan, people that 
are working in some of these communities. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the list goes on. You look at the fishing and 
hunting licences, Mr. Speaker. We outsourced that to again to a 
US [United States]-based company. I believe this company is 
out of Nashville. And you look at again another example: P3 
school maintenance has been outsourced to a company from 
Milwaukee, Mr. Speaker. Another example: the North 
Battleford hospital maintenance has been outsourced to another 
company out of the UK, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So as you look at all these examples, Mr. Speaker, the 
examples, there’s hundreds of examples of how the Sask Party 
has failed miserably on some of these fronts. And yet they come 
along with the feeble attempt under Bill 188 to try and say, 
look, we’re trying to take into consideration some of the local 
knowledge, some of the local benefits if we buy local. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan are basically saying that, I 
think the corral door has been open too long, and all the great 
opportunities have now left Saskatchewan-based companies. 
All the great opportunities have long been lost by the 
Saskatchewan workers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this is why, from our perspective, we look at the 
opportunities that the Saskatchewan Party had — record 
revenues, Mr. Speaker; population was growing; we had great 
investment, Mr. Speaker — all the great opportunities that 
Saskatchewan has enjoyed the last eight years, Mr. Speaker, 
eight to ten to twelve years. What you can see now, Mr. 
Speaker, is the Saskatchewan Party has quite frankly messed it 
up very, very badly. And I think if you look at the examples that 
I alluded to, Mr. Speaker, never mind the argument around Bill 
188 as it applies to our trade agreements, Mr. Speaker. But 
really if I look at the effort behind Bill 188, it is something that 
is a little too late. It’s a little too late. I think the people of 
Saskatchewan know that. 
 
And the reason why it’s a little too late . . . It’s too late for the 
laundry services workers in Prince Albert. Their jobs have now 
gone to an Edmonton-based company, Mr. Speaker. It’s a little 
late for the $1.8 billion being sent to a French-based company 
overseas, Mr. Speaker. It’s a little too late for that project, Mr. 
Speaker. SaskPower outsourced meter installation to Grid One, 
a company out of Texas. Well guess what, Mr. Speaker? For the 
contractors and the workers in Saskatchewan, well this bill’s a 
little too late, Mr. Speaker. And look at the prison food services 
to another company based in the UK. Well guess what? All 
those employees that provided that service, well this bill’s a 
little too late for them as well, Mr. Speaker. And for those that 
have to go online to buy their fishing or their hunting licences, 
Mr. Speaker, that particular service is no longer available in 
some of our businesses in the province, Mr. Speaker, because 
quite frankly the company that got the contract wasn’t 

Canadian-based; it was an American-based company, Mr. 
Speaker. And again the P3 school maintenance, gone to a 
Milwaukee firm, Mr. Speaker. The North Battleford hospital 
maintenance has been awarded to a United Kingdom-based 
company called Carillion. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there are tons and tons and tons of examples 
of how the Saskatchewan Party have not taken into 
consideration the fact that some of their decisions had negative 
effects on many workers in many quarters, in many sections and 
many areas of our province. And now they come along with 
Bill 188 to try and pretend to dress up their concern, Mr. 
Speaker, because we know that they have been getting a lot of 
feedback on some of the issues around the bypass, have been 
getting a lot of feedback around the laundry services out of 
Prince Albert. They’ve been getting a lot of feedback out of the 
Texas-licensed trucks that are putting in or installing some of 
our meters, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know they’re getting a lot of feedback on all the decisions 
that they’ve made, Mr. Speaker, to send our money out, our 
opportunities out, and simply provide layoffs to the people of 
Saskatchewan that have given us their best years and certainly 
have given us top performance when it comes to providing 
these services that we’re now seeing the Saskatchewan Party 
send elsewhere. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of challenges. There are a lot of 
challenges around Bill 188. And it’s not so much, Mr. Speaker, 
from the perspective of the opposition that we know that the 
small-business owner, the local business owner, they provide 
incredible opportunity. And that’s one of the reasons why I, as 
an NDP opposition, as a caucus we put this buy local Act day. 
What we want to do through that particular bill, Mr. Speaker, is 
to provide the local business community the opportunity to 
provide as many services and supplies and services as they 
possibly could to Saskatchewan people and to our 
Saskatchewan government. 
 
[15:00] 
 
And that Buy Local Day, Mr. Speaker, certainly had a lot of 
supporters. And I think people out there understood that as long 
as you have a party that is promoting local businesses, like the 
New Democratic Party is, Mr. Speaker, and you keep that 
promotion on a continual basis, you keep harping on the values 
of some of these companies and some of these small businesses, 
then eventually people at the local level will get the message 
and they’ll start shopping locally as much as they can. 
 
And that’s one of the reasons why, Mr. Speaker, we had a shop 
local day just to recognize the local business community. And 
that particular day, Mr. Speaker, is of course something that’s 
going to highlight all the annual effort to recognize the business 
community. And obviously our argument is that you should 
shop local every single day because there’s great opportunities 
locally and it certainly, as I mentioned at the outset, it recycles 
our dollars in the local community time and time again. 
 
So it’s one of those things, Mr. Speaker, that when we 
introduced that particular bill, it was designed to put the Sask 
Party on notice that they’re not doing enough for the 
small-business community. They’re not doing enough for the 



7472 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2015 

local business community. And we within the NDP caucus 
wanted to take the opportunity to highlight that issue. 
 
And here we are, Mr. Speaker, eight years later, the 
Saskatchewan Party, despite handing out billions of dollars to 
countries all over the world for business opportunity, they come 
along with Bill 188 to try — it is a feeble attempt on their part 
— to try and correct a huge error that they’ve made time and 
time again, and that is sending out dollars and opportunities 
beyond our borders, beyond our country even, Mr. Speaker, at 
the expense of local businesses, at the expense of local workers, 
and certainly at the expense of local economies. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know there are a number of companies 
that are looking at this particular process with a lot of interest. 
In particular, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to say that I’ve had a 
conversation with a number of companies. One particular 
company, Mr. Speaker, that has some interest is a company 
called Saskatoon Fastprint. Now one of the . . . It’s owned by a 
northern Indian band, Mr. Speaker, and one of their recent 
employees was a former chief, Robert Sylvester. And the 
former chief, Mr. Sylvester, has indicated that he is now 
working with this company, and they’re quite interested, Mr. 
Speaker, in providing services and supplies to the Saskatchewan 
government. 
 
Now I’m going to ask the question today, when you look at the 
whole notion of Saskatoon Fastprint . . . If anybody wants to 
know the services that this particular company does, all they 
have to do is google it. But they are keenly interested in trying 
to provide services and supplies to the Saskatchewan 
government. Now where does a company like that go, Mr. 
Speaker? The majority owned . . . The company is owned by 
the Birch Narrows First Nation. They’ve been doing an 
incredible amount of work, Mr. Speaker. They’re a very 
aggressive company, and they are trying their darndest to get in 
on the ground floor to try and provide services and supplies to 
the provincial government. 
 
And how does this particular bill affect them? How does it 
impact them? These are some of the questions that people are 
asking me, Mr. Speaker. And I want to point out that this is 
something that they ought to, Saskatoon Fastprint ought to pay 
very close attention to this because obviously the more 
information they get, the better they are to position their 
company well. So how does this particular Bill 188 affect that 
particular company? How are they going to position their 
company to continue providing opportunity for their employees 
but, more so, good services to the provincial government, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Now I want to also identify northern Saskatchewan. Just from 
my background, Mr. Speaker, is that we know that there’s been 
a lot of companies over time that have done a lot of wonderful 
work. And because they’re so far north, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
know how Bill 188 impacts them as well. Is there going to be 
an effort, say, in some of the northern communities — La 
Ronge, La Loche, Buffalo Narrows, Creighton, you know, to 
name a few — is the government going to make the effort for 
some of their northern-based operations to reach out to the local 
business community, or does the business community 
themselves make the initial contact? 
 

These are some of the questions I think we have to ask in Bill 
188. And we encourage the companies to pay very close 
attention as to how Bill 188 would impact them and what 
opportunities it could provide them. 
 
Now as I said at the outset, I’m a skeptic. I don’t believe this 
current government knows anything in terms of their failed 
attempt at trying to position local communities and local 
businesses to match and to get together to see what services that 
could be provided locally because, Mr. Speaker, at the outset I 
said that, or I gave a number of examples of how the Sask Party 
has shipped out opportunities, have shipped out dollars, has 
shipped out jobs. And, Mr. Speaker, the list goes on. 
 
So I want to refresh very clearly that we’ve got a lot of issues 
around Bill 188. We have got to pay very close attention to 
these bills because we’re not certain where the Sask Party’s 
logic on putting some of these bills out there now, especially 
now that the vast majority of contracts that I spoke about earlier 
have now been awarded to out-of-country companies. And 
we’re talking billions of dollars, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve seen opportunities shipped out of Prince Albert. We’ve 
seen opportunities shipped out of North Battleford. We’ve seen 
opportunities shipped out of Meadow Lake. We’ve seen 
opportunities shipped out of Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. The list 
goes on as to how the Sask Party has failed to protect local 
businesses and local jobs; therefore, that has an effect on the 
local economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think the people of Saskatchewan are fooled no more. 
They know that the Saskatchewan Party made a big mistake 
here, and now they’re simply trying to recover from that and do 
a veiled cover-up of their failures as a party to protect 
Saskatchewan-based interests. And that’s why we have Bill 188 
coming along at the last second, at the last minute. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan aren’t buying that. They 
know that there’s been some very serious mistakes. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have a list of people that do want to speak 
to this. I would encourage the business community that’s out 
there listening to this to do a couple of things around Bill 188. 
First of all, we would encourage them to try and take advantage 
of what Bill 188’s trying to do and to not leave that opportunity 
with the Saskatchewan Party government, that they have to 
become very aggressive, very knowledgeable. Because my 
advice to them, even though they say Bill 188 is to deal with 
$200 million on procurement — I’m trying to look at the local 
business community, Mr. Speaker — do not leave it in the 
hands of the Saskatchewan Party to figure out that opportunity 
because their history would dictate that they’re not going to do 
that work.  
 
I would encourage the local business community to be very 
aggressive, to be very visionary, Mr. Speaker, and for them to 
follow very closely Bill 188 to make sure that they are able to 
position their company to be able to benefit from that. Because 
if you wait for the Saskatchewan Party, under Bill 188, what 
you might find is the vast majority of the procurement services 
will be shipped beyond our borders, and that loses the 
opportunities for Saskatchewan families. 
 
And so therefore, I think a lot of the business community that 



October 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7473 

may be paying attention to Bill 188, again my advice would be 
aggressive, to become very knowledgeable of what the bill’s all 
about, and to push the agenda and the envelope, and to get into 
Saskatchewan Party members’ faces to make sure that that 
opportunity is awarded to Saskatchewan-based companies, to 
local-based businesses, Mr. Speaker, because they haven’t got 
the history of protecting jobs. Their ideology and agenda is 
privatization and, Mr. Speaker, as I said, we have tons of 
examples of how the Sask Party has failed to support local 
opportunities, local jobs, and local investment. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s tons of examples of . . . Most 
recently, this afternoon we heard of $12 million going to 
Cenovus, Mr. Speaker. We’re hearing that the liquor stores that 
were publicly owned one time, and the revenues of that came 
into Saskatchewan coffers who are financing schools and health 
care and housing and the list goes on, Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Party want to do away with that. You look at the 
highway construction challenges, Mr. Speaker, as it comes to a 
lot of the local businesses where they are subcontracting under 
a main company, many times their issues aren’t resolved. 
We’ve heard evidence of that last year. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, everything from the laundry services to food 
services; to the $1.8 billion bypass project, all that money going 
to France; privatizing liquor stores; the highway construction 
problems that I spoke about; the $12 million to Cenovus; 
laundry service again out of Prince Albert. Fishing and hunting 
licenses now being purchased out of the States. P3 school 
maintenance being done by a company out of Milwaukee. 
North Battleford hospital maintenance is being outsourced to a 
company out of the UK. And again, Mr. Speaker, we see all 
kinds of examples of how the Saskatchewan Party has not 
protected Saskatchewan-based industries. 
 
And yet at the same time, when you see all this example, Mr. 
Speaker, they sign things like the New West Partnership. 
They’re signatories to the agreement on interprovincial trade. 
They’re talking about TPP last week, the Trans-Pacific 
Partnership, Mr. Speaker. And it’s really confusing to the 
average person, and really frustrating to us within the New 
Democratic caucus, Mr. Speaker, when you have a government 
that says, okay, well we’re supposed to be free enterprise. And 
they talk about all these agreements, New West Partnership and 
the TPP, and then they turn around and say, well because we’re 
free enterprisers we can’t put any protectionist measures in. 
Then all this whack of opportunity and money gets shipped out 
of province, and then they come along six months before the 
next election and say, oh we’re going to have now Bill 188, 
which talks about positioning our local companies to take 
advantage of some of the procurement opportunities, when 
absolutely everybody who has any sense, Mr. Speaker, when 
they look at the Sask Party record they say, what are these guys 
doing? Exactly what are these guys doing, Mr. Speaker? And 
we can answer that. They do not know what they’re doing, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And that’s the single fundamental message that we have from 
within the NDP caucus, and that’s why we keep speaking about 
our vision for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, our plan for 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And that plan, Mr. Speaker, is all 
under the guise of smart growth, Mr. Speaker. And the 
members over there laugh, Mr. Speaker. They laugh. They 

laugh at the hundreds of jobs being shipped out of Prince 
Albert, Mr. Speaker. They laugh at the hundreds of millions of 
dollars being shipped to Paris, Mr. Speaker. They laugh about 
those people that are losing their opportunity in the publicly 
owned liquor stores, Mr. Speaker. They laugh at the people that 
want to buy a fishing licence but have to go through an 
American-based company to do so. They laugh at the hospital 
maintenance contract given to a UK company for a North 
Battleford hospital. The list goes on and on and on. 
 
Absolutely everybody in Saskatchewan knows that the 
economy was picking up, Mr. Speaker, the good times were 
coming to the province, and all of a sudden the Saskatchewan 
Party get elected in 2007. And they started claiming credit for 
all the hard work that the Saskatchewan companies and 
Saskatchewan people undertook to rebuild this province, Mr. 
Speaker. And eight years later, after giving away billions of 
dollars in this day and age, on October 26th, Mr. Speaker . . . 
[inaudible] . . . anyway, Mr. Speaker, they sit there and they 
start to laugh. They start to laugh, Mr. Speaker, and that’s a 
shame. Because what happens, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan won’t forget that laughter. They won’t forget the 
giggling that’s going on here as they’re squandering 
opportunities for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, as they’re 
squandering opportunities. 
 
And I sit here, and I sit here and I listen and . . . The former 
Finance minister is chirping from his chair, Mr. Speaker. When 
I sit here and I listen to some of the issues that they raise, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’m talking about the debt as well, the P3 model, 
all it’s doing is punting debt down the road so our grandkids 
and our great-grandkids pay for that bill. The Minister of 
Finance, the former minister of Finance knows that. We know 
that. All they’ve done is they’ve punted that debt down the road 
so somebody else pays the bills. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
exactly, that’s exactly why we are arguing against the P3 
model, Mr. Speaker. I can’t understand why the Saskatchewan 
Party doesn’t get it. I don’t know why they don’t get it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So here, here, Mr. Speaker, here we have, here we have as I’ve 
mentioned, as I mentioned, the first order of business, Mr. 
Speaker. They tout their free enterprise party. They want to 
have investment come to our province and, Mr. Speaker, they 
sign all these deals. Then they turn around, Mr. Speaker, and 
then they ship jobs out of Saskatchewan. They ship tons of jobs 
and tons of money out of Saskatchewan. Then they turn around, 
like I said, six months before the election. Six months before 
the election, they come along with a feeble attempt under Bill 
188 to try and say, well let’s try now to position local 
companies to benefit from procuring services for the provincial 
government. Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s a day late and a dollar 
short. 
 
Their vision has never been to protect the people of 
Saskatchewan’s interest. The Saskatchewan Party’s vision has 
never been to protect Saskatchewan people’s interest. Their 
agenda has always been privatization, positioning large 
corporations to run our lives, Mr. Speaker, and the average 
citizen of Saskatchewan, they’re paying the bill, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re paying the bill. We’re paying those bills through higher 
municipal taxes, through higher tuition costs, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re paying that through higher taxes later on, Mr. Speaker. 



7474 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2015 

[15:15] 
 
All these costs, all these costs that we’re incurring are 
compliments of the Saskatchewan Party government that had 
record revenue. And I hope . . . In the eight years that they’ve 
been in government, they squandered every opportunity, they 
blew every dollar that they could, Mr. Speaker, and they 
borrowed every cent they possibly can. To do what? To ship 
money beyond our borders, beyond our country, and that money 
spells opportunity for our kids and our grandkids. So the 
opportunity’s shipped out and the debt stays on our grandkids. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s not why the people of Saskatchewan 
reached out to this particular government. And now they’re 
quickly realizing that a mistake was made, a mistake was made. 
And, Mr. Speaker, come election, I think a lot of people are 
going to come back to the NDP in droves. They’re going to 
send the Saskatchewan Party a message: how could you have 
record revenue, record revenue in eight years, record revenue, 
and you top it all off at the end of your eight years, you can’t 
even provide a budget, Mr. Speaker? You won’t provide a 
budget because you don’t want to share with the people of 
Saskatchewan how badly you’ve managed our finances. 
 
And I can tell the people of Saskatchewan, our objective within 
the NDP caucus is to become government. And we want to 
become government April 4th, Mr. Speaker. We’re ready to go. 
We’re ready to govern. And we’re quite aggressive and we’re 
quite anxious to get going, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why, that’s 
why, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party I believe are in for a 
rude awakening come April 4th because quite frankly the 
people of Saskatchewan are getting sick and tired of the same 
old, same old conservative strategy once again being exercised 
by the Saskatchewan Party government. And it’s time to get rid 
of them, Mr. Speaker. It’s time to make a change. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan want that exciting change and the 
Saskatchewan New Democrats are positioned to protect the 
people of Saskatchewan in better ways as evidenced over our 
discussion in our time, a lot better ways than what the 
Saskatchewan Party has failed to do. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I encourage people to give us 
advice on Bill 188. Watch how they’re doing their work. Be 
aggressive, and protect your business interest. And if you have 
any information that you want to share with us, we’re more than 
welcome to take that information. We would want your advice 
on the bill and how we can strengthen it for days to come. And I 
would encourage you on one final comment. It should not wait, 
not hope the Saskatchewan Party can figure this out. 
 
I would encourage the small-business communities, the large 
corporations, the medium-sized businesses, to continue doing 
what you’re doing to build Saskatchewan because you’re doing 
a great job. And do not go to the Saskatchewan Party for 
advice. You do what is necessary to build your future and 
thereby the future of our province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill 188. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 188, The Best Value in Procurement Act, 
2015. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 183 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 183 — The 
Saskatchewan Employment (Essential Services) Amendment 
Act, 2015 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to enter into the debate on Bill 183, an Act to amend the 
essential services . . . Actually it’s got a very long title, Mr. 
Speaker, An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Employment Act 
and The Saskatchewan Employment Amendment Act, 2014. But 
in short, Mr. Speaker, this particular bill before us is to clean up 
a Sask Party mistake and an incredibly expensive Sask Party 
mistake actually, one that has dragged on for eight years and 
could have been dealt with much more cost effectively and 
much fairer to the citizens of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Just to give you a little bit of a . . . And I have to tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re here not because of the goodwill or benevolence 
of the government recognizing that they made a mistake. This is 
about the government being court ordered by the Supreme 
Court of Canada to fix a mistake that they made, that it could 
have saved us a lot of time and money. 
 
But it’s quite interesting, Mr. Speaker. The minister spoke at 
Saskatchewan Federation of Labour last week and it was almost 
as if it was his idea. And I’ve heard him use the language that 
he’s been advised or suggested to by the Supreme Court. That’s 
not exactly the language . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Guidance. Thank you. The minister has received guidance from 
the Supreme Court of Canada. Well that’s not exactly what the 
minister has received. He has been court ordered to change their 
unconstitutional bill, Mr. Speaker. So again this isn’t about the 
benevolence of the government realizing their mistake or 
recognizing that they made a mistake. This is a government, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that plowed ahead back in 2007 when they 
first introduced Bill No. 5, the essential services legislation, and 
then kept plowing ahead at the cost of Saskatchewan taxpayers, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I just want to put on the record a little bit, some key points 
about this particular bill that is before us. So essential services, 
the difference between this bill and the bill that was introduced 
back in 2007, Mr. Speaker, is that essential services is no longer 
defined in the Act, so parties will be determining what is 
essential in their respective organizations. And it was 
interesting. When I first became an MLA back in 2009, I can 
remember some of the talk about in some workplaces in fact 
more people were deemed essential than were actually working 
on a daily basis. So in a workplace there were some people 
deemed essential and there would be more people working in a 



October 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7475 

strike, Mr. Deputy Speaker, than there would be on an average 
day. So that’s an interesting thing. So key point on the Act that 
essential services is no longer defined in the Act and parties will 
be determining what is essential in their respective 
organizations. 
 
The union will identify qualified members to fill any vacancies 
in the essential services work schedule. So during a strike those 
workers would perform only the duties deemed essential. 
 
And if parties can’t come to an agreement on what is essential, 
the question will go to an independent dispute resolution body 
called the essential services tribunal. The tribunal includes a 
neutral board member and one member from each side of the 
labour dispute. And the tribunal will have 60 days to hear 
arguments and 14 days to make a decision, which will come 
into effect after 48 hours. 
 
And the final piece that I think is a key point is that if an 
essential services agreement interferes with work action, an 
application can be made to the tribunal to revisit the agreement 
under binding mediation/arbitration. 
 
I just want to walk you through the timeline, what’s brought us 
here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So historically speaking, we go back 
to December 20th, 2006. There were stalled contract talks and 
that resulted in hundreds of corrections workers and snowplow 
operators going on strike. It needs to be pointed out that those 
snowplow operators did in fact . . . The roads did get cleared. 
Actually I happened to work for the Department of Labour at 
the time, and I know people called from my unit were working 
in other places as well. I remember that strike quite well. 
 
January 9th, 2007, our now Premier, then opposition leader, 
Brad Wall, publicly mulls . . . The premier publicly mulls 
essential services legislation. He was then, sorry, the opposition 
leader. 
 
June 28th, 2007, the debate about essential services legislation 
was reignited as a full-scale strike by 2,700 health care workers 
loomed. 
 
And then December 5th, 2007, the Premier, the new Premier, 
Premier Wall says government will introduce . . . Sorry. The 
Premier says the government will introduce essential services 
legislation to ensure certain services are still provided if public 
sector employees go on strike. 
 
So this is a lengthy timeline. You’ll have to forgive me here, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’ve been at this for eight years, eight 
years that have cost the Saskatchewan taxpayer a lot of money, 
money that could be spent in many other places had this 
government not been so stubborn and stuck in, I would argue, 
an ideological position. 
 
December 19th, 2007, the government tabled Bill 5, the 
essential services legislation, along with Bill 6, an Act to amend 
the existing trade union Act. Business groups applauded the 
legislation, but the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour 
president, Larry Hubich, called it the worst legislation for 
workers in the country. 
 
February 7, 2008, Mr. Hubich called on the government to 

allow courts to look at the bills. In a remarkable piece of 
forecasting, our Justice minister says, “The courts may make 
. . .” who is now the Labour minister. He says, “The courts may 
make findings on our legislation at some point, but right now 
my department drafts the legislation.” So that was incredibly 
prescient, but we could have taken care of this quite some time 
ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
July 29th, 2008, the SFL [Saskatchewan Federation of Labour] 
launches a constitutional challenge of Bills 5 and 6, arguing 
they violate workers’ rights to collective bargaining and 
organizing new unions. 
 
February 6th, 2012, Queen’s Bench Justice Dennis Ball rules 
Saskatchewan essential services legislation is unconstitutional, 
although he upholds The Trade Union Act, which was Bill 6. 
 
March 5th, 2012, the provincial government announces it is 
appealing Justice Ball’s ruling. The appeal began November 
27th. 
 
April 26th, 2013, the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal Justice, 
J.A. Richards, upholds the Saskatchewan Party government’s 
public services essential services Act. 
 
October 17th, 2013, the Supreme Court of Canada says it will 
hear the SFL’s appeal of Richards’s court decision. 
 
January 30th, 2015, Supreme Court of Canada strikes down the 
2008 public services essential services Act in a five-to-two 
ruling. The court finds unionized Canadian workers have a 
constitutionally guaranteed right to strike. 
 
September 9th, 2015, a consultation paper prepared by the 
government and SFL go to the public sector employers and 
unions with the hope comments can be turned into legislation. 
 
And here we are. October 2015, government introduces 
essential services amendments. 
 
Consultation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has not been this 
government’s strong suit, particularly with this piece of 
legislation, and there’s still some concern by stakeholders that 
starting consultations in September or the end of summer — I 
think it was late August, early September as noted in this 
timeline — and then introducing the bill in October, that’s not 
exactly what you’d call fulsome consultation. But we could go 
back to the early days of the bill as well, and that was the big 
issue that many stakeholders had pointed out, that there was a 
complete lack of consultation. 
 
In fact, in writing this bill, I’ll just point to a Murray Mandryk 
column from the 19th of this month, Mr. Speaker, where he 
says: 
 

. . . the subsequent Saskatchewan Party government’s law 
— or at least, the regulations that dictate how the law 
would be applied — read like it was written by a bunch of 
angry, vengeful party workers. It allowed the employer to 
dictate how many people could be deemed essential (95 
per cent in some units), what jobs were essential (music 
therapists) and even what individuals (George or Martha) 
were essential. 



7476 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2015 

So it’s interesting that lack of consultation, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, always leads to lousy legislation. I would argue that 
lack of consultation with those who are impacted by the 
impending legislation and those who know something about 
that area will always lead to bad legislation with unintended 
consequences. But I think people knew very early on that there 
were some really bad consequences from this legislation. 
 
And this is a key example of how . . . So I just want to put on 
the record a couple of quotes around . . . So although the SFL, 
in its comments about this bill, has talked about being hopeful 
about this bill, a few other labour unions have talked about the 
devil being in the details and how it will be implemented. 
They’ve expressed concerns; let’s wait and see what this looks 
like. It definitely looks better than the original bill did, but 
they’ve expressed some concerns. 
 
I know Barb Cape, the president of SEIU-West [Service 
Employees International Union-West], says, she says . . . Just 
one second: 
 

“Though there appears to be some improvement, the devil 
is in the details,” said Barbara Cape. “We had hoped for a 
most robust consultation process, however, the government 
did not begin to seek our input as a labour stakeholder until 
late August. SEIU-West members believe that taking the 
time to actually read the proposed legislation and consider 
its ‘real world’ implications is an important step in this 
process.” 

 
And that’s from a news release on October 15, 2015 from 
SEIU-West. So there still is some concern about consultation 
around this. I think it’s important to talk about the cost of the 
bill, which we don’t know what this has cost us over the last 
eight years as taxpayers. I can tell you it’s undoubtedly cost 
more than the 8 million that has been cut from surgeries in 
RQHR [Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region], which is causing 
surgeries to go up by 50 per cent just even in the last few 
months, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So thinking about the cost to fight this bill . . . Or the 
government took basically the people of Saskatchewan to the 
Supreme Court. We had to have a Queen’s Bench hearing, a 
Court of Appeal, and then the Supreme Court. So the cost, first 
of all, of creating the bill in the first place, Bill 5, which wasn’t 
a good bill and wasn’t very successful, but you still need the 
civil servants to work on and implement. You need people to 
draft it, which would be lawyers for the province. And then you 
need civil servants to implement it, thinking how it will be 
implemented. That all takes staff time. The cost to get the bill 
drafted, I believe that they contracted out the drafting of the bill. 
Did they in fact seek outside counsel? I’m sorry, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I’m not positive about that. The time spent on court 
costs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so again three levels of court, Mr. 
Speaker. This cost Saskatchewan taxpayers a lot of money, 
money that could be spent elsewhere on many, many things, 
Mr. Speaker. This could be spent in many, many other ways, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:30] 
 
But this is a classic example of this government’s stubbornness, 
its desire to plow ahead with its own agenda without two . . . I 

think this displays very well two things: the Sask Party 
government’s stubbornness and its desire to plow ahead, but 
also its unwillingness, also its unwillingness to admit that it has 
made a mistake, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I remember our Premier at one point talking about being a 
government that will admit its mistakes. Well again I have to 
emphasize this isn’t a government changing a bill and admitting 
it made a mistake. This is court ordered. This isn’t the 
benevolence of the Sask Party government. This was a court 
ordered change, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about this again. This is not a 
government who’s willing to admit its mistakes. We can go 
back to the cut to the film tax credit, which has had a huge 
impact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the film industry here in 
Saskatchewan. We once had a robust, thriving film industry in 
this province and now we do not. We have many, many people 
who have had to leave this province because they couldn’t earn 
a living in their chosen profession. We have students who go to 
the University of Regina and graduate from film school and 
have no hope of being able to pursue their profession here. We 
have people who worked in the film industry, film industry 
technicians, who stayed in Saskatchewan after the cut to the tax 
credit because they have roots here and they couldn’t uproot 
their partners or their kids for those reasons, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
So this government, instead of recognizing it had made a drastic 
mistake with cutting the film tax credit, much like the drastic 
mistake that they’ve made on this particular bill that we have 
before us, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I 
don’t know why the former Finance minister is so agitated 
again. There has been an incredible amount of agitation these 
days coming from that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s Monday. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — It’s Monday. My colleague from Rosemont 
has pointed out, it must be Monday. I don’t know, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Anyway, the fact of the matter is this is a government, Mr. 
Speaker, who pushed people out of Saskatchewan, a 
government who bragged about attracting young people and in 
fact did the exact opposite. There are people who uprooted their 
lives and who still are trying to establish their careers in other 
provinces, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So this particular bill before us 
is exactly the example of this government unwilling to admit its 
mistakes, much like the film tax credit. This is again an 
example of this government’s stubbornness. 
 
We can look at this government’s unwillingness to implement 
GSAs [gender and sexuality alliance], Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
despite hearing from or hearing about students who talk about 
the lack of ability to form GSAs in schools. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this is a government who is not willing to support 
students fully, to ensure that they are safe and secure and 
comfortable in being who they are in schools. Is this going to 
have to be something that goes through the court system too, 
Mr. Speaker? Who knows? 
 
This is a government who . . . Again this is a fix of a piece of 



October 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7477 

legislation we’ve had. I’ve only been an MLA for six years, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and there have been many pieces of legislation 
that the government has put forward hastily and then we’ve had 
before us again a short time later. 
 
We can talk about the changes to the school year, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Again, you should never make policy on the back of a 
napkin, and I think that this is what this government likes to do, 
whether it’s essential services legislation, school year . . . They 
were going to change the school year and make sure that it 
starts after the Labour Day weekend, but they never looked at a 
calendar and they never thought about how many days school 
boards need to have in place. They never thought to talk about, 
talk to school boards about what parents wanted. In fact it’s 
interesting that if you . . . having spoken to the school boards in 
Saskatoon, there’s actually about a 50/50 split between starting 
before and after Labour Day and how that would mean for a 
week of holidays in February that people have become quite 
accustomed to versus two weeks at Christmas. So had this 
government, when it came to the school year, actually talked to 
school boards, they would have maybe taken a different 
approach. 
 
Again this government’s idea of creating policy on the back of a 
napkin, we can talk about MRIs [magnetic resonance imaging], 
the MRI bill before us? Clearly there is no evidence supporting 
the use of private MRIs in shortening wait-lists. The evidence 
across Canada actually shows quite the opposite for all kinds of 
reasons, all kinds of reasons. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What’s the relevance, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Ms. Chartier: — The Health minister’s wondering how this is 
relevant. It is very relevant. This is about governments who 
make policy on the back of a napkin, like their essential 
services legislation, like their MRI bill before us, like changing 
the school year, like not having any good, positive, or valid 
information in cutting the film tax credit, Mr. Speaker. So this 
is a government who has cost taxpayers a lot of money because 
they were stuck on an idea, and now that they’ve been ordered, 
now that they’ve been ordered to make changes, we have the 
bill before us again. 
 
But ironically, again just sort of historically about this bill that’s 
being amended, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 2012, I believe it was 
2012, we had the original iteration of the employment Act 
before us. Not essential services, that was 2007. But it was 
rolled into 2012 where this government took 12 pieces of 
legislation and smashed them into one, Mr. Speaker, put them 
all into one, with a summer of consultation. 
 
I can tell you, when I worked for the Department of Labour, 
there was a national consultation going on on the federal labour 
code. That consultation was fulsome and included cross-Canada 
meetings. It included talking to all kinds of stakeholders. That 
was on one piece of . . . That was on . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . They’re mocking my language, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which 
is . . . Who the heck cares? Like they . . . it is the most 
ridiculous thing that they . . . Who cares, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
They think that that is pretty funny over there. But 12 bills 
rolling . . . I don’t know what language the very eloquent 
former Finance minister would use, but apparently he would not 
choose the same language I have, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

So they took 12 bills, rolled them, rolled 12 bills together in one 
bill with very, very, very limited consultation. And again I point 
you to that consultation process that went on, in about 2006 I 
believe it started, on the federal Labour Code. That was a 
detailed, lengthy consultation process that ensured it wasn’t just 
online, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It ensured that all kinds of 
stakeholders had an opportunity to participate. 
 
So this is a government, this is a government who plows ahead 
with its own stubborn agenda, isn’t willing . . . Contrary to what 
the Premier said in the past, it is not willing to admit its 
mistakes. It only changes things when it’s pushed at the last 
minute. 
 
I think the thing that makes me most angry about this, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is the cost to Saskatchewan taxpayers. When 
we have budget decisions that . . . Governing is about priorities. 
This government chose to fight Saskatchewan working people 
rather than making wise amendments and changes early on, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. That money that has been spent fighting this 
bill to the Supreme Court could be used in so many different 
ways. I think that that’s one of the most galling things about 
this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So I know that my colleague . . . I’m just trying to think if 
there’s anything else that’s important to put on the record. I 
think that I have covered it and I know my colleague from 
Saskatoon Centre, when we move into committee down the 
road here, will have many questions and many thoughts on this. 
But I just want to again point out that this bill is an example of 
Sask Party stubbornness and its unwillingness to admit its 
mistakes, which I think is not acceptable in a government. 
 
But with that, I would like to conclude my remarks. I move to 
adjourn debate. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 183, The 
Saskatchewan Employment (Essential Services) Amendment 
Act, 2015. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 184 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 184 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance (Motorcycles) Amendment 
Act, 2015 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m pleased to 
continue speaking about Bill No. 184, which can be cited as The 
Automobile Accident Insurance (Motorcycles) Amendment Act, 
2015. And, Mr. Speaker, this bill relates to the changes that are 
being made by the government to our public insurance contract. 
And I remind everybody that in Saskatchewan our main motor 
vehicle insurance contract is in legislation which is open to 



7478 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2015 

debate and discussion throughout the province. 
 
And it’s clear that the minister responsible for the legislation, 
who also is the one responsible for SGI, or Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance, has had much pressure placed on the 
corporation and on him and on the Premier as it relates to 
motorcycle insurance rates. 
 
And so what we have here, according to the minister, is a 
proposal that provides for cheaper insurance for people who 
drive motorcycles. But this cheaper form of insurance which 
waters down the coverage is not recommended by the minister. 
It’s not recommended by the members of the advisory 
committee because they’re concerned that people will be 
travelling without sufficient insurance and if they’re seriously 
injured in an accident while using a motorcycle. So it begs the 
question about why this kind of a proposal would be brought 
forward. 
 
The practical issue relates to different insurance funds, if I can 
put it that way, different gathering of the insurance premiums, 
which are then used to pay for the damages that are suffered by 
a particular group of, in this case, motorcycle drivers or riders. 
And rather than keep a standard that is of, I think, one that the 
minister would recommend and the advisory committee would 
recommend, they have chosen to bring forward a proposal 
which allows for a lesser type of insurance for motorcycle 
riders for a cheaper fee. 
 
And it raises quite a number of questions about whether other 
groups who think that their insurance fees are too high, that 
they will want some kind of a treatment like this. And I think 
that it ends up raising questions about the whole nature of the 
type of coverage that we have in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I spent quite a bit of time going through that last 
Wednesday, and so I don’t think I’ll go back there. But what I 
want to point out is that when ministers or the Premier, when 
cabinet brings forward legislation like this into the House which 
alters the traditional tried-and-true form of insurance, we all 
need to ask questions about why they’re doing this. And it 
strikes me, in a pre-election period, that this may be much more 
a political bill than an actual practical bill related to providing 
insurance coverage for motorcycle riders. And I think that’s a 
grave question to ask here in this place. 
 
I know that I will have some questions or some of my 
colleagues will have some questions in committee around this, 
because we need to understand on the record why the 
government has made these choices. And if it’s a purely 
political choice, then I think everybody needs to know that. And 
it could be another one of these types of legislation that will be 
challenged in the courts, and we want to have on the record the 
actual rationale of the government. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have a lot more to add about this bill 
so at this point I will move adjournment of debate. Thank you. 
 
[15:45] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 184. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 185 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 185 — The 
Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous Measures) Amendment Act, 
2015 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise this afternoon and speak on Bill No. 185, The 
Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous Measures) Amendment Act, 2015. 
And it’s an important one. I mean it’s always interesting when 
you look at the guts of these bills that come forward and see 
what we have before us, particularly when it talks to privacy 
and necessary amendments. We have seen this government, a 
few years ago under a different minister, take back legislation. 
We had the super ID [identification], and it was found by the 
Privacy Commissioner to be over-encompassing and not 
needing that to be done. 
 
And I think we should have some questions about this one in 
front of us because here we have a bill before us calling for 
facial recognition technology. It’s interesting, the need for that. 
We’re always interested in keeping up with technology; that’s a 
good thing, and we need to do that. And there’s several reasons 
for that: one, to be cost effective. We don’t want to be using 
things that are out of date and you can’t get parts for anymore. 
We all know that. That’s important, and I think most 
Saskatchewan people can relate to that, you know? But you also 
need to make sure that there is a need for keeping up to date. 
 
And I think this is very important, and so I’ll quote the minister 
in his comments from October 20th, just a few short days ago, 
when he said, and I quote: 
 

Mr. Speaker, the most significant amendment to this Act 
protects data gathered through facial recognition 
technology used with driver’s licences in Saskatchewan. 
Saskatchewan is the only province not using this 
technology. Having it in place will bring our province in 
alignment with every other jurisdiction in Canada. 

 
So it will be interesting. And when we get into committee, we 
don’t hear much about this until it actually happens. What do 
they have in other provinces, and what’s the protection from the 
government or others misusing this data? It’s really, really 
important that we have that before us. For example, he talks 
about: 
 

It will protect Saskatchewan residents from identity theft. It 
will prevent people from obtaining multiple . . . licences or 
IDs [identification]. It will also improve road safety by 
preventing suspended drivers from using a false identity to 
get a licence. 

 
So he’s providing three good reasons, and that’s fair enough. 
And we’re glad that he’s done that, but we need to know the 



October 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7479 

depth of those reasons. For example, how many people out 
there, how big of a problem is it around obtaining multiple 
driver’s licences or IDs? You know, I mean this is an issue 
sometimes young people have when they try to get false ID so 
they can get into bars or whatever, but we never saw that as a 
big challenge before. But it will be interesting to know from 
SGI how big of an issue that really is. 
 
And so those three reasons, we need to drill down and we will 
ask the minister, for example, how big of a problem is it in 
Saskatchewan for identity theft? How big of a problem is it that 
we have here in Saskatchewan, people with multiple driver’s 
licences or IDs? That will be interesting. And of course we 
want to make sure, you know, when people are suspended 
because of drunk driving or whatever, they should not have 
false ID. So is this the answer? 
 
I want to, at this point, I’m going to tell you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’m going to quote from the Virginia Journal of Law 
and Technology. Interestingly this was done in the spring of 
2002. Now as you would remember, that was a pretty pivotal 
year. It was really pivotal. A lot of these articles would have 
been written in early 2001. And if we all remember, 9/11 was 
really the pivotal time. And so this, I think, people would find 
very interesting. 
 
And I’m not saying one side or the other how I feel about this, 
but I think we need to think more about this. Because here we 
have . . . If SGI is a bit on mission creep in doing too much, 
where is the tipping point between what they need to know and 
what they want to know or people are urging them to know? 
 
Now interestingly, if we think about that we see more and more 
the cameras giving out tickets, not the cops on the corner, 
cameras are becoming all over the place. We have them in the 
public places and we’re just becoming used to it. We’re being 
watched all the time. Well here’s an interesting quote, and I 
think the government side would find this interesting. I’m 
quoting from this article: 
 

In January 2001, roughly 100,000 ticket-holders who came 
to watch the Super Bowl in Tampa, Florida, were being 
watched themselves, not by people, but by cameras 
equipped with face recognition software. Unbeknownst to 
spectators, these cameras scanned each individual face in 
the stadium and a computer matched their profiles against a 
central database of known criminals. The Argus-eyed 
system identified nineteen individuals . . . [but] since they 
were petty ticket scalpers and pickpockets, the police did 
not bother to make any arrests. 

 
Still, as you can imagine, 100,000 people who thought they 
were watching a football game were in fact being watched. 
 
So how does this work for us here in Saskatchewan when we 
think, okay that’s pretty cool; now we’ve got facial recognition 
on this, and for sure this is me. And the reasons the minister 
gave are good. But that means, all of a sudden, I’ve given a 
pretty big piece of my privacy to the state. And we have to have 
questions about that. How is that going to be protected? 
 
Now interestingly, the Privacy Commissioner has given his 
stamp of approval to this legislation. And I think, after I’ve 

given this speech, I’m going to phone him up and say, I’d like 
to see your notes, if you’d be kind enough to share them, about 
this. Because the research that they did about, is this 
appropriate, have they put parameters around this for SGI? Who 
do they share it with? Will it be shared with others? Will it be 
something that can be shared en masse to others? This is a real, 
this is something that is a bit of a Pandora’s box, isn’t it, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? Because all of a sudden you have, you’ve got 
the cameras on the stoplights giving you tickets. Now you’re 
going to be in a game where, someplace public where you think 
nobody’s . . . You’re just part of the group, but actually you’re 
being searched as you sit there. Now this is really interesting. 
 
And the other thing I just want to raise at the same point here 
that is a bit of a problem, is that we know in Saskatoon this is 
an issue that the police chief is wrestling with, it’s the issue 
around carding. On one hand, we think this is a good thing 
because we want to make sure we’re all safe in the 
communities, that’s for sure. But again people have raised the 
issue that not only are they carding, but they’re keeping that 
information and they’re building profiles. 
 
So I don’t know if people realize how much of our privacy is 
being eroded. It’s not like it was 50 years ago or 40 years ago, I 
mean let alone the computers who can do all this analysis and 
match you up. You have 100,000 faces and pick out 19 
pickpockets. This is something that’s quite, quite alarming. If 
we have to make sure we’re doing the right thing and the 
necessary thing . . . Is this needed? 
 
Is this something . . . Now I understand other provinces have 
done this, and it would be interesting to know, what are their 
parameters? Who are they sharing their information with? Can 
it be shared because . . . [inaudible] . . . I think this is important 
to know. Who will it be shared with? 
 
So we have questions. We have questions. And I think that we 
just can’t write a blank cheque to SGI and say, go for it. I mean, 
I don’t know what the costs are. It will be interesting to know 
what the costs are in years that we’re making some tough 
choices. Like today we heard about the cuts to the surgical 
times, you know. And what we heard there was in fact now we 
have the wait times going up, but we’re going to probably 
spend a whack of money on this. 
 
And I got to tell you, if it’s anything like in Social Services 
where we have a Linkin system that was supposed to cost $15 
million, now we’re up to $50 million, I tell you, this 
government can’t keep track of their . . . When they start to 
write blank cheques, they go a little crazy over there.  
 
And the former Finance minister should know that. We’ve seen 
that with the Linkin system and Social Services. And I don’t 
know how he can even begin to chirp from his chair as if he has 
any credibility to creating parameters around costs. If there’s 
somebody who hasn’t been able to control costs in spending, is 
that Finance minister for sure. Where has all the money gone? 
Everybody in this province asks that question. Where has all the 
money gone? Where has the money gone? 
 
And here we have SGI here getting a blank cheque to bring in 
this technology, and the minister has no idea, has not told us 
any idea of how much this is going to cost. It’s going to be 



7480 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2015 

pretty cool because we’re going to be up with everybody else. 
It’s going to be pretty good . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . You 
know, the Finance minister talks about me being a comedian, 
but I’ve got to tell you, he gives me lots of good lines, 
especially his last budget. That was a good joke, Mr. Speaker, 
I’ve got to tell you. I got to tell you, you know, if I’m a 
comedian, he’s the best source for jokes. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I get off the line that I’m supposed to 
be talking about. And I know they’re distracting me, so I want 
to get back to talking about Bill 185 . . . [inaudible]. You know, 
Mr. Speaker, this is what Ralph Waldo Emerson said. He said, 
“A man finds room in the few square inches of the face for the 
traits of all his ancestors; for the statement of all his history, and 
his wants.” 
 
So it’s a pretty special thing when we start to talk about facial 
recognition, and this is a big issue. This is not . . . When the 
minister says this is a significant part of the legislation, you bet 
it is. And we have questions about the costs. Is it really worth 
it? He identifies three reasons, but really has it been that big of 
a problem? Maybe it has. Maybe it has, but after eight years 
now is the time to deal with those? So I hope SGI, when they 
come forward to defend this bill, brings information about 
exactly, exactly how many times that we’ve had multiple driver 
licences or IDs used in Saskatchewan. How big of a problem is 
it? How big of a problem is it in terms of identity theft? 
 
We want to create parameters around it because there are issues 
out there people want. People want better health care in 
Saskatchewan. And we see promises being broken by this 
government and they won’t own up to it. We’ve seen that in 
question period where the Premier, he prefers to give a history 
lesson, prefers . . . And we had even the Health minister going 
back to the 1990s today to find an excuse for his behaviour. 
That’s unbelievable. We’re talking about here and now and the 
challenges people are facing, the cost of living here in 
Saskatchewan. We have the Minister Responsible for 
SaskPower, while our rates are going up, are giving cheques of 
$12 million — $12 million — to a company that really we have 
big questions about. Why are they giving that kind of money 
away when our rates are going up in our homes in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
So this is a government that can’t seem to create parameters 
around their work. It expands and expands and expands. And let 
me get started on P3s, P3s. How you can believe that? How can 
you believe that? The cost of the P3s that we have here. How 
can you believe that government? 
 
And then this government says when we talk about essential 
services that they can pay both sides of the bill, both sides of 
the bill, and it’s going to cost less than a couple of hundred 
thousand. Eight years, eight long years of work on an 
ideological argument that we should never have had, and 
they’re saying it’s only a couple of hundred thousand at most. 
 
How does this government have any credibility at all? I’ve got 
to tell you, people have a lot of questions about where the 
money went. And then we find out some of the things where 
they say they spent hardly anything. It sure looks like they’re 
working off the side of the desk, Mr. Speaker. It sure does. 
 

[16:00] 
 
But I’ve got to tell you, this bill before us right now, we have a 
lot of questions about. I know there’s another part that I want to 
talk about, and this is the question about . . . And the minister 
says, “Over 50 per cent of the vehicle owners make monthly 
. . .” Now he’s talking about: 
 

A further amendment proposes changes to the Act to allow 
for the impounded vehicle’s licence plates to be cancelled. 
Over 50 per cent of the vehicle owners make monthly 
insurance payments. When the vehicle is impounded, SGI 
continues to take monthly . . . money from their bank 
accounts. Customers are unhappy with the process and the 
amendment seeks to improve that. 

 
I find this odd. Isn’t this the whole point of impounding cars, to 
create some unhappiness? Maybe I’m wrong but if your car is 
impounded, it’s usually not for a good reason. You’re not 
celebrating. You’ve done something wrong. So why all of a 
sudden is this government okay with cancelling the monthly 
payments? I would think you would want to continue the 
monthly payments. It would be a way to pay for the 
impoundment, wouldn’t it? There are fees, I would assume, or 
someplace for the car or truck to be. There are costs to that. So 
who’s going to pay for that? Is that the taxpayer who is going to 
pay for a car to be impounded? And the person’s car who is 
impounded gets to have their monthly bill cut off. I find that 
passing strange. 
 
And so we’ll have questions about why all of a sudden this 
relationship with the person who has this vehicle . . . Now it 
might be the argument that somebody says, well I own the 
vehicle and it wasn’t me that caused it to be impounded. Well if 
that was the case, you would think it would only take maybe a 
day or two to figure that out. You’d find out that your car 
wasn’t at home or your truck wasn’t back at the work site. And 
you’d find out really quick where the truck was and then you 
would have to pay that fee to get it out. But if somebody’s let a 
vehicle in a place where you keep these vehicles, you would 
think somebody has to pay for the upkeep. So why not have . . . 
I mean, SGI has got to have some costs involved in this. I find 
this interesting. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m thinking that this bill has caused a lot of 
interest. And I think that this is going to be some interesting 
questions in committee, and I appreciate the time that I’ve had 
here to speak. I want to end in one other quote from this article. 
It’s a very interesting article because it talks about mission 
creep and how we’ve gone overboard in technology. And I 
think we have to have some discussions about that. But he says, 
and this is a quote: 
 

The serial number of a human specimen is the face, that 
accidental and unrepeatable combination of features. It 
reflects neither character nor soul, nor what we call the self. 
The face is only the serial number of a specimen. 

 
I thought that was very interesting. Milan Kundera was the 
person saying that. And I think that we’re into interesting times. 
And while this article, this journal was put together in 2002, just 
right around the time of 9/11 when we got into this in a big, big 
way. And so this is an interesting time for us. 



October 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7481 

So I know others want to speak on some of the bills today but I 
wanted, and I appreciated the opportunity to get up and speak, 
get my thoughts on the record on this bill. And I hope when 
SGI comes they have some answers because this may be one 
committee that I may attend and have some questions about 
privacy. It’s a big issue for me as a human rights critic that I 
want to know what are the limits here. We see in Saskatchewan 
that we have to do a lot of work to protect our privacy and this 
is one area with SGI, I have a lot of questions. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would move adjournment 
on Bill No. 185, The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous Measures) 
Amendment Act, 2015. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 185. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 186 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 186 — The 
Municipal Conflict of Interest Amendment Act, 2015 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and it is indeed my honour to be able to rise in the House today 
to enter into the debate on this bill, Bill 186, The Municipal 
Conflict of Interest Amendment Act, 2015. 
 
This is a fairly lengthy bill with a number of changes, but I 
think if you drill down into it you will see very quickly that it is 
sort of three bills that are on a parallel track. Because what the 
minister is proposing in this particular amendment is to amend 
The Cities Act and The Municipalities Act and The Northern 
Municipalities Act to reflect some changes to conflict of interest 
guidelines and rules for municipal leaders, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So really if you read the first section on The Cities Act, the 
changes are almost identical to The Northern Municipalities Act 
and The Municipalities Act. So, Mr. Speaker, don’t take a lot of 
time reading the whole bill. And I know you’re going to want to 
pore through it and ensure that you fully review all the 
implications, but really it’s like three bills in one that follow a 
parallel track. 
 
And having said that, I just wanted to reflect a little bit on the 
role of municipal councillors in the province of Saskatchewan 
and certainly across Canada and in other countries. And I think 
back to my father’s involvement in municipal politics back in 
the day. Certainly served his time as a councillor. He served his 
time as the reeve. And I can remember the calls coming in and 
it was usually about the grader, and there was always a problem 
with the gravel on somebody’s road or something that the 
grader had done or the grader broke down. But I remember as a 
teenager hearing my dad get these calls and having to deal with, 

you know, why the school bus was late or why the washout in 
the one culvert north of, you know the . . . [inaudible] . . . farm 
wasn’t working properly. 
 
And so I think my point here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that being 
an RM [rural municipality] councillor is really a thankless job 
on many, many levels and I want to really applaud the work of 
all RM . . . well, urban and rural municipal councillors who take 
time out of their busy lives to commit to the larger cause which 
is the orderly governing of their communities, be it the rural 
municipality or certainly the small towns. 
 
Again in my small town of Lafleche, the mayor’s job was not 
an easy job. And I know my uncle was mayor for many, many 
years and it was one that he took seriously and really gave 
voluntarily of his time. I think the remuneration has never really 
kept up with the duties and the pain in the necks that a lot of 
councillors get by virtue of stepping up to the plate and 
engaging in this public responsibility. I know that it’s a tough 
job and it’s a call to duty that many rural and urban individuals 
take very seriously. Like we are going to meet I think this week 
with some of the city council folks, and it’s always a pleasure 
and an honour to be able to talk with some of those folks and 
hear about the hard work that they’re doing in their urban 
municipalities. And I think the same goes for the folks at 
SARM [Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] and 
the work they do there. 
 
Having said that, I think this bill is a response to a particular 
situation that kind of went sideways. A couple years ago the 
government saw fit to do an investigation, and we now have a 
report by Justice Barclay on some suggestions for 
improvements when ethical questions arise at the municipal 
level. If I understand correctly, what the minister is proposing is 
that this adoption of some more formal rules around a code of 
ethics and ethical conduct is basically taken from our current 
code of conduct as members of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
And as you know, Mr. Speaker, every year we have to file our 
disclosure reports. That’s a very important part of what we do 
as members of the Legislative Assembly. It’s public 
information that people can access. Because I think open, 
transparent accounting for people’s interests is an important 
part of who we are and in many cases what drives us to become 
involved politically. I think the same level of engagement 
happens at the rural municipal level and the urban municipal 
level as well. 
 
So questions of people’s motivations are always complicated. 
And I’ve just been watching a lawyer show on Netflix, so I’m 
always kind of now seeing the intrigue in all of this. But 
certainly people’s motivations are strong, and what compels 
people to go forward is they want to see change. Now whether 
it’s going to affect them materially or affect their personal 
financial situation materially, that’s where things can 
sometimes get a little bit cloudy. 
 
So I think it’s very important that the report, Justice Barclay’s 
report, be taken very seriously, and I think that this bill is 
addressing a lot of that. But certainly as we go through with the 
debate and have an opportunity to examine these changes very 
closely, we will be able to see whether or not it achieves the 
purposes that the minister has declared or intended here. 



7482 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2015 

Basically the amendments are going to address the Barclay 
report’s recommendations, but there’s some other changes that 
the minister indicated as well. And I think, you know, these are 
changes that are intended to take that very seriously. 
 
I know that, as Ag critic and dealing with some of the water 
issues that people are facing with, you know . . . Water levels 
are really, really high in Saskatchewan on many levels, and a lot 
of the concerns I get from individuals when there’s illegal 
drainage happening is the ability of the rural municipality to 
address that effectively. 
 
And I think you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, being a member of 
a rural community, is that often the water doesn’t stop at the 
boundary of the RM. Water keeps moving. And so all of a 
sudden you’ve got two RMs that are in dispute about where all 
this water’s coming from, and then you have certain individuals 
who have large land holdings who happen to be a councillor 
and their land may be benefitting from some of that drainage. 
So it becomes very delicate and very complicated, and certainly 
a lot of the people that I’ve been meeting with are very 
concerned about whether or not there’s been advantages taken 
from having positions on municipal councils — very 
concerning. 
 
And certainly I think given what we know about the spirit of 
volunteerism and the headaches that are involved with being a 
rural municipal councillor, there’s a balance there. So I think, 
sadly, this was motivated by a situation where there was 
obviously a need for some boundaries and some lines to be 
drawn for a code of ethics. And you know, this is what’s 
driving these changes. I don’t think it even comes close to the 
integrity of, you know, 95 per cent of people who volunteer for 
these positions. And I say volunteer because any pay that does 
come out of them cannot possibly meet the amount of hours that 
these folks put in. So there may be some remuneration — I’m 
not sure — but again this is essentially a volunteer position, and 
people are doing that and running their businesses and taking 
care of their families all at the same time. 
 
So I think it’s a real balance. I think the government’s 
attempting to find that balance in implementing what the justice 
said in terms of his report. And then they’re adding a few other 
things, more government control of rural municipalities. And 
again I’m not sure how that will go over once, if and when the 
government has to actually use that hammer that they’re 
creating. We’ll certainly see in that event whether, you know, 
the individuals and the organizations that were consulted with, 
whether or not they’ll appreciate it as much at the time if that 
hammer ever needs to be used. But I’ll talk about that in a little 
bit. 
 
The minister’s indicated that there’s three main purposes that 
he’s trying to achieve with this bill. First of all is the 
implementation of the Barclay report, which I’ve referenced. 
Secondly it’s the ability of this government to impose certain 
things on municipalities, if needed, especially to address areas 
of municipal conflict of interest. So there’s more of a hammer, 
as I said, for the government to impose upon certain elected 
municipal officials, if necessary, or if in the view of the 
government it’s necessary. And then finally — and I think the 
third part is probably the most important part of this — is an 
expansion of the mandate of the Provincial Ombudsman to be 

able to investigate some of these concerns that are being, that 
I’m hearing about in my capacity as Agriculture critic. And I 
think that’s a really important role for the Ombudsman to fill, 
and I think we will see a real uptake on this expansion. 
 
So in terms of the report itself, first of all the first main change 
is requiring individual councillors to make a much broader 
declaration of their personal interests. And I think again I 
mentioned it’s following what we need to do as members of this 
Assembly, where we have to disclose all of our interests 
financially and through businesses and through the community 
as well. So this is mirroring that. And council members will 
need to disclose this, and it will be available for individuals to 
review. 
 
The second thing now is these disclosure statements are 
required to be filed. This is a mandatory filing and regular 
updating of the public disclosure statements. And as the Deputy 
Speaker knows, that’s something we do every year with our 
Conflict of Interest Commissioner, and we are required to 
disclose and actually sit down and meet with him and go 
through that report. I don’t think this is suggesting that the 
Conflict of Interest Commissioner is going to sit down with 
every rural municipal councillor. I’m pretty sure that’s not what 
is happening. But there will be a requirement for a mandatory 
filing and update of these statements. 
 
[16:15] 
 
Thirdly, the big change based on the report is to require 
municipalities to adopt a code of ethics. So this is going to be 
required and they will need to do that. There is a model code 
that has been proposed, and if the municipality’s comfortable 
with that, they will implement that. They may already have 
codes of ethics that will either be close enough that they fit or 
they’ll have to start from scratch. What we find out is that this 
model code of ethics isn’t available just yet, and once again 
we’ll have to wait until the regulations are passed to see what it 
looks like, which is always kind of a waiting game when we see 
legislative amendments that require changes to regulations as 
well. So we’ll watch for that and keep an eye out for that. 
 
The second issue is what I talked about, is the hammer that this 
government is now going to make a little tougher, so things like 
transparency declaration, disclosure of interests, and further, 
that the minister’s indicated they’re going to strengthen and 
improve the authorities in the Acts related to inquiry, 
inspection, and disqualification. So one example that the 
minister gave was ensuring that the authority for the minister to 
suspend or limit the powers of a council member during the 
course of an inquiry until the results are known. So right now 
there’s no way for the minister to ensure that someone who is in 
question has their power suspended, so that’s going to make 
that a little broader authority for the government. 
 
Another one is broadening the authority to remove council 
members from office. This is a very serious step. I think things 
would have to be really deteriorated before our government 
would step in and actually remove someone from office, but 
these changes provide this government with that authority or the 
ability to actually do that. And there’s a couple of other changes 
in terms of the extent of the government’s authority over these 
elected officials. 



October 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7483 

But I think I would like to spend just a little bit of time on the 
third and final area of the proposed amendments because I think 
this is indeed the most important section. And I certainly want 
our constituents . . . And I’m hoping that all MLAs will take 
steps to ensure that their constituents understand that there now 
is a position for the Provincial Ombudsman in relation to rural 
municipal affairs, in relation to municipal affairs but I think 
particularly at the rural level. Because we know that that level 
of government, if you’re talking about the city of Saskatoon, 
that’s a big administration. There’s lots going on and certainly 
it’s important to be able to go to the Ombudsman there. But in a 
smaller community where you’re complaining about your 
neighbour or your brother-in-law or somebody’s cousin, it’s 
much more difficult I think to openly have an even discussion 
about the things that people are concerned about. 
 
So I think having that third body . . . You don’t have to go to 
your MLA anymore. You don’t have to go to the media. But 
you can just go and talk to the Provincial Ombudsman and they 
will hear your complaint and make a decision in relation to that. 
 
So the way it works right now with the expansion of the 
mandate of the Provincial Ombudsman, any member of the 
public or the minister could submit an issue or complaint to the 
Ombudsman regarding a municipality, including administrative 
or procedural matters and alleged conflicts of interest or code of 
ethics breaches. 
 
So this is a really big step, Mr. Speaker, and I think one that 
will be welcomed and hopefully uptaken. Uptaken, I’m not sure 
if that’s a word. But taken up is probably a better way to put it, 
on the uptake of this ability to go to this impartial third party 
where they’re not involving their neighbours or close friends, 
and they’re actually getting an impartial ruling on what’s been 
going on that they are concerned about. 
 
So I think this is a huge opportunity for some of the concerns 
I’ve been hearing when it comes to illegal drainage. A lot of 
farmers are worried that, you know, they go to their neighbour 
and their neighbour is on the RM council and they feel helpless. 
They feel that they don’t have any venue to have their concerns 
taken seriously. If they go to the Watershed Authority usually 
there’s a six-month delay before the staff can even get to the 
complaint, so time is passing very quickly and the tensions are 
elevating and escalating. 
 
So I think, as the minister indicated, even the Provincial 
Ombudsman herself has said that this: 
 

. . . is very much in keeping with the role of the 
Ombudsman. [And it’s going to] . . . assure the people of 
Saskatchewan of a credible, independent, and impartial 
office that they can take their concerns to and know that 
their issues will be taken seriously. 

 
This is from the minister’s comments on October 21st. So I 
think that part of the bill is incredibly important and I think 
certainly will help the folks that are struggling, particularly with 
their own councils. 
 
And I think, indeed I believe this will be more of a small town 
or rural municipal issue where the closeness of the community 
makes it really difficult to even allege these breaches, allege 

that they’ve occurred. And then to do the investigation is a very 
personal and tough situation in a small community. I think the 
evidence we saw in the situation that led up to the Barclay 
report is a good example of how divisive that kind of discourse 
is and how divisive that kind of, you know . . . When people 
don’t get along in a community it just, it really tears people 
apart. And the closer knit the community, the more devastating 
it is to the community when things go sideways when it comes 
to allegations of improper conduct and conflict of interest. 
 
So you know, a lot of people are working really hard just to 
make a go of it, and if they see problems with their municipal 
council that they feel are affecting them, both personally but 
financially certainly, I think it’s important for them to have an 
avenue where they can go. 
 
I don’t think today I’m going to go through each clause in 
detail. It’s a very long bill and, as I said, the changes to The 
Cities Act are almost identical to the changes to the rural 
municipal Act, and it’s also identical to The Northern 
Municipalities Act. I see some attempt in the bill to take the 
language to make it more understandable and, for example, 
pecuniary interest is now being described as financial interest. 
So that’s an interesting amendment. 
 
I think it’s always helpful to ensure that bills are understandable 
by people when they’re reading it. Often legislative language is 
very dense and thick language that is not always easy to sort of 
sort out. So I think those kinds of changes will be helpful. We 
understand that the minister has consulted with SARM and 
SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association], and 
so those consultations are obviously very important to the 
implementation of these kinds of changes, to those bodies and 
to the members that they represent. 
 
So again we’ll take the time in the next little while to ensure 
that if there are concerns with the bill brought forward from the 
public or from those bodies, that we’ll be able to reflect upon 
them and enter that on the record for the debate as well. 
 
But I think, Mr. Speaker, at this point that would be the extent 
of my comments on this and I would like to move that we 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 186, The Municipal Conflict of 
Interest Amendment Act, 2015. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 186, The Municipal 
Conflict of Interest Amendment Act, 2015. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 187 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 187 — The 
Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 2015 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 



7484 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2015 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to stand in the House and debate this very important 
Bill No. 187, The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act. 
And it’s one that, you know, it’s a bit of an interesting thing 
because when I was first elected in the fall of 2001, one of the 
first pieces of work we did in a committee, a special committee, 
was to take a review of The Farm Land Security Act. And I 
know there were a few members from the other side particularly 
who were on that committee and brought forward many ideas. 
 
And it was an interesting time because, you know, the way that 
government was at that time, the NDP actually did not . . . 
couldn’t have the controlling levers in that committee. And so 
we were left with a bill that many felt could have been stronger, 
and yet we did bring it forward and it did pass. But we were 
concerned about the consultations at the time because it moved 
very fast, because people were wanting to open up farm land in 
a way that many felt that we should have that conversation with 
people in Saskatchewan, and that that did not happen. 
 
And I know the other side, well it’s a different . . . You know, 
they remember it differently because they would like to. They 
often remember things differently. It’s all about perspective, 
isn’t it? And we were willing to have those consultations, but 
they felt that they would prefer to just resolve it in committee 
and that was . . . And then here we are. Here we are still dealing 
with it and dealing with some of the changes that were a little 
too rapid, a little too fast. But they did, and partial credit to 
them because in the sense of having an online system, they did 
get 3,200 people from Saskatchewan to say that they didn’t 
want foreigners or pension plans to own farm land in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So that was a bit of a consultation. But that has been the trend 
of this government, to use those kind of online consultations, 
whether it’s in labour, and we saw that with the employment 
Act of 2012 where, instead of meeting face to face with folks 
. . . They have a hard time meeting with people. They have a 
really difficult time meeting with people and hearing them face 
to face. In fact the only time that they do meet with people face 
to face is when the court orders them to meet with them face to 
face, as we see with the Minister of Labour where he was 
ordered by the Supreme Court to resolve the issue of essential 
services, and then he took that on. And sometimes he will 
position that as if that was some sort of guidance. But I don’t 
know. When you call an order from the court, especially with 
the penalties that they received, it’s a little more than just 
guidance. It’s an order. 
 
So these folks over here, they only consult when they’re 
ordered to consult. And here we have a situation where they 
were backed into a corner. They were very much backed into a 
corner, and they had to do something. Even their own people, 
the supporters . . . And we know they have strength in rural 
Saskatchewan. Their people are very strong. But they were 
saying, what’s happening to our communities? What’s 
happening in the communities? There were some very large 
buyouts of farm land, and land was going into hands that 
nobody really knew who was really owning it and who really 
was the money. 
 
And of course this is an interesting government because, as 
we’re seeing with the P3s where they’re insisting that it’s all 

local, but we know, we know these companies are French. And 
even the French companies have some questionable 
backgrounds because we know some of the questions that have 
been raised by human rights, human rights groups. 
 
And I mean they’re all looking forward to their French trip. 
Some are going this December, I understand. They’ve been 
invited by the Prime Minister to make sure that they go, on a 
topic that they really haven’t wanted to talk about, climate 
change. 
 
But getting back to this, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s really critical 
that we take a good long hard look. And we are supportive to 
many of the amendments. We think this is the way to go. But 
we know that it is unfortunate that we’ve found ourselves here, 
and that maybe there was more that we could have done. We 
would have liked to have seen it done sooner. But here we have 
a question before us about a real commitment to community 
and that type of thing. 
 
Because you know, the fact of the matter is . . . and it was 
interesting. I want to read this one quote from the minister. And 
I know he likes to get down home every once in a while, but he 
says, and I quote: 
 

Today I am pleased to speak to the changes that will keep 
our farm land in the hands of our farmers and ranchers 
while still allowing for a continued economic growth. 
Exemptions will . . . to be granted for economic 
development initiatives. We welcome investment in our 
province, and our government will continue to ensure . . . 
[we have] a positive investment climate. 

 
So that’s all great, and I really appreciate the hats off and the 
shout out to the ranchers and the farmers, and that’s really good 
because they’re the people who are living in the communities. 
And if we can keep those communities stronger, that’s the key. 
 
But I remember in 2002 the argument was made and raised by 
the other side that, you know, many of our folks . . . it was that 
so much of the farm land had to be owned by Saskatchewan 
folks. And then we increased . . . And this is where the problem 
became, because we increased the amount that Canadians could 
own. And the fact of the matter was that the argument that was 
put forward by the other side was that many of our folks who 
grew up in Saskatchewan were now living in Calgary but 
couldn’t buy their parent’s farm. And that sounds reasonable. 
That’s something we should try to accommodate. Or they’d 
moved to Ontario, and they can’t buy their own home quarter 
anymore. They feel like that’s important, and fair enough. So 
we had to take a look at that. 
 
[16:30] 
 
But that created issues around . . . So we’re opening up to 
Canadians and Canadian companies. And then we created the 
situation where we could have shell companies, and then all of 
a sudden companies holding pensions, investment companies 
really saw an opportunity here in Saskatchewan. And I think it’s 
a great opportunity actually when you see the price of farm land 
is not going down, won’t go down. But the problem was that it 
becomes too expensive for the local folks who really want to 
start out and get a start in farming but the costs are just too high. 



October 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7485 

And that’s a challenge. And that’s a challenge that we have to 
recognize. 
 
And that was the challenge that started The Farm Land Security 
Act some 40, 50 years ago, and it was the attempt to make sure 
that there was a way that we could help our farmers and our 
ranchers and our local people own land. Because you know, at 
the heart of it we know the strongest economic growth really 
comes from people who live there. They feel it. They live it. 
They know what’s happening in their communities. And if it’s 
not happening locally, it’s pretty hard to get somebody to come 
in from some other place, from Calgary or Toronto, to make it 
happen. It’s just too big. 
 
And so what we have is we have to create this balance though, 
and this is the challenge. And this government and the 
laissez-faire approach to it will say, well farms will increase in 
the size that they will increase to, and that’s just the way it goes. 
But it squeezes out smaller farms, and we wonder what’s 
happened to our local communities. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I grew up in a farming family. We’ve 
now had our family farm for probably, I would think it’s going 
to be 110 years. And I know there’s many families in this 
Chamber who’s had their farm for over 100 years. My 
colleague is one, and I know there’s folks on the other side. So 
we’ve seen the changes. We’ve seen the changes in the farms, 
and it is a shame. It is really a shame. 
 
And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was fortunate this 
weekend to take a drive out to the Great Sand Hills. And you 
see the changes in the communities, the old communities. We 
were driving by one and we saw this farm that looked very, 
very efficient and it must have been one big operation. It must 
have been huge. And then down the road, there was one farm 
that looked like the end of the world. I tell you. We couldn’t tell 
whether it was a small town or whether this was a place that 
they were moving old, wrecked granaries, you know. You 
would have those old granaries that were just the tiniest sheds, 
right? And that was big enough. But everybody was moving 
these sheds. I don’t know what was happening in this 
community, but it was a real, real challenge. 
 
And so to keep the communities alive and, you know . . . We 
were at an old schoolhouse and it was interesting to see and it 
brought back memories where you had kids, families, enough in 
the township that you could create a school. And what a time 
that must have been where the old one-room schoolhouses, 
grade 1 to 8, and many of them were operational for many 
decades. But again, they became a thing of the past. And again 
we see that as we see the schools and communities face harder 
and harder, tougher times — especially the small ones. 
Especially the very small ones. And so this is a challenge that 
we have in Saskatchewan. 
 
And for many of us, and we know this on both sides of the 
House because we grew up in rural Saskatchewan, where the 
size of the farms have now grown. I think the average size of 
farms is about four sections, is it? Four sections. And that’s, 
you know, unbelievable when you used to have somebody with 
a quarter section, and that was really, really almost what you 
needed. And now four sections. And that would be the small 
guy. That would be the small guy in the neighbourhood. 

And of course all the issues that come along with the farms 
increasing in size, including the whole issue that we’ve been 
dealing a lot about with water and flooding and the whole 
change of use of GPS [global positioning system] on tractors 
where you have these huge fields. And you know, it was really 
neat when we were coming back and we came back through 
Lancer, up to the Lancer Ferry, and as you’re coming north 
from Lancer before the river you see this . . . and I don’t know 
who it was, but he must have been just a . . . The farmer, he or 
she or the family, must have had a lot of foresight because they 
used a lot of the windrows. I’ve never seen so many windrows 
in my life. It was really amazing as you were coming through 
some of the hills and you come into the flats and all these rows 
of caraganas. This farm must have really believed in it because 
I’ve never seen so many windrows in my life. 
 
And now we would see that would be a problem, because what 
do you do with GPS and windrows? You can only go so far and 
then you’ve got to turn around. And so this was a real . . . It was 
really interesting to see as you see the changes in the way we do 
things now. And then the fact of the matter is, somebody would 
say, so I have to measure the economic benefit of that windrow 
and what’s it contributing in terms of saving moisture content, 
that type of thing, wind erosion versus a tractor and the 
efficiency of going straight down that row and not having to 
veer off because of those caraganas. 
 
So times do change and we have to change with it. And we see 
that we have this piece of legislation before us, and whether it’s 
the best we could have, I know there has been a lot of pressure 
both in the media, in the communities, and we’ve been hearing 
it. And if we’ve been hearing it, Mr. Speaker, you can bet 
they’ve been hearing it. Or if they haven’t been hearing it, they 
should have been hearing it. They must be hearing it in their 
communities about the foreign ownership and the way that it’s 
been hidden so that you cannot find out where the money goes. 
 
Now this is an interesting government because they kind of 
specialize in hiding where the money goes, especially these P3s. 
It’s a whole level of specialization in terms of these umbrella 
organizations. So maybe it’s new times that we live in, but this 
was happening particularly with land holdings. And so we 
know that there was a lot of concerns raised about foreign 
ownership and who was really behind it because, you know, the 
fact of the matter is, as I said earlier, we’re not making more 
farm land, and it’s a great investment. 
 
The problem becomes then if somebody just becomes a holding 
company and holds it at that price. And it really squeezes out 
the local folks who really want to get a start in farming and who 
are really committed to the communities. I mean this is 
something that I know that . . . Well Saskatchewan, it’s the 
heart of who we are and what we are, and so this is a bit of a 
challenge. So we are really glad that the government, when they 
saw that 3,200 people responded and the media pressure, and 
the minister acted quickly. And here we are at the end of this 
session, and it’s time to do something. So we think this is 
appropriate. 
 
And so we know that the amendments include the pension plans 
and the administrator of pension fund assets and trust are 
ineligible to buy farm land, and that it has defining having an 
interest in farm land to include any type of interest or benefit. 



7486 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2015 

Capital appreciation is normally associated with ownership of 
the land. And the purchase of farm land requires financing to be 
through a financial institution registered to do business in 
Canada or a resident, and then of course the increased power to 
the Farm Land Security Board. And so this will be able to add 
and, it says, assist in the major way for those . . . so the 
researches and searches so we can find who was actually behind 
the money. 
 
So we would like to see this process. We’re seeing it moving in 
the right direction. We would have liked to have seen these 
changes addressed sooner. This is really important. And we 
know that there are many out there who’ve benefited, benefited 
in a major way from the loopholes. And it will be interesting to 
see what happens now when they are closed. And the 
unfortunate part though is who pays for these loopholes being 
opened for so long are the local farmers, the local ranchers. 
 
You know, another interesting thing that . . . So I did talk a little 
bit about water and the impact of the nature of how water flows 
through our . . . over the land in Saskatchewan, how it’s 
changed, how it can be changed, and how, you know, we have 
had the arguments that a lot of flooding has been caused by the 
redirection of the water. 
 
But we’ve also had, and I remember from this in 2002, but 
we’ve really missed this discussion too, and this is a problem 
when we don’t have the hearings or public meetings. You 
know, back then we had a lot of discussion about environmental 
protection of the land, and we had, you know, we had 
presentations from Ducks Unlimited, different groups to talk 
about what they saw were challenges in ownership of land. And 
so I’m not sure what the impact is on that. I would have 
questions about that because that was pretty important. They 
had some pretty important ideas. And I don’t think that with the 
changes this government has brought forward in terms of the, 
you know, wildlife conservancy, that we can just forget about 
that. In fact, it will be interesting to know the impact of this in 
terms of Nature Canada, their role in Saskatchewan. What does 
this mean for them? I mean obviously they’re a Canadian 
company so it should be relatively straightforward, we hope. 
 
But I hope there aren’t any unintended consequences that we’re 
cutting out groups who might be helpful. I mean one for 
example, Ducks Unlimited, which really is an American group 
but has a Canadian farm group. But you know, this is an 
interesting one, and we’ve not had . . . You know, in terms of 
receptions and stuff, we haven’t had an opportunity to meet 
with Ducks Unlimited like we used to. We used to have an 
MLA reception quite often with those folks, but that was always 
a challenge to find . . . 
 
So where did the money come from then? Was it American 
money that was coming up, you know, and what would it mean 
for this kind of legislation? 
 
And so I think there are lots of questions about this and what 
are the unintended consequences. And what have we learned 
about environment, especially the land-holding groups like 
Ducks Unlimited, Nature Conservancy of Canada, in the last 10 
to 15 years? I don’t know. Some got off to a rocky start and 
were looked upon in a kind of a negative way, but I think we’ve 
learned a lot. 

But of course times have changed, and it would have been 
interesting to hear from them on their thoughts. But this is the 
trouble. And I will always say that when we do consultation, we 
should do it in many forms. Online is fine and good. That’s 
very helpful and it’s a good start. But public consultations can 
be really informative to everyone because, you know, you get a 
lot of different people speaking about things that they want to 
share with the public as well, not just the ministry. 
 
And unfortunately we see, as a direction of this government, 
that they just won’t do public consultations unless they’re . . . I 
mean they won’t do them. They won’t do them, period. I mean 
when the Minister of Labour did consultations, they were 
closed consultations and he was ordered to do them. They were 
not public consultations. And so we need to be clear about that. 
 
So I do worry about it because we’ve just missed a lot of good 
insight in this. So here we are with this bill and I’m really 
hoping that we’re not going to be back here in three or four 
years correcting yet another mistake because there was 
something that this government didn’t hear about, you know. 
 
I mean it’s like the employment Act. And this is what I said in 
the employment Act in 2012: we will be back every year with 
an amendment, The Saskatchewan Employment Act amendment 
Act. And I think we have been here almost every year, every 
year with . . . It’s an annual thing. And every year the minister 
brings forward his new Saskatchewan employment Act. It’s 
always something new and improved, fair enough, but we may 
have caught it in the first year if we had public consultations. 
Many of those things we would have caught in the first year if 
we had those proper consultations. 
 
So here we have an Act that we probably will be back in four or 
five years and the government will do another online 
consultation and will fix the problems, fix . . . will tweak it, will 
tweak it. That’s what they do, is they tweak it. And yet we don’t 
really get to the heart of what we really need to do. And I think 
with this . . . You know, as we said, it’s a good start. Too bad 
it’s a late start. Farmers and ranchers are going to pay the price 
for this being so late because people, these big companies, 
already own the land and we know for sure, if there’s one thing 
we know for sure, is they’re not going to sell it for less. I don’t 
think anybody will tell me they’re going to sell farm land, any 
of these companies, for less. I’m pretty sure about that. Nobody 
wants to bet a dollar on that, I bet . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . There might be. I don’t know about that. We’re starting to 
go back . . . You know, we were talking history today about the 
’90s. Now we’re going back to the ’70s. We’re going back to 
the ’70s, the good old ’70s and the land bank. That was a pretty 
good thing happening. That was . . . 
 
[16:45] 
 
But you know, I digress, Mr. Speaker. I digress. I was talking 
about Bill No. 187. That’s what I was talking about, Mr. 
Speaker. I woke up the giant over there. I woke up the . . . 
There you go. But I know, Mr. Speaker, I know the passion of 
what those folks . . . [inaudible] . . . But you know one thing, I 
will say this. I will say this. It will be a long day before any of 
these companies that own their land will be selling it for less, 
unless of course their Minister of Finance, he would sell it for 
less. He would sell it for less. So I don’t want to see him . . . 



October 26, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7487 

Well I do want to see him near some of those companies. That 
would be a good thing. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think what we need to do is . . . I know 
there will be many others who want to speak to this bill. Many 
others will want to speak to this bill. And it’s even sounding 
like the government side wants to speak to this. They want to 
speak to this. They’ve got a few ideas they want to get on 
record. But that will be in committee. And maybe we’ll have a 
pretty large committee meeting, and they’ve got to say 
something. But you know what they could also do, Mr. 
Speaker, is go online. They could go online. I urge the members 
over there to go online and give me some feedback. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that, and I know that we’ve got a lot of 
work to do, but I’ve got to say, as I’ve said before, we’re 
pleased to see this. Moving in this direction is the right 
direction. A little too late, but we’ve got to get on this. We 
know that the farmers and ranchers have paid a price. It’s the 
price of land for too many has increased in value to a point 
where the small guy’s not being able to get involved. And we 
need to see if that can happen. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move adjournment of Bill No. 
187, The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 2015. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 187, the Saskatchewan farm security Act, 
2015. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. 
tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:48.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7457 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7457 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7457 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7457 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7458 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7458 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7458 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7459 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7459 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7459 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7459 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7459 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7459 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7460 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7460 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7460 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Violence Prevention Week 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 7460 
 Installation of New University of Saskatchewan President 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7460 
  Norris ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7461 
 Queen City Pride Festival 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7461 
 Prince Albert to Host World Softball Championship 
  Jurgens ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7461 
 Team Canada Shows Well at 2015 Special Olympics World Games 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7461 
 Health Care Providers Week 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7462 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Surgical Wait Times and Provision of Health Care 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7462 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7462 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7464 
 Carbon Capture and Storage Agreement 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7465 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7465 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 188 — The Best Value in Procurement Act, 2015 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7467 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7468 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 183 — The Saskatchewan Employment (Essential Services) Amendment Act, 2015 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7474 
 Bill No. 184 — The Automobile Accident Insurance (Motorcycles) Amendment Act, 2015 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7477 
 Bill No. 185 — The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous Measures) Amendment Act, 2015 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7478 
 Bill No. 186 — The Municipal Conflict of Interest Amendment Act, 2015 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7481 
 Bill No. 187 — The Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 2015 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7484 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


