
























































Hansard: November 23, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 87A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 23, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Hon. Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7747 
 November 23, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I would request leave for an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
today to introduce two very special guests to the Legislative 
Assembly. We are welcoming today Mr. Tom Palaia, consul 
general of the United States of America in Calgary, and Mr. 
Thomas Hanson, the United States’s Commercial Service’s 
principal commercial officer for Western Canada. I’m 
wondering how Tom gets that all on his business card. But 
nevertheless they are in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is Mr. Palaia’s first official visit to Saskatchewan. I 
understand he was here briefly prior to assuming his diplomatic 
role in August, but this is his first official visit to the province. 
He represents not just Saskatchewan but also the province of 
Alberta and the Northwest Territories. Mr. Palaia is a career 
diplomat whose prior assignments included postings at the 
American embassies in Poland, Guatemala, London, and 
Panama. But his most recent posting was in what is now the 
United States’s embassy in Havana. It’s a good thing we 
arranged reasonably good winter weather, I think, because 
going from Havana to our typical winters in November would 
have been rather tough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Palaia and Mr. Hanson have a busy schedule 
while they’re in Saskatchewan. They’re going to be meeting a 
number of representatives from our government and from 
various other agencies. The fact that their schedule is so busy 
should come as no surprise. As we all know, Canada and the 
United States share the largest trading relationship in the world, 
and Saskatchewan’s part of that relationship is astounding, Mr. 
Speaker. I’ve referred to it previously, but right now I think our 
exports to the US [United States] account for virtually 
two-thirds of everything this province exports around the world. 
 
The United States is by far our largest trading partner. The state 
of Minnesota is the largest of that group. But last year we sent 
$22.7 billion south of the border. Breaking down those numbers 
even further, we see that the last year the United States 
accounted for about 40 per cent of Saskatchewan’s potash sales, 
so they’re an important customer in that area as well. And they 
bought 40 per cent of our uranium, and we’re providing 
electricity, actually, as a result of that uranium sale, to 1 in 
every 15 American homes. 

Americans also buy our oil, and last year we exported more oil 
to the United States than countries that are considered oil rich, 
ranking ahead of Nigeria, Iraq, and Kuwait. We’re a reliable oil 
supplier to our southern neighbours. 
 
The ties of business and trade are strong and so are those of 
education. Our two universities have seven agreements with 
American institutions and are engaged as partners in multiple 
research projects. 
 
There’s much more I could say about this relationship, Mr. 
Speaker, but I think we’re all aware of how important this 
relationship is, not just from an economic perspective but from 
a friendship perspective. In fact I think we all probably have 
experienced situations where we visited south of the border and 
we’ve encountered somebody who knew somebody up here. 
And oftentimes there’s marriages across the border; it gets that 
close sometimes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to quote President John F. Kennedy, who 
was addressing the Canadian parliament in May of 1961. In his 
remarks he said, “Geography has made us neighbours. History 
has made us friends. Economics has made us partners. And 
necessity has made us allies. Those whom nature hath so joined 
together, let no man put asunder.” Please join me in welcoming 
our two guests from the US consulate in Calgary. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I would like to take 
this opportunity to recognize two people that are very important 
in my life. They say — I think we’re all familiar with it — that 
behind every successful man stands a woman. I would like to 
say, behind every successful man stands a very surprised 
mother-in-law. But that certainly may be true in my case. 
 
But I’m introducing two ladies who have stood in my place in 
my constituency for a number of years. I’d like to introduce, in 
your gallery, Beth Humphrey who’s worked for me for 14 years 
and Carol Miller who’s been in my office for eight years. And 
without their yeoman service on my behalf, we could never 
have served the Cypress Hills effectively and as promptly as we 
do. And it’s because of these two ladies who have joined us in 
the gallery today. 
 
And holding down the fort back home is Linda Wig, my 
constituency assistant who fills in on a temporary basis once in 
a while. So colleagues, please welcome my two constituency 
assistants to the House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the member opposite in welcoming this American delegation to 
the Assembly today, Mr. Palaia and Mr. Hanson, and I welcome 
Mr. Palaia on his first visit here to Saskatchewan. I’m sure it 
will be the first of many. I’d like to extend our best wishes to 
him for the important work that I’m sure he will do in 
strengthening that vital relationship that Canada has with our 
neighbour to the south. 
 
As the member opposite was reading out the various exports 
and aspects of our relationship, my seatmate reminded me of 
one important export that he missed, and that’s NHL [National 



7748 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2015 

Hockey League] hockey players. Mr. Speaker, we know we 
send a lot of those from Saskatchewan towns south of the 
border as well. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in 
welcoming these two individuals to the Assembly today. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave for a little 
bit of an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister requests leave for a very short 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seated in 
your gallery, I’d like to introduce some special guests from the 
creative industries that have joined us here in the Chamber 
today. Michael Jones is the newly appointed CEO [chief 
executive officer] of the Saskatchewan Arts Board. Mr. 
Speaker, we’re very excited to have Michael as the new CEO of 
the Arts Board, as he brings a great wealth of knowledge and 
experience to Saskatchewan. Since 2007 he’s been the director 
of the performing arts program at the Metcalf Foundation, one 
of the largest private family foundations in Canada, making 
significant large grants to the performing arts sector. 
 
Michael served as general manager of the School of Toronto 
Dance Theatre and Arraymusic. He’s also held senior 
management positions with the Muki Baum Association’s 
school of the arts program and Choirs Ontario. So please join 
me in welcoming Michael to his legislature. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce 
some more guests from the creative industries. Nova Alberts, 
president of the Saskatchewan Media Production Industry 
Association. We’ve been working together and really enjoy the 
partnership. And we’ve got more work to do, but thanks for all 
your help. Joining Nova today is Gordon Pepper who’s the 
executive director of the Saskatchewan Filmpool. 
 
They join us here today for the kickoff to Saskatchewan Film 
Week. SMPIA [Saskatchewan Media Production Industry 
Association] and the Filmpool will be hosting a number of 
events this week, including the Saskatchewan Independent Film 
Awards. And I look forward to attending these events this week 
and look forward to our continued partnership. So please help 
me in welcoming Nova, Gordon, and Michael again to their 
legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join in with the minister opposite to welcome these important 
guests to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
First of all, Michael, welcome again. We had the pleasure of 
meeting in Saskatoon a few weeks ago and I think the 

Saskatoon community is very excited about having you here in 
the province, and for the new changes that you’ll bring to the 
Arts Board. We’re very proud of our Arts Board here in 
Saskatchewan, so we are glad you’re here and are looking 
forward to moving forward with that. 
 
And a big welcome to Gordon Pepper and Nova Alberts for 
their representation here on behalf of the film industry in 
Saskatchewan. I know it’s Film Week so it’s an exciting time 
and I know you have a great lineup of events in front of you. So 
again thank you for your leadership and your support of the film 
industry. Obviously there is a long ways to go yet to 
re-establishing this important industry in our community, and 
without folks like you it simply won’t be on the right track 
back. So thanks very much for all the work you do. And on 
behalf of the official opposition, I’d like to welcome you to 
your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you and to all members of the legislature, I’d like to 
introduce a young gentleman from Moose Jaw. It’s Mr. Mark 
Paterson, Mr. Speaker. He’s the new founder of the Safe Homes 
for Single Mothers. It’s a new CBO [community-based 
organization] in Moose Jaw and I’ll have a bit more to speak 
about that in a few minutes. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have two 
introductions. First of all, the most important person in my life 
— I’d like to introduce my wife, Leane Durand, to the 
Chamber. Leane is a business person in Saskatoon, Mr. 
Speaker, a mother of four, and certainly keeps . . . A lot of her 
time is keeping me on track, Mr. Speaker, so I very much 
appreciate her support. And she’s down here once a year just to 
check up to see if I’m actually working in Regina, so I 
appreciate her coming to her Chamber. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker, for this. I appreciate that but, Leane, welcome to your 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I’d like to introduce to 
you Steve Compton of the Regina & District Food Bank. I very 
much appreciated the opportunity to work with Steve over the 
last two years before being elected, while I was in Saskatoon 
Food Bank & Learning Centre. And I just wanted to welcome 
Steve to his Chamber, to be able to recognize the work that the 
Regina Food Bank and all the food banks in Saskatchewan are 
doing, as well as the community-based organizations, to help 
those in need during the Christmas season and throughout the 
year. So I’d very much like to welcome Steve to his Legislative 
Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to join with the member opposite to welcome Mr. 
Steve Compton, CEO of the Regina & District Food Bank, to 
his Assembly. Certainly we’re so thankful for his leadership in 
our community. I’ve known Steve certainly for many years. 
I’ve witnessed him in action in the community and certainly the 



November 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7749 

food bank as well. We’re thankful for their work in extending 
supports to families. 
 
Coming from an education perspective, I know full well that 
learning doesn’t occur if a child doesn’t have food in their 
belly, and I’d like to thank the Regina & District Food Bank for 
their work in putting food in bellies and their work as well in 
supporting the development of young people and families 
within Regina. So it’s my pleasure to welcome Mr. Steve 
Compton to his Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce to you, and through you to all the members of 
the Assembly, Warren Kaeding. And if you want to give us a 
wave, Warren, stand up. Warren is a farmer from Churchbridge, 
Saskatchewan. They had Wagon Wheel Seed farms in that area, 
very successful farm, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But also, a little more important even for, and very timely right 
now, Warren’s a very good supporter and constituent of mine 
and we’re both hoping that within the next four months that 
totally reverses the situation — Warren’s in here and I’m up 
there if I come into this building. So I ask all members to 
welcome Warren to his Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all my colleagues, it’s a real pleasure for me 
today to introduce my oldest son and his family from Melfort 
who are joining us. Tim is the manager in the IT [information 
technology] department in Doepker Industries and he is one of 
these amazing people that can answer any kind of questions 
about computer problems over the phone. He answers more 
questions on that than he ever did when he was at home, so I 
thank him for doing that work. 
 
Patti, my daughter-in-law, is Rod Gantefoer’s daughter. Many 
of you remember him as the MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] from Melfort. Patti is a public health nurse, and 
most public health nurses right now have calluses on their 
thumbs from giving all the flu shots. And I think her and 10 
other people are having 15,000 flu shots in our area right now. 
 
My second-oldest grandson, Grant, is also a computer person. 
And he’s playing football this year and did a really good job. 
And my youngest grandson is Jack. Jack is a young man that 
can entertain you around a campfire and tell all kinds of stories 
and keep us all in stitches laughing. But most importantly, Mr. 
Speaker, I have to tell you he’s a little disappointed in his 
grandmother because he thought that I should be able to pass a 
law making it mandatory to put marshmallows in chocolate 
milk, in cocoa. And I think maybe with all the members in the 
House, we could pass that law if we wanted to. We’d call it 
Jack’s law, and we’d have marshmallows in chocolate milk. So 
thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and please help me 
welcome Tim and his family to their legislature. 
 
[13:45] 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure to introduce to you and to all members of the 
Assembly, 24 grade 7 and 8 students from North Valley High 
School in Lemberg, Mr. Speaker. They are seated in the west 
gallery. Today they are accompanied by their teacher, Ms. Karie 
Dovell, and chaperones, Mr. Stan Englot, Ms. Jill Noble, and 
Ms. Tina Babcock. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I met with them earlier this morning in the lower 
gallery. I must say that they were very well prepared. They had 
a lot of good questions that hopefully I supplied at least some 
good answers. They have a busy day. After they’re done 
viewing the proceedings in the Assembly, they’re going to be 
off to Agribition, Mr. Speaker. And I would ask all members to 
welcome them to their Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition calling for better support for GSAs 
[gender and sexuality alliance] in Saskatchewan schools. And 
we know that this province lags behind others in securing the 
rights of gender- and sexually diverse students, and this 
government’s not doing enough to create safe spaces in our 
schools for sexually diverse students or students who are bullied 
because of their sexual identity or orientation. And we know 
this government must act so that students have simple, 
easy-to-understand information about GSAs in their schools or 
how to form a GSA and who they should talk to in order to 
form a GSA. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on this 
government to take immediate and meaningful action to 
pass The Respect for Diversity — Student Bill of Rights Act 
and enshrine in legislation the right of Saskatchewan 
students to form GSAs within their schools in order to 
foster caring, accepting, inclusive environments and 
deliver equal opportunities for all students to reach their 
full potential. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
Saskatoon, Dalmeny, Rosetown, Rouleau, Regina, and other 
places in the province. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition 
asking for this government to support a new long-term care 
facility for Creighton and Denare Beach. Mr. Speaker, our 
senior citizens have done their part to build this province and 
northern Saskatchewan is no exception. 
 
According to the 2009 Croft report, the long-term care stats of 
our health region is at a code red level. Seniors from our 
northern communities need immediate attention from this 



7750 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2015 

government, and many residents cannot afford private care. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly may be pleased to cause 
the Saskatchewan government to treat northern 
Saskatchewan senior citizens with respect and dignity and 
immediately invest in a new long-term care facility in the 
Creighton-Denare Beach area. 
 
And in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
It is signed by many good people of Creighton and Denare 
Beach. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to stand in my place today to present another petition as 
it relates to cellphone coverage for northern Saskatchewan. And 
the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To cause the provincial government to improve cell service 
coverage for northern communities like St. George’s Hill, 
Dillon, Michel Village, Dore Lake, Michel Point, and Sled 
Lake to provide similar quality of cell coverage as southern 
communities currently enjoy. This would provide support 
to our northern industries as well as mitigate safety 
concerns associated with living in the remote North. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, day after day we present these petitions, and 
this particular day we have petitions signed from all throughout 
the province of Saskatchewan, as I’ve indicated. And some of 
the petitions I’m presenting today come from Big River, Dore 
Lake, Sled Lake, Saskatoon, Warman, Prince Albert, 
Shellbrook. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition yet again in support of better 
seniors’ care. Mr. Speaker, this petition grows out of the 
seniors’ care crisis here in this province, the one that the 
government is willing to even acknowledge, let alone address. 
And this comes out of the government cutting minimum quality 
of care standards and our loved ones being neglected because of 
short-staffing in our long-term care homes, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the provincial 
government to immediately undertake meaningful steps to 
improve the quality of seniors’ care, including creating 
more spaces and more choices for seniors; ensuring higher 
standards of care in public facilities, private facilities, and 
home care; ensuring appropriate staffing levels in seniors’ 
care facilities; restoring regulations that provide minimum 
standards of care; and providing more support to help 
seniors remain independent in their own homes for as long 
as they desire. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Regina. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition in support of better schools, and it reads as follows: 
 

We respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan call on this government to immediately stop 
ignoring schools and start prioritizing students by capping 
classroom sizes, increasing support for students, and 
developing a transparent plan to build and repair our 
schools. 

 
This is signed by citizens from Saskatoon, and I so present. 
Thank you. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

45th Canadian Western Agribition Begins 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise in the Assembly today to announce the 45th 
Canadian Western Agribition kicked off this morning at Evraz 
Place. From November 23rd to 28th, Regina will once again be 
hosting Western Canada’s premier agriculture marketplace, 
trade show, and rodeo. 
 
Mr. Speaker, each year Agribition attracts more than 125,000 
visitors from more than 70 countries. This prestigious event 
happens over six days, showcasing more than 4,000 head of 
North America’s finest livestock, agriculture equipment, and an 
impressive trade show that has 450 vendors from around the 
world. 
 
Along with the livestock shows there’s an Agri-Ed program for 
school kids, thinkAG Career Expo, Indigenous Ag Summit, 
Grain Expo, and new this year, the food pavilion presented by 
Mosaic which features cooking demonstrations, food and 
product sampling, and the Living Sky Winery Garden. Mr. 
Speaker, there’s truly something for everyone. Events include 
various levels of rodeo and skill competitions, and returning 
this year, full-contact jousting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to remind members of our 
government’s $22 million joint investment with the federal 
government in the new $37 million International Trade Centre. 
This impressive 150,000-square-foot facility will be a focal 
point at Evraz Place which opens in 2017. Mr. Speaker, I invite 
all of my colleagues to take time out of their busy schedules to 
check out this world-class event hosted right here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in my place today to 
recognize the beginning of an exciting and important week for 
our province and our city — Agribition. For almost 50 years, 



November 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7751 

people from every part of our province and well beyond have 
marked the Canadian Western Agribition on their calendars. It’s 
an opportunity for Saskatchewan’s agricultural sector to shine 
and to show the world what our producers, manufacturers, 
innovators, and entrepreneurs have to offer. There’s something 
for everyone at Agribition every year and this year’s lineup is 
no different with livestock, trade booths, live music, rodeo, 
full-contact jousting, and of course, incredible food. 
 
Agribition also serves as a valuable educational tool for 
teachers in Saskatchewan. Many students from Regina and 
across Saskatchewan will have a look at the world of 
agriculture close up. For many of these kids, it will be the first 
time they experience the sights and smells of our agricultural 
sector first hand, and this provides an opportunity for them to 
get a better understanding of how food gets from the farm to 
their forks as well as to the world. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in 
thanking all the organizers, volunteers, and participants, and 
specifically CWA’s [Canadian Western Agribition] CEO and 
all around good guy, Mr. Marty Seymour, along with the 
CWA’s board of directors for all their work and leadership 
making Canadian Western Agribition such an incredible 
success. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 

Canadian Agricultural Hall of Fame Induction Ceremony 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise in this Assembly today to congratulate the 2015 
inductees into the Canadian Agricultural Hall of Fame. The 
ceremony was held yesterday with several colleagues from this 
Assembly attending, including the Premier and the Minister of 
Agriculture. Also there were senators and MPs [Member of 
Parliament], including the Hon. Lawrence MacAulay, our new 
federal Minister of Agriculture. There were also dignitaries and 
guests from across the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, throughout the history of the Canadian Ag Hall of 
Fame, the province of Saskatchewan pops up time and time 
again, and this year was no different. This year’s five inductees 
came from across Canada. They were Dr. Ron DePauw, E. 
Ward Jones, Anthony von Mandl, Ovila Lebel, and another 
familiar name, Mr. Speaker, Dr. Grant Devine. Former Premier 
Devine was nominated and inducted for championing 
Saskatchewan on the national and international stage. Another 
Saskatchewan connection is Dr. DePauw, nominated for 
pioneering innovation in new wheat varieties. Each inductee has 
made accomplishments that have helped make Canada a world 
leader in agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to share that the event held here in 
Regina was the first time it was held outside of Toronto. This 
event, in correlation with Agribition, was a great opportunity to 
showcase achievements in the industry. I invite all members of 
this House to congratulate all inductees on this commendable 
achievement. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Saskatoon Symphony’s 85th Anniversary Gala 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, on Saturday I, along with the 
Leader of the Opposition, the member from Saskatoon Centre, 
and the Minister of Central Services, had the great pleasure to 
attend the Saskatoon Symphony Orchestra’s 85th anniversary 
gala and to join in the celebration of the success of the Share in 
the Future campaign which saw the orchestra surpass its goal to 
raise more than $448,000 with the generous matching donations 
from the Frank and Ellen Remai Foundation. 
 
Hometown opera singer, Danika Lorèn, captivated audiences 
with her stunning rendition of Bellini’s “Ah! non credea 
mirarti.” World-class trumpeter and Walter Murray Collegiate 
alumni, Guy Few, took to the stage with a dazzling performance 
of Hayden’s “Allegro.” Then Saskatoon Symphony’s own 
concertmaster, Michael Swan, led the ensemble through a 
captivating rendition of Massinet’s “Méditation.” And finally 
Saskatoon-born Samuel Deason wrapped up the hour-long 
extravaganza with his stunning interpretation of George 
Gershwin’s classic for piano and orchestra, “Rhapsody in 
Blue.” 
 
For 85 seasons the Saskatoon Symphony Orchestra has brought 
world-class performances and top-calibre soloists to the stage in 
our City of Bridges. This concert and gala was another excellent 
instalment in a long history of skilful music making and artistic 
excellence for the SSO [Saskatoon Symphony Orchestra]. 
 
I ask all members to join me in thanking everyone who had a 
hand in making this 85th Anniversary Gala a success, especially 
executive director Mark Turner and SSO conductor Eric 
Paetkau. With the hard work and leadership from these two, 
there’s no doubt in my mind the SSO will be thrilling audiences 
for another 85 years and more. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Long-Term Care Home Opens in Tisdale 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
Friday the Rural and Remote Health minister and the member 
from Melfort joined myself and local residents in Tisdale to 
celebrate the grand opening of Newmarket Place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Newmarket Place has a total of 71 long-term care 
beds and one respite bed. Our government provided $16.4 
million to the $20 million facility that replaces an older, smaller 
home. Newmarket Place lies adjacent to the Tisdale Hospital, 
allowing residents convenient access to all the care they need. 
This amazing new project wouldn’t have been possible without 
the hard work and dedication of the Tisdale trust committee, the 
town of Tisdale, and the municipalities in the surrounding area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to improving health 
care infrastructure in our province. In 2009 we announced plans 
to replace 13 outdated health facilities in Saskatchewan, and our 
government has delivered on that commitment. Newmarket 
Place is the 11th of those 13 projects to be completed, with the 
final two in the works. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government will continue to deliver on our 



7752 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2015 

promise to put seniors first. This is unlike the members opposite 
who, when they were in government, closed 19 long-term care 
facilities. The NDP [New Democratic Party] left Saskatchewan 
seniors without the care they needed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
community of Tisdale on this exciting achievement. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

Safe Homes for Single Mothers 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise in the 
House to talk about the work being done by Mr. Mark Paterson, 
founder of Safe Homes for Single Mothers. Safe Homes is a 
non-profit organization that offers free upgrades for single 
mothers and their children. 
 
Mark started his non-profit when he realized that many single 
mothers were unable to pay for costly home inspections and the 
repairs that were required to make these homes safe. This often 
resulted in families living in subpar, unsafe homes. 
 
Through the sponsorship from Moose Jaw Electric, JAW’S 
Mechanical, McCauley Agencies, and Thunder Creek Home 
Inspections, Safe Homes for Single Mothers has been able to 
offer a service that creates a safe environment for these mothers 
and their children. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Projects include the installation of smoke detectors, fire 
extinguishers, electrical upgrades, and plumbing remedies. The 
first project took place in August, where the organization was 
able to provide $4,000 in upgrades for a total of $1,700. These 
upgrades focused on personal safety and prevention of fire 
hazards. 
 
Mark attributes his inspiration for founding Safe Homes for 
Single Mothers to Dr. Jonas Salk, Marie Curie, and Herb 
Locke, all of whom had dedicated their lives to helping others 
without looking for a return. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this House to join me in 
thanking Mark Paterson and the sponsors and Safe Homes for 
Single Mothers for the work that they are doing. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Saskatchewan Film Week 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is the kickoff 
of Film Week here in Saskatchewan, and the creative industry 
associations have some great events planned for the week. 
Saskatchewan Media Production Industry Association, SMPIA, 
Saskatchewan Filmpool, and Creative Saskatchewan have 
partnered together for various events and workshops. Mr. 
Speaker, some of the great events for professionals and the 
public include market readiness learning opportunity, 

alternative financing, lunch with a buyer and agency, and 
behind the scene. 
 
SMPIA is a proud sponsor of the 2015 Saskatchewan 
Independent Film Awards, also being hosted this week. This 
annual showcase is designed to highlight and celebrate the 
creative and diverse film and video works by the members of 
the Saskatchewan Filmpool Cooperative. This week will be a 
great display of our film industry members in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to emphasize one of the ways that our 
government has supported film in our province. Creative 
Saskatchewan, a program that supports the arts in our province, 
has distributed over $12 million across the province. In fact, 
over 3 million has gone to the film sector this year alone. We 
will continue to support our creative industries here in the 
province, and encourage everyone to get out and enjoy some of 
the great events that our industry has planned for this year’s 
Film Week. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Surgical Wait Times and Provision of Health Care 
 
Mr. Broten: — According to the latest stats, the number of 
people waiting longer than three months for surgery has jumped 
by 73 per cent across the province. That’s 20 per cent higher 
than the increase we saw last month. And this is a direct result 
of the Sask Party’s cut to the surgical budget. What does the 
Premier have to say about this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, in the 
absence of the Premier I’ll take that question on behalf of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this government 
has invested $50 million into our surgical initiative. That’s on 
top of the $60 million that was in last year’s budget. And that is, 
Mr. Speaker, a total of $285 million invested in the surgical 
initiative since it started under this government in 2010. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can report to the House that the number of 
people waiting compared to 2007 when the members opposite 
were in government, the number of people waiting longer than 
18 months for surgery is down 99 per cent, from 2,600 people 
waiting longer than 18 months for surgery down to 21 people. 
The number of people waiting longer than a year for surgery is 
down 98 per cent, from 5,136 down to 98 patients. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re working hard with our health regions to not only ensure 
that we maintain the gains but as well be able to deliver to the 
people of this province among the lowest waits for surgery in 
this entire country. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, with the record revenue available 
to this government over the past years, we better have seen that 
kind of improvements when it comes to surgical cares. 
 
Here’s the problem, Mr. Speaker. Here’s the problem. We have 
seen this . . . We see this trajectory now going in the wrong 



November 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7753 

direction. We see big waits increasing, Mr. Speaker, in 
Saskatchewan and big month-over-month increases. The 
increase in surgical wait times are especially bad here in our 
capital city. Since March, the number of people waiting longer 
than three months for surgery has jumped by 107 per cent. 
That’s 30 per cent higher than the increase that we saw just last 
month. Why, Mr. Speaker? Because the Sask Party government 
cut the budgets for surgeries. How can the Premier possibly 
think that this is acceptable? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, again on behalf of . . . in the absence of the Premier, 
I’ll take that question on behalf of the Government of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I can report to the House that our 
health regions to date in this fiscal year have completed nearly 
44,000 surgeries. That is in fact 1,100 more than was targeted at 
the beginning of the year for this time of year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The total number of patients that are waiting longer than three 
months for surgery is, Mr. Speaker, it is 2,900 people in this 
province that are waiting longer than three months for surgery. 
We know that we need to do considerable . . . continue to do 
work to get that down to the three-month wait for surgery. 
That’s the offer that we made to the people of this province. We 
need to maintain that. We need to continue to work on that. But 
it is 2,900 people that are waiting for surgery longer than three 
months. The total number of patients waiting longer than three 
months for surgery in 2007 — 15,365, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while we know that we need to continue to focus 
on our surgical wait times, Mr. Speaker, we are in much better 
shape, far better shape than we were under the NDP, and we’re 
going to keep it that way. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, because of the Sask Party’s 
surgical budget cuts, we see waits increasing significantly 
across the province and especially here in Regina. Just nine 
months ago, less than 1,700 people were waiting longer than 
three months for surgery. That’s now jumped to almost 3,000 
people. That massive increase is a direct result of the budget 
cuts that the Sask Party made in March. Will the Premier at 
least admit that his cut to the surgical budget means way more 
people are waiting longer than three months for surgery? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Again in the absence of the Premier, I’ll take that question on 
behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the 
number of surgeries or the patients that are offered surgeries 
within three months is at 89 per cent province-wide. 
Ninety-nine per cent of surgeries take place within a six-month 
window. So the vast majority of our patients are receiving their 
surgery within between three and six months. That is a far cry 
from the days of the NDP government where people waited 12 
months, 15 months, 18 months, 24 months for routine elective 
surgery in this country. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t that many years ago — in fact it 

would have been in the time that I was the Health minister — 
when the former Health minister from Lakeview tried to take 
credit for the beginning of the surgical initiative. And what 
were we told at that time during committee? That the wait times 
that they had and the resources that they put into that initiative, 
it would have taken 30 years to get to where this government 
has got in five years, Mr. Speaker. We know there’s more work 
to be done, but we are a long ways away from the NDP record. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier promised to eliminate 
emergency room wait times, but the government made no 
progress on that and they walked away from that promise. The 
Premier also promised, Mr. Speaker, that no one would wait 
longer than one week to see a specialist, but we see, Mr. 
Speaker, that that has jumped to nearly 11 months for waits. 
And you have to see a specialist before you get on the wait-list 
for surgery, so we know that the long waits were already there. 
But now we are seeing surgical waits growing too, Mr. Speaker, 
because the Premier decided to cut the budget for surgeries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after a decade, a decade of unprecedented 
prosperity and record revenues, Saskatchewan people are 
frustrated to see this happening, and rightly so, Mr. Speaker. 
Will the Premier at least admit, will he at least admit that it was 
a mistake for him to cut the surgical budget this year? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much. Again in the 
absence of the Premier, I’ll take that question on behalf of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, you know, it’s 
interesting coming from the members opposite, who in the 1999 
election promised a 30 per cent reduction in surgical wait times 
in this province. And do you know what happened over those 
four years? Wait times went up 61 per cent under their watch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has made a commitment that we 
will dedicate the resources, that we will make changes to the 
system including adding third party private delivery of surgery 
which, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to inform the House that since 
2010, 47,000 surgeries have been performed under the public 
system using third party private surgical delivery. Mr. Speaker, 
it’ll be about 11 or 12,000 this year. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of this province want to 
know, what is the Leader of the Opposition’s opinion on that? 
Would he keep those third party private surgical suites if he was 
the premier of the province? Yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, they promised zero times on 
emergency rooms — worse, as bad as ever, Mr. Speaker. They 
promised one-week wait for specialists — worse than ever, Mr. 
Speaker, gone up to nearly 11 months. And, Mr. Speaker, now 
we see waits for surgeries increasing. When you see the wait, 
the three-month wait for surgeries, increasing by 107 per cent in 
Regina alone, you’d think that would be a wake-up call to the 
Premier to admit that it was a mistake to cut the surgical 
budgets, Mr. Speaker. That’s what you would think. 
 



7754 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2015 

This is the government that has dumped mounds of money, Mr. 
Speaker, into American lean consultants, into Japanese senseis, 
Mr. Speaker, and into kaizen promotion offices. They applaud 
and are pleased to waste money on such initiatives, Mr. 
Speaker, while they cut the budget for surgeries. They’ve even 
ramped up spending on health executives, Mr. Speaker. We see 
a 37 per cent increase and in some cases, a 46 per cent increase, 
Mr. Speaker, on health executives. But this government chose, 
they chose to slash the budgets for surgeries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, across the province, the wait-lists have grown by 
73 per cent. In Regina, the wait-list has grown by 107 per cent, 
all because of the Sask Party’s misplaced priorities. To the 
Premier: why will he not admit that the cut to the surgical 
budget was a mistake? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — And again, Mr. Speaker, in the absence 
of the Premier, I’ll take that question on behalf of the 
Government of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, you know what 
should, I think, give us all a wake-up call in this province is the 
fact that we are three months away from the drop of the 
provincial writ and we have no idea what the plan is of the 
leader opposite. The Leader of the Opposition aspires to sit in 
that seat and he hasn’t even told us what he would do. He hasn’t 
even told us if the 11,000 surgeries that we’re going to be 
performing this year in private surgical settings, if he would cut 
those. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the same dollars dedicated in this year’s 
budget, without those third party surgical suites, we wouldn’t be 
able to hit our targeted number of surgeries. They are 
instrumental in being able to perform the number of surgeries 
that we’re going to perform in the system. They have been 
instrumental in reducing the wait times for surgeries in this 
province to the point where major newspapers were reporting 
headlines like, “Longest waits are in Saskatchewan,” 
Leader-Post, 2001; “Survey says waiting lists for elective 
surgery twice as long in Saskatchewan,” 2002. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know what the headlines are today, Mr. 
Speaker, in this province compared to the rest of the country? 
“Among the lowest waits in all of Canada.” “Record progress 
on surgical wait times.” That’s . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Next question. I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 

Provision of Out-of-Province Medical Treatments 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party cut the budget for 
surgeries, and the waits are going up. That is very clear, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Kayden Kot’s parents came to the legislature 41 days ago, 41 
days ago. Kayden is just four years old, and he has complex 
health challenges which were made worse by a serious medical 
error. The Saskatoon Health Region admits that it can’t meet 
Kayden’s needs, so they asked this government to let Kayden 
go to Denver for desperately needed treatment at a cost of 
$14,000. But 41 days later Kayden’s parents are still waiting to 
hear from the government. What is the Premier’s explanation 

for the government’s ongoing refusal to cover this $14,000 
program? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Again in the absence of the Premier, I’ll take that question on 
behalf of the government. Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity 
to meet with Kayden’s parents, Mr. Speaker. We did that earlier 
this session. We made a commitment that the time that it would 
take the review committee to do their review would be moved 
up because they believed that it was an excessive wait just to 
have the committee hear their review. The review date was 
moved up. The committee has issued their opinion. We are 
currently analyzing that opinion and will be informing the Kot 
family of our decision shortly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, 41 days ago Kayden’s parents 
came to the legislature wanting treatment for their son, wanting 
treatment for their son. The Health minister didn’t proactively 
seek out to meet with them, Mr. Speaker, on that day but met 
with them afterwards. And they were given the same refusal 
lines, Mr. Speaker, the same refusal lines that they’d been 
getting all along the way, Mr. Speaker. That answer will be cold 
comfort to Kayden’s parents, Mr. Speaker. No wonder 
Kayden’s mom had this to say: “Kids with needs get wrapped 
up in red tape and delayed with therapies when they need it 
now.” 
 
I can’t understand, Mr. Speaker, how the Premier and the Sask 
Party government can continue to ignore the plight of this little 
boy. And a big reason, a big reason for his health challenges are 
because of a serious medical error that Kayden experienced in 
our health care system, Mr. Speaker. We owe this little boy and 
we owe his family so much better, and certainly not a slow walk 
of 41 days before they can get an answer, Mr. Speaker, when 
they could fix this right now if they had the compassion and if 
they had the willingness to learn and to look at the facts straight 
from the Saskatoon Health Region, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Sask Party wastes $14,000 in a blink of an eye, yet they 
continue to refuse treatment for Kayden for $14,000. My 
question to the Premier: how on earth can he justify this? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
just want to — as we have to do from time to time — I just 
want to correct the Leader of the Opposition. Mr. Speaker, the 
Kot family didn’t have to seek me out as if I wasn’t willing to 
meet with them. I’ve known Kayden’s father since we were 
seven years old. I have spoken to Kayden’s father earlier this 
year. I have met with them, Mr. Speaker, and I would hope that 
the Leader of the Opposition would get his information correct 
before he brings it to the Chamber. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell you the difference between this side of 
the House and the members opposite. I think with the exception 
of one case — and it was their choice not to meet with me — 



November 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7755 

we, either myself as Health minister or the Rural and Remote 
Health minister, the former Rural and Remote Health minister, 
or the former Health minister, we meet with individuals that 
come forward whether they agree with what we decide or not, 
which is far different from the members opposite. If you came 
to this legislature before 2007, you couldn’t find a Health 
minister to meet with. That is the difference on this side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker, and I think the members opposite know 
that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the last time the Health minister 
said he would do something shortly was when he said he would 
release the seniors’ care reports, Mr. Speaker, and that was 
about 42 days ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government’s treatment of Kayden and his parents has 
been deplorable, Mr. Speaker. They’ve had to fight every inch 
of the way for the care that they need for their son, Mr. Speaker, 
and it has been absolutely unacceptable and everyone on that 
side knows this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Kayden’s mom is watching today. She’s watching 
right now, Mr. Speaker. She deserves a crystal clear answer 
about when she will find out whether or not she gets care for 
her son. When will she find out whether or not her son can get 
the medical care that he desperately needs and he absolutely 
deserves? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, as I said before, we are 
currently reviewing the information that has come back from 
the review committee, Mr. Speaker, and we will be issuing a 
decision to the family once our review of that is complete. 
Because of the fact, as I have indicated on the floor of the 
legislature, as I have indicated to my colleagues, because I have 
known Kayden’s father for many years, I felt it was best that I 
would have another minister review the file before making the 
final decision. And we are doing that, Mr. Speaker. We are 
going to do that. That’s our commitment. 
 
And here’s the difference. Under this government . . .  
 
An Hon. Member: — What’s the holdup? 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well part of it is the fact that we now 
have a review committee that we send information out to get a 
review when the ministry turns down somebody, which never 
happened before, Mr. Speaker. There was no review under way. 
Under the NDP, once you got a decision that was no, there was 
no way to appeal that. We’ve made those changes. We put that 
in place and we will be following that review process. In this 
case, we will be changing it slightly for the fact that I know 
Kayden’s father personally. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Emergency Room Wait Times 
 
Ms. Chartier: — The Premier promised to eliminate ER 

[emergency room] wait times. He said if you show up at the 
emergency room you’d be able to see a physician right away. 
But of course we know this government has not made progress 
on that. In fact, the government’s own documents show they’ve 
abandoned that commitment. There were more reports over the 
weekend from Prince Albert about a crowded emergency room 
and unacceptably long waits to be seen by a doctor. What’s the 
Health minister’s explanation for this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, we certainly have seen some progress that has been 
made in our ERs across the province as we’re working towards 
our emergency department initiative. We did provide in last 
year’s budget about one and a half million dollars. We 
increased that in this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We know that we are also working, doing some important work 
outside of the emergency department because we know that it 
will help flow within the emergency department. So for 
example, we had a major announcement of the expansion of the 
Lighthouse in Saskatoon that will take pressure off of the 
emergency department. We are providing for paramedicine at 
places like the Lighthouse as well. We do have our police and 
crisis teams both in Saskatoon and Regina, and we’re seeing 
good results both in those communities as we are implementing 
those programs. 
 
It’s not just going to be one thing that’s going to be the solution 
for emergency departments. That’s why we’re looking at both 
the process in the emergency department, but as well as the 
process outside of the emergency departments to see those 
improvements. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — The most recent figures for Prince Albert’s 
emergency room show that urgent patients are waiting up to an 
hour and 25 minutes to see a doctor — urgent patients. 
According to national standards, a doctor’s supposed to see 
urgent patients within at least 30 minutes. People who show up 
in Prince Albert’s emergency room are waiting almost an hour 
longer than the guidelines say they are supposed to wait. Is this 
acceptable to the Health minister? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if it was acceptable, 
we wouldn’t put money into an emergency department wait and 
patient flow initiative. That’s why we’ve invested in this year, I 
believe, close to $4.7 million into our emergency department 
waits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that this is not going to be solved 
overnight. Mr. Speaker, we know that we have to ensure that 
we have the proper resources in terms of both in the emergency 
department as well as changing some of the processes. That’s 
why Regina is concentrating on the triage process, to be able to 
improve that aspect of care. But we also need to ensure that we 
have the supports outside of the emergency departments. 
 



7756 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2015 

So whether it be the Home First/Quick Response which is 
operating in Prince Albert and has been an effective program to 
the point where we have expanded it in this year’s budget, or 
seniors’ house call program which we believe will be very 
helpful to ensure that people are having that proper support 
provided in their own home; whether it be the police and crisis 
teams that we’re seeing both in Saskatoon and Regina that have 
been very effective and that are seeing reduced visits to the 
emergency department, those that are not appropriate for the 
emergency department, and adding capacity to the community 
setting. So it’s not going to be solved overnight, but certainly 
this government is showing dedication to making progress on 
this file. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — People who show up at the ER and are 
classified as needing urgent care have acute pain, moderate 
trauma, a gastrointestinal bleed, or acute psychosis and they’re 
supposed to see a physician quickly. But the most recent 
statistics show they’re waiting almost an hour and a half in 
Prince Albert’s emergency room. 
 
And reports from over the weekend say the ER is clogged. 
Victoria Hospital is over capacity and patients are being left to 
wait far too long. The John Black lean program clearly didn’t 
work despite mountains of money being dumped into it. What’s 
the minister going to do about P.A.’s [Prince Albert] ER waits 
right now? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, well we are putting 
additional resources into the system for the emergency 
department. That’s why this province, this government provided 
$4.7 million in this year’s budget, an increase of $3 million. 
And P.A., Victoria Hospital would have received funding as a 
part of that to increase . . . I believe they used their dollars to 
increase physician services in the emergency department, 
especially during peak hours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that, you know, this is not certainly 
new for the health care system in this province or in any other 
province, of ensuring that we are seeing patients in a timely 
fashion. In fact I can tell you that back in 2004 — this would 
have been from a then Dr. John Witt — this is what he said: 
“Too many days and nights we have the simultaneous arrival of 
critically ill patients, and it has become routine to make 
potential heart attack patients wait hours to be seen.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, at that time I think the minister of the day 
basically took a hands-off approach in terms of improving waits 
in ERs. That’s certainly not the position that we’ve taken as the 
government, and we will continue to work on this issue. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Renewable Power Targets 
 
Ms. Sproule: — It’s good to finally see this government talking 
in a somewhat meaningful way about renewable power. But we 

know the Sask Party government has a bad track record of 
making big commitments and then failing to actually follow 
through. We see that in everything from ER waits to specialist 
waits to greenhouse gas emission reductions — big 
commitments that sound good but very little follow-through, 
and that’s the Sask Party way. 
 
So we’re not going to break out the cake and balloons yet. But 
we have a simple question for the SaskPower minister: why is 
the 50 per cent target a cap rather than a base? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, along with the SaskPower 
president and CEO this morning, we were very pleased to be 
able to announce to the people of Saskatchewan our plan with 
regard to renewables going forward, a 50 per cent plan for 
renewables that we will include into the generation mix here in 
Saskatchewan by year 2030, Mr. Speaker. We think this is an 
important target and we think it’s important because the people 
of Saskatchewan want our government to move with respect to 
CO2 emissions, and that’s exactly what we have done, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The NDP had a program, a platform around this as well, Mr. 
Speaker. It was similar to ours. The concern that we had with 
their platform, Mr. Speaker, was around the Poplar River plant. 
We felt that it was unnecessary to close that facility down as 
their plan indicated. I guess we should have known that, given 
the fact that they don’t like coal and they want to shut the entire 
industry down. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, this government was very 
deliberate in its wording. Despite what the Premier said last 
week, this government is not setting a clear target of generating 
at least 50 per cent of our power for renewables. No, they’re 
just saying that generation capacity will be up to 50 per cent 
renewables. The capacity will be up to 50 per cent. 
 
This is starting to look like it’s just a ploy to cover for the 
carbon capture mess and the fact that this government has no 
climate change strategy. The legislation we introduced would 
have set a target of at least 50 per cent of our power generated 
with renewables. Will the SaskPower minister agree to remove 
the “up to” language from this target and make it a firm 
commitment to generate at least 50 per cent of our power from 
renewables? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, I think as was explained at 
the news conference this morning, clearly when you’re talking 
about renewables, Mr. Speaker, there’s a difference between 
what the actual capacity is and the amount of generation there is 
from that because they operate at various efficiencies, as the 
member opposite would know, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I can start naming members, identifying their 



November 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7757 

constituency if you would like. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, as it was indicated this 
morning, there’s various efficiencies for the various types of 
renewables, as the member opposite would know. When you 
look at wind, for example, the efficiencies might be as high as 
50 per cent which means 50 per cent of the time there’s no 
generation at all, Mr. Speaker, from that facility. But you still 
have that kind of generating capacity when they’re operating, 
when there’s full wind capacity to operate, Mr. Speaker. And I 
think that that’s important. 
 
And I also think it’s important why we see at least one NDP 
that knows what they’re talking about, Mr. Speaker. In the 
paper today, there was a quote: “First of all, Saskatchewan 
Environmental Society is very pleased with Premier Wall’s 
announcement and we commend him for it. We think it’s 
absolutely a feasible target.” And that came from none other 
than Peter Prebble, Mr. Speaker, someone the member opposite 
should be very familiar with. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for the Economy. 
 

Renewable Electricity Targets for 2030 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I’m pleased to rise in the Assembly to share a vision of 
the plan to power Saskatchewan’s future. Today I joined Mike 
Marsh, SaskPower’s president and CEO, to announce plans to 
help our province reduce its environmental impact today and for 
years to come. 
 
SaskPower employees are working hard to meet the growing 
demand for power in a growing province. They’re busy 
replacing and repairing aging infrastructure. They’re working 
hard to meet tougher environmental regulations to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions. We’re already meeting that 
challenge with carbon capture and storage, Mr. Speaker, more 
hydro imports, and exploring the possibility of new hydro in 
northern Saskatchewan. But I think we can do more. 
 
Today we are pleased to announce the province of 
Saskatchewan and SaskPower are setting a target to have up to 
50 per cent of the province’s power come from renewable 
sources by year 2030. That is a doubling of Saskatchewan’s 
total renewable power capacity in just 15 years, Mr. Speaker. 
By meeting this target, SaskPower will reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions by over 40 per cent from 2005 levels. 
 
About 25 per cent of our current power capacity today comes 
from renewable sources, including hydro and wind. SaskPower 
has enough wind capacity to power nearly 100,000 homes and 
businesses already in Saskatchewan, and about 400 homes in 
Saskatchewan and businesses in our province in Saskatchewan 
use solar power as a secondary power source, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s a great start, but we believe we can do more. 
 
In particular over the last year, SaskPower has worked hard to 
create a plan for SaskPower to significantly increase the amount 
of renewable electricity in Saskatchewan’s generation mix from 
25 per cent today to as much as 50 per cent by 2030. 

[14:30] 
 
All sources of power have pros and cons, and the goal is that 
diversified portfolio of options that balances reliability, cost, 
and environmental impact. As the first step to achieving this 
target, a plan to expand wind power will help SaskPower add 
more renewable electricity to our system while making the best 
use of Saskatchewan’s world-class wind resource. 
 
We are also interested in looking at utility-scale solar projects 
in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, which would be a 
groundbreaking step in Canada should we be in a position to 
move forward as the cost of solar projects is continuing to trend 
downward. Mr. Speaker, we’re also looking at the potential for 
more hydro projects and hydro imports from other provinces, as 
well as the potential for geothermal projects here as well. 
Further details will be shared as we move further down the road 
of achieving our long-term goal and as some of the details are 
worked out. 
 
SaskPower estimates this will affect the average residential 
consumer’s power bill by about $1 per month, Mr. Speaker. The 
total cost of this plan is expected to be in the range of about 
$1.5 billion over 15 years. We believe this is a valuable 
investment in our province’s green energy future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are proud of the direction that is being taken to 
ensure that we are meeting our environmental responsibilities 
for today and for generations to come while at the same time 
ensuring Saskatchewan families and businesses continue to 
enjoy reliable, affordable electricity here in our province. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition was hopeful last 
week when we heard that the Sask Party planned to adopt the 
NDP goal of power generation from 50 per cent renewables by 
2030, and of course today we’re disappointed, Mr. Speaker. The 
goal should be to generate at least 50 per cent of the power 
entering the grid from renewables. Instead we have a goal to 
have the capacity to generate no more than 50 per cent of 
Saskatchewan’s power from renewables by 2030. 
 
We know SaskPower employees are doing their very best. We 
all know Saskatchewan people want action on climate change. 
Saskatchewan still has the highest per capita greenhouse gas 
emissions in the country but, instead of rising to the challenge, 
instead of taking more seriously Saskatchewan families’ desire 
to do our part, the Sask Party has presented a weak, 
watered-down target. They’re using evasive words, Mr. 
Speaker, to say 50 per cent when what they mean is something 
less than that. 
 
Saskatchewan should be joining other premiers in showing 
leadership on this file. A firm commitment to generate at least 
50 per cent of our power from renewables by 2030 is a realistic, 
achievable goal if the right actions are taken to match the target. 
We urge this government to take another crack at it and to come 
up with a plan to set SaskPower’s target to be at least 50 per 
cent of Saskatchewan’s power generated by renewables by 
2030. 



7758 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2015 

The bill I introduced in this spring called for 50 per cent 
renewable generation by 2030, a 350-megawatt efficiency and 
conservation target by 2050, and an 80 per cent greenhouse gas 
reduction goal by 2050, with benchmarks along the way for 
each of those three goals. Mr. Speaker, those goals are 
achievable if there are actions to match them. 
 
I also want to hear a commitment from this government that I 
think was lacking this morning, and that’s a commitment to 
green jobs right here in Saskatchewan. Local businesses and 
co-operatives should be the driving force behind 
Saskatchewan’s energy future, not foreign corporations. 
Changing our carbon footprint can be a massive driver for jobs 
and the economy. I want the green jobs in power generation, 
plus in research and development, to be jobs for Saskatchewan 
people and Saskatchewan companies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m asking the Sask Party to take another look at 
this. Getting it right is not for the sake of a media release or a 
talking point; it’s for the sake of our beautiful Saskatchewan 
environment, our children and our grandchildren, and for the 
sake of our economy going forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, with leave to move some motions of condolence. 
 
The Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has requested leave to 
move motions of condolence. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 

Adolph Sylvester Matsalla 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of the Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Adolph Sylvester Matsalla, who passed away on May 
18th, 2015 at the age of 89 years old, was a member of the 
Legislative Assembly from 1967 until 1982, representing 
the constituency of Canora for the New Democratic Party. 
He served as the minister of Tourism and Renewable 
Resources. 
 
Mr. Matsalla was born on March 22, 1926 on a small farm 
in the Rama district. From 1943 to ’52, Mr. Matsalla taught 
in a number of rural schools. After marrying his first wife, 
Anne, he worked as a secretary treasurer for the RM [rural 
municipality] of Buchanan for 23 years. Once elected, he 
continued to hold that position until 1975 when he was 
appointed to cabinet. 
 

Mr. Matsalla is survived and sadly missed by his second 
wife, Marcella, and her children as well as his four 
children, Les, Marianne, Ronald, and Cheryl, and their 
families and stepchildren. 
 
In recording its deepest sense of loss and bereavement, this 
Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to the 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — It was moved by the Deputy Premier: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of the former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation for the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 

 
Will you take the motion as read? I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to join with the 
Deputy Premier in paying tribute to Adolph Matsalla, or Al 
Matsalla, as he was better known. Mr. Matsalla attended 
teachers’ college in Saskatoon and taught in several schools 
near Canora. He left teaching in 1953 and began working with 
RM of Buchanan in several administrative roles, and in 1967 he 
defeated the Liberal incumbent and was elected to represent the 
good people of the Canora constituency. 
 
Like I often do when preparing to speak to condolence motions, 
I read Mr. Matsalla’s maiden speech in this Assembly, which he 
delivered way back on February 27th, 1968. This is part of what 
he said: 
 

Mr. Speaker, as I rise to speak for the first time in the 
Legislature, my first thought is about the constituency of 
Canora and its people, whom I was elected to represent. I 
feel that it is with a great deal of pride and honour that I 
have been placed in a position to truly represent the Canora 
people through the democratic process of election. With 
this, one possesses a sense of security and sureness in his 
reputation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that strong focus on representing the good people 
of the Canora constituency, of always ensuring that they were 
first on his mind, is demonstrated not only by his record in this 
Assembly but his leadership within government. But it’s also 
shown by the fact that Mr. Matsalla was easily re-elected three 
times in 1971, 1975, and 1978. 
 
After his retirement, Mr. Matsalla’s public service did not end. 
He went on to serve as the administrator for the RM of Sliding 
Hills, and he even served two years on Canora’s town council. 
 
So we pay tribute to him today and express gratitude for his 
service to the people of Saskatchewan as an MLA and a cabinet 
minister and a public servant. We express gratitude for his 
service to the CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] 
and the NDP. And we express our sincere sympathies to his 
family, his wife Marcella, his four children, Les, Marianne, 
Ronald, and Cheryl, and their families as well as his 



November 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7759 

stepchildren. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a honour to participate in recognizing the 
accomplishments of a great person, a person who dedicated a 
lot more to the Canora area over time in a number of areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the condolence motion, as read by the Deputy 
Premier, summarizes a great career, a man who spent a lot of 
time helping individuals. I’m just going to highlight a couple of 
things, Mr. Speaker, beyond what the Leader of the Opposition 
has also said. And I’m going to spend a little bit of time on 
education because of course Mr. Matsalla began his education 
in a rural area. 
 
And as mentioned, he grew up on the family farm in what is 
referred to as the Rama district. Those of you who travel down 
Highway 5 will recognize that just out of Rama, there is a road 
that is called the Matsalla road. And that, Mr. Speaker, is the 
road that goes by Adolph’s family farm, the place where Victor 
and Mary came when they came to Canada. Mr. Speaker, 
Adolph’s dad was a young boy about 7 years of age, I believe 
— and I hope I’m not erring on any of these numbers — when 
he came to Canada with his parents. He came here directly from 
Galicia. And I think that’s one of the reasons that you’ll see 
later on in life when Adolph has the opportunity to actually 
travel to Poland and to Ukraine because of course his dad was 
from that area. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, also growing up in a rural area in the early 
years, in the ’30s, meant that of course you were going to the 
local school district, that school that was close by. Adolph’s 
elementary education was in a little school called Walna and, 
Mr. Speaker, that school district is still marked in the RM. After 
completing his elementary education, he went over to Buchanan 
to do some of more senior grades and then finally finishing his 
high school education at St. Joseph’s College in Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as was the case with many individuals, at an early 
age there was a need for teachers. And if you can imagine this, 
he went to normal school in 1943 and spent a short time at 
teacher’s college, as it was referred to, and then came back to 
start teaching in the MacNutt area at age 17. And he was 
teaching in a school that had students from grade 1 to 10. So 
you can imagine, maybe, probably, a student in grade 10 would 
have been pretty close to 16 years of age and the teacher up 
front was 17 years of age. 
 
So he spent a number of years, from 1943 to 1952, teaching in a 
number of schools in the Preeceville area, Tiny area, Tadmore, 
and at the same time completed what was referred to then as a 
first-class permanent teaching certificate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting how he changed in still wanting to 
serve people. Moving out of the teaching profession in 1952, he 
was hired as the assistant secretary treasurer. Now of course we 
know that position is RM administrator, but it was then the 
assistant in the RM of Buchanan. At the same time working, 
going to school and completing his certification course, his 

administration course, and getting his certificate, then in June of 
1953, he was hired as the secretary treasurer of the RM of 
Buchanan, which he continued until December 31st, 1975. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to note though, as he’s serving as 
the administrator, he becomes interested in politics. He starts to 
work on behalf of the political party of his choosing, which of 
course at that time was the CCF, and in 1966 in fact he is 
selected as the CCF candidate to run in the provincial election. 
The provincial election doesn’t take place until 1967, and at that 
time he’s now elected as the NDP member for the constituency 
of Canora. As mentioned by the Leader of the Opposition, 
re-elected again in subsequent years with his final re-election 
being in 1978. 
 
As was already mentioned, I’m not going to repeat that he spent 
some time in cabinet from 1975 until 1979 when he stepped out 
of cabinet as other members were placed in cabinet in 1979, and 
then did not seek re-election in 1982. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, a pretty broad range of serving the people of 
Saskatchewan, because after the time of not serving in cabinet, 
he decided to go back as the secretary treasurer of Sliding Hills, 
and then serves, I believe it was, another 11 years as the 
secretary or administrator then. 
 
[14:45] 
 
So when you look at that career of 34 years, some of it at the 
same time as he was the MLA for the Canora constituency, he 
was also serving as the secretary treasurer. No doubt a pretty 
busy, busy lifestyle, I’m sure, trying to ensure that he served the 
people of the RM of Buchanan well, as well as serving the area 
as the member for the constituency of Canora. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a quick comment about his family members. I was 
elected to the school board in 1985. And at the same time, there 
was a young man who was elected to the Melville board of 
education, the Catholic board there, and his name of course was 
Les Matsalla. That was Adolph’s son, served on the school 
board in the late ’80s for the same period of time that I was on a 
school board. So I did get to meet Les at a number of 
trustee-related occasions; and of course there for the same 
reason, to serve the people of Melville to ensure that education 
was a top priority. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the people of now Canora-Pelly 
constituency, I would like to extend of course my condolences 
to the family members of the late Adolph Matsalla. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join and 
express my condolences to the Matsalla family. I had the 
occasion to meet Mr. Matsalla a couple of times, but my more 
ongoing contact was with his son, Les Matsalla, who is a 
practising lawyer in Saskatchewan, and then subsequently a 
Provincial Court judge serving in Swift Current. 
 
I think that much of the Matsalla style of dealing with people 
and being a good representative of the people from that part of 
the province has now been passed on to the next couple of 
generations. And we say thank you very much to the Matsalla 



7760 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2015 

family and to all of those who loved Mr. Al Matsalla. So I just 
wanted to express those words. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion before the House, moved by the 
Deputy Premier: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Adolph Sylvester Matsalla, who passed away on May 18, 
2015 at the age of 89, was a member of this Legislative 
Assembly from 1967 until 1982, representing the 
constituency of Canora for the New Democratic Party. He 
served as the Minister of Tourism and Renewable 
Resources. 
 
Mr. Matsalla was born on March 22nd, 1926 on a small 
farm in the Rama district. From 1943 to 1952, Mr. 
Matsalla taught in a number of rural schools. After 
marrying his first wife, Anne, he worked as the 
secretary-treasurer for the RM of Buchanan for 23 years. 
Once elected, he continued to hold that position until 1975 
when he was appointed to cabinet. 
 
Mr. Matsalla is survived and sadly missed by his second 
wife, Marcella, and her children, as well as his four 
children, Les, Marianne, Ronald, and Cheryl and their 
families, and his stepchildren. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 

Robert Pickering 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to, 
at the end of my remarks, move another motion regarding a 
former member. But before I move that motion I did want to 
speak to this member a fair amount, if I could take some time. 
 
I’ve had the opportunity to be in this House for about 16 years, 
and we’ve had these condolence motions each year to recognize 
former members. I don’t know if there has ever been an 
instance though that I knew the former member as well as I 
know this person, Mr. Robert or Bob Pickering from Milestone. 
 
Originally started farming . . . Born in Wilcox but farmed I 
guess it really would have been south of Wilcox or east of 
Avonlea. I know where their farm was. But Bob was certainly 
well known before he got involved in politics. In fact, I think 
maybe that part of his success in politics stemmed from the 
success he had on the curling ice across Saskatchewan and 
throughout Canada. Bob was very well known in the curling 
circles. 

And I want to touch a little bit about kind of on his curling days, 
and then I’ll touch a little bit on his political days, but most 
importantly what kind of weaved through all of that was really 
his wife, Dorothy, and their family, the girls, Laurie, Pattie, and 
Sheri, that I know fairly well of course. They went to school in 
Milestone when I went to school. Maybe they were a little bit 
younger than I was when I went to school, but I certainly 
remember them. And having spent a fair amount of time around 
Milestone after school, they were around quite a bit, so I knew 
the family quite well. 
 
But Bob’s curling certainly put him on the map. It says here that 
he was in three Briers. All I can remember as a kid when you’d 
kind of listen to the radio or listen to the sports after the 
provincial weekend is that Bob Pickering was representing 
Saskatchewan again. I’m surprised it was only six times. I know 
that he went to a Brier with the Campbell brothers from 
Avonlea, of course, Garnet Campbell. And they took him I 
guess maybe a little bit under his wing for a year or two. He 
went to the Brier under the Campbells. But mainly he got to be 
really well known as Peewee Pickering. His nickname was 
Peewee because he wasn’t a very big guy. 
 
And for anybody that remembers Bob Pickering curling, and 
especially under Peewee, if they remember his backswing, he 
was famous for his backswing. He had the high backswing. 
He’d bring the rock back, way up past his head. And there are 
lots of different shots, still shots of Peewee with that 
backswing. 
 
And I was talking to some people this past weekend that said, 
like why did he always do that? Why was his backswing so 
long and so high? And it was because he was a pretty small 
guy, and growing up in rural Saskatchewan when it was natural 
ice, and down around that . . . Avonlea, Wilcox, probably some 
alkali in that water that they were putting on the ice, so that 
made it really tough. In curling terms, that would be called 
tough. And so that’s why his backswing got to be as big as it 
was, is so that he could get the rock down to the other end of 
the ice. Now he never got away from it. Even as he got curling 
in other venues, to the Brier and into the city, he still kept that 
patented backswing which made him very well known. 
 
Bob was also quite well known in the curling circles for the 
bonspieling piece. I mean that’s where we all . . . Well I should 
say not all, but I certainly learned a little bit about curling was 
the bonspieling end of it. I was probably better at that than I 
was the curling. But Bob did a pretty good job at the 
bonspieling end of it as well, and he was quite well known for 
that. 
 
And I was talking, as I said, to some friends from Milestone this 
past . . . I guess it was on Thursday. Another quite well-known 
person from Milestone had passed away and we were at the 
funeral, and we went and chatted after. And I was talking to — 
and the family will know him very, very well — Jim Monson 
from Milestone. And I was saying, geez, is there any good 
Peewee stories that you have? I have to do this condolence 
motion and I just kind of wanted to put on record a little bit of 
what Bob was about. 
 
I mean Jim started and I never really got another word in 
edgewise because it was story after story after story. And so 



November 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7761 

many others in that area had stories about Bob. He had a strong 
rink made up of people mainly from Milestone, but I know one 
of the Fords from Gray, Gary Ford, was on his rink at times. 
 
But there was this one spiel that Jim was telling me about that 
he didn’t have kind of the natural rink that he would normally 
have, whether it was Jack Keys and Dick Schiefner and some of 
the other guys that he had curl on his rink that certainly helped 
him to the provincial titles. Unfortunately, never a national title. 
I remember hearing it said he was the best skip never to win a 
Brier. And back in those days the Brier was set up quite a bit 
different. It was just a round robin, who happened to have the 
best record at the end. And he went through with a winning 
record pretty much every Brier that he’d been at, but he never 
quite had that, the most winningest record, if that’s the proper 
term. There wasn’t the Page playoff system or anything else 
where I’m sure he would have had not only the purple hearts, 
because I remember his sweater lined with purple hearts back 
then. For every provincial title, he’d put a purple heart on. And 
he had his sweaters lined with purple hearts, but he never did 
have that national championship. 
 
But back to the story that Jim was talking about is that he didn’t 
have his normal rink and so they decided that they would . . . 
He wanted to go into the, I think it was known then as the 
Corby Cup. It was the Elks provincial playdowns, kind of. It 
wasn’t the official playdowns that go to the Macdonald’s Brier. 
Back in the day it was called the Macdonald’s Brier. But this 
was to the Corby Cup. 
 
I remember even kind of when I first went there, there’d be 60 
or 70 teams. But back in the day, there’d be 120 teams from all 
across Saskatchewan, and it was probably the best curling spiel 
in the province, save for the provincial championships. 
 
And Bob didn’t have really a rink with him because the other 
guys were going off on their own. So he asked two guys that 
happened to not be playing hockey that weekend. They were 
younger, Wayne Rogers and Jim Monson. And I don’t know 
who the third was. I think he might have been the caretaker at 
the rink. I’m not sure. 
 
And Bob just told them, he said, you know, if you guys between 
the three of you can make a shot an end between the three of 
you, I think I can do okay and hopefully carry the day. Well you 
know, so he’s got . . . Bob’s got a couple of younger guys and 
the caretaker with him. I don’t know if it was the caretaker, but 
. . . So a pretty young team. 
 
Well of course at the Corby Cup, sponsored by Corby’s, you 
kind of get an idea what would go on after the games. And they 
had a lot of fun because that is quite a long playdown. It was for 
the whole week, and they had an awful lot of fun at this 
bonspiel. It was in Weyburn and they were in Milestone, so 
they could kind of go back and forth. 
 
And be darned if they didn’t win every game all the way to the 
final of the Corby Cup, and that was on a Sunday. And the story 
goes . . . Now I don’t know if it’s true or not, Dorothy. But 
some would say that Dorothy might have said to Bob, maybe 
you should just take it a little bit easy because it’s Saturday 
night and you’ve got the final. You guys have made it all the 
way through with these young guys, two hockey players and a 

caretaker. Maybe you should just take it easy tonight, Bob, so 
that you can maybe win the Elks provincials, which is again a 
real feather in his hat. 
 
So the story goes . . . Now it’s just a story. Bob did take it easy 
on that Saturday night and they got blown out on Sunday. So 
that just goes to show you, you know, Mr. Speaker, that his 
bonspieling helped his ability on the ice. And a lot of people 
could say that you could never stay up with Bob the night 
before and curl at 8 in the next morning because he had the 
button weight every time where everybody else was just barely 
trying to make it to the rink. So be it Peewee or Bob was very 
well known for his curling across the province. 
 
He got into politics, and I remember, I remember very distinctly 
when he got into politics because my dad was quite involved on 
an organizational level. I remember him getting . . . He worked 
in a grain elevator. He’d come home and have a quick shower 
and put on a tie and go to a constituency meeting. 
 
And back in those days, in the early days, Conservatives didn’t 
have much . . . not that they didn’t have support across the 
province but they didn’t have much representation here. And 
they thought in the, it would have been called the 
Bengough-Milestone constituency at that time, but they needed 
a name. They needed somebody that had a good name and so 
they, you know, Bob Pickering’s name floated around and my 
dad and a few others approached Bob to see if he would be 
interested in running. 
 
Bob was a farmer and a curler. He didn’t have a lot of 
experience in politics but certainly in that first election back in 
’78 he ended up winning and then became the representative 
and, like all of us for the first term or two, first term especially, 
we learn a lot and, you know, public speaking wasn’t maybe on 
the forefront of what we did in the past but it becomes part of 
what you have to do into the future. And Bob worked on that 
and certainly became a very good representative for Indian 
Head-Milestone over the number of terms that he represented. 
 
Just on one last personal story for me, I was kind of getting 
interested in politics at that time as well and so . . . interested in 
running. I knew he was stepping down after the 1991 election 
and would be stepping down and I was kind of the age, pretty 
young then, but I thought I’d be interested to see what politics 
would be all about. And so I phoned up Bob and he said, yes, 
come by and let’s have a chat. So the first time I was ever in 
this meeting was to meet Bob Pickering, and I remember his 
office was down where our caucus office is, down on the end of 
the second floor. And I remember driving up and I didn’t know 
where I should park because this place could be really 
intimidating. It was really intimidating, still is intimidating at 
times. But I remember finding a spot and coming in and being 
completely intimidated until I got to Bob’s office. 
 
And he really didn’t want to talk about politics. He really 
wanted to talk about farming and the Milestone community and 
what was going on around there because truly that was his . . . 
That really was who Bob was. It was the community of 
Milestone and surrounding areas — Avonlea, Wilcox. And 
agriculture was certainly more of who he was than anything 
else. 
 



7762 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2015 

So I know it’s tough for Dorothy and the girls again, who I see 
every so often, losing their dad. But he did leave a huge mark 
on this province, not only as a sports, truly celebrity in this 
province, but also as a very good politician and most 
importantly a really good representative for the people of Indian 
Head-Bengough at that time. 
 
So I would just like to read the condolence motion: 
 

That this Assembly record with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and express 
its grateful appreciation of the contribution he made to his 
community, his constituency, and the province. 
 
Robert “Bob” Pickering, who passed away on June 24th, 
2015 at the age of 82, was a Member of the Legislative 
Assembly from 1978 to 1991, representing the 
constituency of Bengough-Milestone for the Progressive 
Conservative Party. He served on many committees 
including the Agriculture, Privileges and Elections, Public 
Accounts, and Crown Corporations Committee. Bob also 
served as Minister of Municipal Affairs, Minister of Rural 
Development, and Minister of Parks and Renewable 
Resources. 

 
Mr. Pickering was born on September 19th, 1932 in 
Wilcox, Saskatchewan. He was a grain farmer and a skilled 
curler. He was inducted to the Canadian Curling Hall of 
Fame in 1974 for his participation in six Briers. 

 
Mr. Pickering is survived and sadly missed by his wife, 
Dorothy, and his daughters Laurie, Pattie, and Sheri, as 
well as their families. 

 
In recording its own deepest sense of loss and 
bereavement, this Assembly expresses its most sincere 
sympathy to the members of the bereaving family. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
[15:00] 
 
The Speaker: — Will the House take the motion by the Deputy 
Premier as read? I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you. I rise to join with the Deputy 
Premier in paying tribute to Robert Pickering. Mr. Pickering 
was an avid and skilled curler, participating in four consecutive 
provincial championship winning teams and representing 
Saskatchewan in six Brier tournaments. 
 
As one of the tributes in his obituary said, “It was always a 
thrill to watch PeeWee curl. Who could ever forget that 
backswing of his?” That legendary backswing of his and his 
many other curling skills landed Mr. Pickering an induction into 
Canada’s Curling Hall of Fame in 1974. 
 
He served the constituency of Bengough-Milestone for the 
Progressive Conservative Party from 1978 to 1991, and he was 
the Minister of Rural Affairs, Minister of Rural Development, 
and Minister of Parks and Renewable Resources. 
 
Today we pay tribute to Robert Pickering and we thank him for 

his service to the people of Saskatchewan. And we express our 
deepest sympathies to his wife, Dorothy, his daughters Laurie, 
Pattie, and Sheri, and their families. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a few comments in 
regards to Mr. Pickering. Mr. Speaker, when I was elected in 
’86, Bob was here as a minister. And I remember, what I 
remember of Bob Pickering was coming to this Assembly. 
What I knew of him prior to my election was just following the 
curling. It was, in those days, you kind of took a real interest. 
We had the Richardsons. We had Bob Pickering. And as just a 
rural member and an individual, you followed curling quite 
extensively because we had, over a period of years, we had 
some sound representation on the national level from this 
province, and Bob was one of those individuals. 
 
Of course I didn’t know Bob that well until I got elected. And 
as the member from Indian Head-Milestone had indicated 
earlier, what I remember of Bob, I came in and I was kind of 
looking up to him because, well, here’s this gentleman who’s 
known as a national curler. Now he’s an elected representative, 
and kind of sought out Bob to get a little advice as to what it 
was that really impressed you and how he could . . . how I could 
look to him for some advice as what I should do now as an 
elected member. 
 
And quite interestingly enough, as the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone had mentioned, if you started talking farming 
and a little bit of sports, then you got to know the man a lot 
more. That was almost what was more important and more on 
his mind than really what it was to sit around in this Legislative 
Assembly. However he did speak highly of his time, the time he 
spent in the Legislative Assembly. And he didn’t brag a lot 
about whether he was minister or not. He had an opportunity to 
represent the people of his constituency. And he wasn’t very 
outspoken about it; he just did his job to the best of his ability. 
 
And basically I think, if I recall, he said, just be a good 
representative. Listen to people. And you don’t have to be out 
there, seen a lot of times in the public, but just listen to people. 
And that’s what I remember from Bob Pickering, the man who 
was a farmer, who was a curler, who became an elected 
member of this Legislative Assembly, and I believe he served 
his constituents and the people of this province well. And it was 
a privilege and an honour to have been a colleague of his in that 
period, ’86 to ’91. 
 
So I just wanted to extend my condolences and appreciation to, 
condolences to Dorothy and the family and to say thank you for 
allowing your husband, your father, to be an elected member of 
this province, who we look back on now. And many people 
across this province are saying thank you, Mr. Pickering, for the 
time and effort you put into being a member of the Legislative 
Assembly here in the province of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is that, by 
the Deputy Premier: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 



November 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7763 

made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 

 
Robert “Bob” Pickering, who passed away on June 24th, 
2015 at the age of 82, was a member of this Legislative 
Assembly from 1978 until 1991, representing the 
constituency of Bengough-Milestone for the Progressive 
Conservative Party. He served on many committees 
including Agriculture, Privileges and Elections, Public 
Accounts, and Crown Corporations committees. Bob also 
served as the Minister of Rural Affairs, Minister of Rural 
Development, and Minister of Parks and Renewable 
Resources. 
 
Mr. Pickering was born on September 19, 1932 in Wilcox, 
Saskatchewan. He was a grain farmer and a skilled curler. 
He was inducted into the Canadian Curling Hall of Fame in 
1974 for his participation in six Briers. 
 
Mr. Pickering is survived and sadly missed by his wife, 
Dorothy, and his daughters Laurie, Pattie, and Sheri, as 
well as their families. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 

Joan Duncan 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before I 
again move this motion regarding the passing of Joan Duncan, 
former MLA, a couple of words. Just one story that I had 
regarding Joan. 
 
I got to know her just very, very briefly, kind of near the end of 
her career when I was going to some conventions. And I always 
remember meeting her and thinking what a strong woman she 
was. Especially to be serving, you know, as one of the early 
women in cabinet, what a strong woman she was, but also 
coming from Maple Creek, so far away from the city. And I had 
a bit of a respect for her at that time, but it certainly became 
greater. 
 
Once you serve in this House and you realize the pressures, 
number one, to be in the capital city as a minister and as a 
representative, but also those draws and ties back to your 
constituency . . . I don’t think she could serve further away, 
serve in an area further away — and the member may speak 
about this — but further away from the capital city as Maple 
Creek and still be in southern Saskatchewan. 
 
So she did great work again for the people of Maple Creek, but 
more importantly some of her portfolios were very important 
and a major change through those years, and did a great job not 
only for the people of Maple Creek but, as I was going to say, 
for the province of Saskatchewan. I’d just like to read the 
motion now, Mr. Speaker: 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of the former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution she 
made to her community, her constituency, and the 
province. 
 
Joan Duncan, who passed away on September 23rd, 2015 
was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 1978 
until 1991 representing the constituency of Maple Creek 
for the Progressive Conservative Party. Ms. Duncan, along 
with one other member, were the first female cabinet 
ministers appointed in Saskatchewan history. Ms. Duncan 
held many ministerial positions during her term, such as 
Minister of Government Services, Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs, Co-operation and Co-operative 
Development, and Economic Development and Tourism. 
 
Ms. Duncan was born on October 30th, 1941 in Cudworth, 
Saskatchewan. She attended primary and secondary school 
in Wakaw and then studied pharmacy at the University of 
Saskatchewan. She and her husband, John, owned and 
operated Duncan’s Drugs in Maple Creek. Ms. Duncan is 
survived and sadly missed by her husband, John, their four 
children, William, Heather, Richard, and Michael, and 
their families. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — Will the Assembly take the motion read by 
the Deputy Premier as read? I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you. I rise to join with the Deputy 
Premier in paying tribute to Joan Duncan. Ms. Duncan was a 
trailblazer for women in politics here in Saskatchewan. In 1978, 
Ms. Duncan was the only woman elected to the legislature. 
Today that’s hard to fathom, although we know we have a long 
way to go to achieve gender parity in this Assembly. 
 
A 1982 article in the Saskatoon StarPhoenix said, “Joan 
Duncan, the only woman in the Saskatchewan legislature, has 
earned a reputation as one of the toughest opposition members.” 
Ms. Duncan and her colleague Patricia Smith of Swift Current 
were the first women to be appointed to cabinet. She served as 
Minister of Government Services, Minister of Consumer and 
Commercial Affairs, Minister of Co-operation and Co-operative 
Development, and Minister of Economic Development and 
Tourism. Recalling her swearing-in, Ms. Duncan said: 
 

I was overwhelmed. I had never seen the cabinet room and 
I was simply awestruck. Here I was, one of the 64 MLAs, 
and yet I was also one of the 16 who were given such 
enormous responsibilities.  

 
Today we pay tribute to Joan Duncan and we thank her for her 
service to the people of Saskatchewan. And we express our 
deepest sympathies to her husband, John, their four children, 
William, Heather, Richard, and Michael, and their families. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



7764 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2015 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the sixteen and a 
half years I’ve been in this legislature, I’ve never been required 
to participate in these condolence motions, and it’s with a bit of 
mixed emotions I think that I do that now. 
 
Joan Duncan was a trailblazer, as has been indicated already. 
She set a pretty high standard for subsequent MLAs to meet in 
terms of constituent representation. And in fact I understand 
that her victory parties were known throughout the Southwest 
and were often attended by Liberals who had lost the election. 
And so maybe that was the genesis of the Saskatchewan Party 
informally then. I’m not sure. But Joan had a real reputation of 
being able to connect with constituents, and I think the loss of 
her now will be felt by many people who were close to her on a 
personal level and many more who were close to her on a 
political level. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I didn’t know Joan personally. I met her for the 
first time when I was knocking on doors in Maple Creek in the 
2011 election and she invited myself in, and I think I had one 
other person with me at that time. And she was just full of 
curiosity, inquisitive as could be as to how the election was 
going and who was doing what and where the government was 
going to go on this or that particular initiative. She was very 
alert and bright, although she was confined to home for most of 
the time and was not outdoors and socializing as frequently and 
as readily as she would have liked, I’m sure. 
 
I did get to meet her husband, John, though. He ran the 
drugstore in Maple Creek — or one of them — Duncan’s 
Pharmacy. After Joan had taken her leave from the business, he 
was there, and he was a very reliable and faithful pharmacist. 
People had come to depend on him, and he had an obligation 
toward them that I’d hardly ever seen actually in a pharmacist 
previously. 
 
So when I’d wander into the store . . . When I’d visit Maple 
Creek, I’d often go up and down Main Street and talk to various 
people, business owners and operators. I invariably came to 
Duncan’s Pharmacy because I knew John would be an engaging 
conversation partner. But I always had to wait to talk to him 
until he had finished filling every prescription that was on his 
desk or in the hands of the people standing in front of me. And 
so I got to the point where I either came very early in the 
morning or very late at night because I lost a little bit too much 
time there waiting to have that conversation with John. 
 
You know, as the Deputy Premier referenced, it is a tough life 
where you have to balance your responsibilities to the public, 
and in Joan’s case to her government through a cabinet 
portfolio, and to your family and your community. 
 
[15:15] 
 
And Maple Creek is roughly 400 kilometres from the city of 
Regina, so if she made that trip every week as I do, I know what 
kind of a toll it would take on her physically. And the demands 
of the job, being such as they were, would have created even 
more pressure on her. And I think that the way that she was able 
to serve and the length of time she was able to serve speaks 
highly of her commitment and her motivation to serve the 

people of, at that time, the constituency of Maple Creek. 
 
The constituency today, Cypress Hills, makes up part of . . . is 
made up part of the constituency of Maple Creek and the former 
constituency of Shaunavon. So out of those two areas that are 
sort of all tied together in Cypress Hills right now, there are still 
at least three, maybe four MLAs residing there just waiting to 
make trouble for the next MLA that comes along. 
 
But I think that one of the things I can honestly say is that I 
never felt like I was being put under the microscope of 
inspection by the Duncan family. They were curious, they were 
interested, and they were really conversant in the politics of the 
day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to read into the record the obituary that 
appeared in the paper, if I may. I was just going through the 
paper one day and opened it up quite accidentally and found 
this obituary. It took me by surprise as I didn’t realize that Joan 
had developed such serious health issues. But it says here that: 
 

With her family by her side, Joan Duncan died peacefully 
in the Maple Creek hospital on Wednesday, September 23, 
2015. A funeral service to celebrate Joan’s life was held 
Friday, October 2 at the Maple Creek Armoury. 
 
Joan was born to John and Edna Tratch October 30, 1941 
in Saskatoon and raised in Wakaw. She was the protector 
of her three sisters and the ringleader for their childhood 
adventures. Her idyllic childhood gave her the foundation 
that allowed her to grow into a strong and wise woman. 
 
Joan moved to Saskatoon in 1961 to go to university where 
she met John, the love of her life. The only thing that 
worried her was how young he looked and that people 
would think she was dating a teenager. John moved to 
Maple Creek to work as a pharmacist and Joan joined him 
there after they were married. 
 
She immersed herself in the community, teaching Sunday 
School and leading Canadian Girls in Training. She was an 
avid curler and golfer and attended many Saskatchewan 
Roughrider games. Joan loved to cook and was never 
afraid to take on a challenge in the kitchen. Her traditional 
New Year’s Eve fondue was legendary among family and 
friends. She was proud of her Ukrainian heritage and for 
years cooked the 12 Ukrainian time-honoured Christmas 
Eve dishes. 
 
Joan’s family and home were her life. Joan managed a very 
lively household and liked nothing better than taking care 
of John and their four kids. During these busy years she 
was a hockey- and figure-skating mom, a tutor, a 
taskmaster and a committed homemaker. She could be on 
the road driving kids to hockey, taking Richie to the 
hospital to get his broken arm fixed. She might be baking 
something for a friend’s shower, babysitting someone’s 
kids or helping Heather do her homework. These things 
were her greatest joy. 
 
Joan was elected, as was indicated, to the legislature in 
1978, and she was one of the first women to serve in 
cabinet. I believe the other woman at the time was Pat 



November 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7765 

Smith, who was elected in the constituency of Swift 
Current. 
 
Joan was a committed MLA and took very good care of 
her constituents. She met with everyone who ever wanted 
to see her, and on occasion she made sure someone got fed 
or taken to the hospital or to the Salvation Army if that was 
needed. Joan worked hard and the exhaustion, politics, and 
long hours took its toll, but her sense of purpose never 
wavered. 
 
She was greatly respected by the area ranchers and 
farmers. She had many friends from all over the province, 
but her heart was always in Maple Creek. She loved its 
open countryside, its sunrises and sunsets, and how each 
season had its own special smell. And she loved the sage 
that grew on the sandy soil between Maple Creek and 
Piapot, the Cypress Hills, her house on the corner, and 
John’s garden. 

 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all the constituents of Cypress Hills 
and the former Maple Creek constituency, I offer my 
condolences to the family of Joan Duncan. May she rest in 
peace. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just to add a few more 
comments in regards to the condolence motion we have before 
us for Joan Duncan. 
 
Joan was also another one of those members that was there 
when I was first elected as well in 1986. And while the member 
we spoke about earlier, Mr. Pickering, was maybe a little more 
soft spoken in the Chamber, Joan Duncan was anything but. 
She was a feisty, feisty individual, and if the opposition were 
raising a question and it was directed in her direction, she 
usually had some kind of very . . . She could get up and start 
softly, somewhat like the member from Canora, but it wasn’t 
long before she got quite feistier in in her responses to 
members’ questions. And I found that quite interesting.  
 
I might also add that back in ’86 this Assembly was a lot more 
raucous than it is over the last few years. And so if you were a 
minister, you stood up and you not only spoke for your caucus 
colleagues and your responsibilities but for the people you 
represented — your constituents. And Joan, I would say, did 
that very well as did Pat Smith. And there again, there was quite 
a contrast between Pat Smith who was the member from Swift 
Current. She could be very, being that teacher type, not the 
feisty voice, but she could stand up and do it in a more direct 
manner, put you in your place. But Joan, like I said, was very 
feisty. 
 
I really appreciated Joan. Whether it was in caucus or whether it 
was in the Chamber or even just to meet with her as an 
individual, she was an individual you could approach. You 
knew you could sit down, have a chat with her, and you could 
get some advice from her days in the Chamber — prior to my 
involvement — and very good advice as to how you should 
handle yourself as an MLA. And I really appreciated Joan for 
that. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I also might mention that we didn’t have a 
calendar in those days. When I was first elected that ’87 term, 
that ’88 term, both went well into the fall. From the spring well 
into the fall we sat and, as a result of that, those were long, long 
days. We sat Monday to Friday with Mondays, Tuesdays, and 
Thursdays being 10 o’clock days, those long days. And of 
course when you’re on the government side of the House and 
you’re the backbencher, you don’t get to have a lot of 
participation. All committee work was done on the floor of the 
Chamber. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I was mentioning this, there was a real bond 
that began to be built between members, not just the 
backbenchers, but even cabinet ministers. One thing I 
appreciated, Mr. Speaker, was the fact that as backbenchers, 
there were times, you know you’re part of the larger team, but 
you almost felt left out. And Joan Duncan was always good at 
saying as we would recess for the 5 to 7 period, she’d come to a 
number of us as MLAs and say, where are you going for 
supper? I’ll join you, as did Mr. Taylor. They were very good at 
doing that, and you’d just . . . made you feel more a part of the 
team. So I appreciate that. 
 
I also recall one time where Joan on a trip, a ministerial trip out 
to the East Coast, just made arrangements to actually have live 
lobster shipped back to the province so we could at least have a 
barbecue in her back yard. That was another team-building 
experience. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, as we reflect back on some of these 
individuals — and in my case I had the privilege of knowing 
them as a colleague — there are a lot of good memories you 
have. And you could see, and it’s gone through the years, you 
can see how each individual member, how they represented 
their constituents. And you drew on that, even as you observed 
their manners and how they worked in the House, the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it truly was an honour to serve with Ms. 
Duncan. And I want to say to John and her family — as I got to 
know John, not that well but I did know him — I want to extend 
my condolences as well and just say thank you for having had 
the privilege. First of all, you were willing to share your wife 
and your mother while she spent time here; but also as a 
member, I had the privilege of getting to work with her, getting 
to know her. And I just want to say thank you and would extend 
my condolences on the passing of Joan Duncan. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — On the motion by the Deputy Premier: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution she 
made to her community, her constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Joan Duncan, who passed away on September 23rd, 2015, 
was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 1978 
until 1991, representing the constituency of Maple Creek 
for the Progressive Conservative Party. Ms. Duncan, along 
with one other member, were the first female cabinet 
ministers appointed in Saskatchewan history. 



7766 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2015 

Ms. Duncan held many ministerial positions during her 
term such as Minister of Government Services, Consumer 
and Corporate Affairs, Co-operative and Co-operative 
Development, and Economic Development and Tourism. 
 
Ms. Duncan was born on October 30th, 1941 in Cudworth, 
Saskatchewan. She attended primary and secondary school 
in Wakaw, then studied pharmacy at the University of 
Saskatchewan. She and her husband John owned and 
operated Duncan’s Drugs in Maple Creek. Ms. Duncan is 
survived and sadly missed by her husband, John, their four 
children, William, Heather, Richard, and Michael, and 
their families. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 

Mary John Batten 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I wish to move: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and express 
its grateful appreciation of the contribution she made to her 
community, her constituency, and to the province. 
 
Mary John Batten, who passed away on October 9th, 
2015, was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 
1956 until 1964, representing the constituency of 
Humboldt for the Liberal Party. 
 
Ms. Batten was born in Sifton, Manitoba in 1921. She 
attended the University of Saskatchewan and earned her 
Bachelor of Arts and Bachelor of Law degree in 1941 and 
1942, respectively. She articled at the firm of Diefenbaker 
and Cuelenaere in Prince Albert and was called to the bar 
in 1944. 
 
After her departure from the Legislative Assembly, she 
was appointed to the District Court in Saskatoon. She was 
the first woman to hold a federal judicial appointment in 
Saskatchewan. From 1966 to 1968 she chaired two Royal 
Commissions: the Prairie Provinces Cost Study 
Commission and the Public Accountancy Commission. In 
1980, Ms. Batten was appointed to the Court of Queen’s 
Bench for Saskatchewan. She was appointed the first 
female Chief Justice on June 30, 1983. She held that 
appointment until her retirement in 1989. 
 
The Honourable Mary Batten is survived and sadly missed 
by her four children, Dick, Justine, Trish, and Jyll, as well 
as many grandchildren and great-grandchildren. 
 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
the Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to the 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — On the motion by the Deputy Premier, will 
the Assembly take it as read? I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to join with the 
Deputy Premier in paying tribute to the Hon. Mary Batten. Ms. 
Batten was a leader among a small number of women in politics 
and the legal profession. She received a law degree from the 
University of Saskatchewan in 1942 and was called to the bar in 
1944. 
 
She was elected to this Assembly in 1956 and served here as a 
Liberal MLA until 1964. Ms. Batten was the first woman of 
Ukrainian origin to be elected to a Canadian legislature. For a 
time she was the only lawyer and the only woman on the 
opposition side of this Assembly, and she was known for her 
vigorous debating skills and the strength of the opposition she 
provided. 
 
Ms. Batten was a strong advocate for women’s involvement in 
politics. As an MLA, she did speaking tours reaching out to 
women’s groups and organizations, encouraging women to 
become involved in and to utilize their talents to their fullest 
potential, despite social pressures, and she played an integral 
role in pushing for the strengthening of women’s legal rights. 
 
[15:30] 
 
In a presentation to the Regina Business and Professional 
Women’s Club in 1961, she called for steps to be taken to 
amend laws around marriage in order to protect women and 
children in the event of a separation or divorce. 
 
After her departure from this legislature in 1964, Ms. Batten 
went on to serve as a district court judge and chair two Royal 
Commissions. In 1983, she became our first woman Chief 
Justice and she served in that role until 1989. 
 
Today we pay tribute to the Hon. Mary Batten and we thank her 
for her service as an MLA, as our Chief Justice, and as a 
trailblazer for women in politics and law. And we express our 
deepest sympathies to her four children, Dick, Justine, Trish, 
Jyll, and their families. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mary Batten 
was born August 30th, 1921 in Sifton, Manitoba. She attended 
the University of Saskatchewan where she earned degrees in 
both arts and law. Mary served as an articling student under 
future Prime Minister John Diefenbaker and was accepted into 
the Saskatchewan bar in 1945. 
 
Following her acceptance to the bar, Mary then settled in 
Humboldt where she would marry Charles Batten. In Humboldt 
she quickly established herself as a strong community leader as 
she became very active in a variety of community 



November 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7767 

organizations. Here she would become a partner with Batten, 
Fodchuk, and Batten in Wadena and Humboldt in 1964. 
 
In 1956, 11 years after being accepted to the Saskatchewan bar, 
Mary decided to put her passion for politics to use and decided 
to run for public office in the constituency of Humboldt for the 
Liberal Party. Here she was successful in narrowly defeating 
the incumbent CCF cabinet minister, Joseph Burton. This 
historic election victory meant that Mary would not only 
become one of the first women elected to the legislature, she 
would also become the first Ukrainian Canadian woman to be 
elected to a provincial parliament. 
 
While serving in opposition, Mary was chosen to serve in the 
high-profile position of the province’s Justice critic. Soon after 
taking office, she became a vocal critic of party leader Hammy 
McDonald. She is often seen as being instrumental in 
precipitating McDonald’s resignation, which would lead to the 
leadership convention that elected future Premier Ross 
Thatcher. 
 
Mary Batten would serve in public office for two terms before 
moving on to further her career in law. Shortly after serving out 
her second term in office, Mary became the second woman to 
receive a federal government appointment to the judiciary in 
Canada. While serving as a judge, Mary was asked to chair two 
provincial Royal Commissions — in 1966 on accounting 
practices, and in 1968 on the cost of living. Mary’s excellence 
as a judge was recognized by many and in 1983 she earned the 
appointment as the first female Chief Justice in Saskatchewan. 
Mary would continue serving the court for another seven years 
as Chief Justice until her retirement from the courts in 1990. 
Her retirement came after spending an extremely successful 26 
years as a judge. 
 
Mary continued to tirelessly serve her community throughout 
her career, by volunteering with many different community 
organizations. She was a member of the board of directors of 
the Vanier Family Institute, and the Regional Psychiatric Centre 
in Saskatoon. She was also a member of the Canadian 
Consumer Council and the Saskatchewan Science Council. As 
one of the earliest women elected to the legislature and one of 
the first female judges in the province and the first female Chief 
Justice in Saskatchewan history, Mary Batten was instrumental 
in helping to remove barriers to women in society’s highest 
public offices. Mary was survived by four children, nine 
grandchildren, nine great-grandchildren, a brother, a niece, and 
a nephew. 
 
Mary Batten excelled in everything she did, and she will be 
sincerely remembered as a great role model for generations to 
come. The constituents of Humboldt join this Assembly in 
expressing its most sincere sympathy to the members of this 
bereaved family. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 
wanted to briefly join the debate here on the motion of 
condolence for Mary John Batten to add my voice to those that 
mark the passing of a real towering figure in Saskatchewan 
politics and certainly in Saskatchewan legal circles. 
 

I’ve had the pleasure of meeting Mary a couple of different 
times in my life. And I guess I just want to note, in addition to 
the good things that have been said about Mary in terms of 
being a trailblazer both in politics and in legal circles, when she 
won — as has been pointed out by the member from Humboldt 
— when she won in Humboldt in 1956, she was beating Joe 
Burton who was also something of a trailblazer in 
Saskatchewan politics in bringing the CCF cause forward with 
the very important German Catholic vote, and with Catholics 
generally across the province. So one towering figure to another 
certainly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I’d met Mary Batten, as I know various of my colleagues 
have — and we’ll perhaps hear a bit more about this from my 
colleague, the member from Lakeview — as the mother of 
Trish, who is of course the partner of our colleague Clay Serby, 
and certainly someone that I very much enjoyed serving with 
and did a lot for the public life of this province. But Trish was a 
very big part of that, and that Batten touch certainly I know 
figured a lot in the work that Clay was able to do on behalf of 
the people of Saskatchewan. So I’ve had the pleasure to have 
met Trish. 
 
And certainly this is also a lesser-known fact, but Dick, one of 
Mary’s sons, would be recruited to play for the NDP hockey 
team back when we were winning a bit more consistently, Mr. 
Speaker, despite the best efforts for the member from 
Rosemont, and her grandson, David. So it was always a good 
time to socialize and to get to know a bit about the Batten 
family. 
 
But it’s to them in particular that I want to say, we’re sorry to 
see the passing of Mary, but what a tremendous life. What a 
legacy. And to the Batten family, we express our sincere 
condolences. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to express my 
condolences also to the Batten family on the death of Chief 
Justice Mary Batten. I first knew her as a young lawyer 
appearing in court. And she was often the one that was probably 
most generous with younger lawyers and listened carefully to 
arguments and basically was somebody that you really liked to 
get as a judge. And when she then was appointed the Chief 
Justice, that sent a signal I think through the whole legal system 
here in Saskatchewan that there was going to be a change. And 
she was that, I think, generous change that was, I think, 
important for the legal system here. She was subsequently 
succeeded by my old law partner, Chief Justice Donald 
MacPherson. 
 
So when I became the attorney general in 1995, one of my tasks 
was to go to the courthouse in Saskatoon for various judicial 
events, and Chief Justice Mary Batten was always there, at that 
point serving in a supernumerary role, but still hearing cases. 
And she was one who was very quick to come and speak to me 
and spend time asking about politics because no matter how 
many years she had at the bench, what was happening in the 
legislature and what was happening in the world of politics in 
Saskatchewan was a very important part of her life. 
 
I also knew Dick Batten as a lawyer that I dealt with in various 



7768 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2015 

places. So then later when I came to be here in the legislature 
and met Trish through our colleague Clay Serby, I also then had 
a chance to visit with Mary Batten when she was fully retired. 
And she continued to have that keen interest in politics, which 
I’m sure she kept right until the end because she was very much 
in the forefront of developing many of the things that happened 
here in this legislature. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to express my condolences to all the 
members of the extended Batten family and say thank you very 
much for Chief Justice Mary Batten’s service. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution she 
made to her community, her constituency, and to the 
province. 

 
Mary John Batten, who passed away on October 9, 2015, 
was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 1956 
until 1964, representing the constituency of Humboldt for 
the Liberal Party. 

 
Ms. Batten was born in Sifton, Manitoba in 1921. She 
attended the University of Saskatchewan and earned a 
Bachelor of Arts degree and a Bachelor of Law degree in 
1941 and ’42 respectively. She articled at the firm of 
Diefenbaker and Cuelenaere in Prince Albert and was 
called to the bar in 1944. 
 
After her departure from the Legislative Assembly, she 
was appointed to the District Court in Saskatoon. She was 
the first woman to hold a federal judicial appointment in 
Saskatchewan. From 1966 to 1968 she chaired two Royal 
Commissions, the Prairie Provinces Cost Study 
Commission and the Public Accountancy Commission. In 
1980, Ms. Batten was appointed to the Court of Queen’s 
Bench for Saskatchewan. She was appointed the first 
female Chief Justice in June 1983. She held that 
appointment until her retirement in 1989. 
 
The Honourable Mary Batten is survived and sadly missed 
by her four children, Dick, Justine, Trish, and Jyll, as well 
as many grandchildren and great-grandchildren. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 

Norman Vickar 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to move a motion: 
 

That this Assembly record with sorrow and regret the 

passing of a former member of this Assembly and express 
its grateful appreciation of the contributions he made to his 
community, his constituency, and the province. 
 
Norman Vickar, who passed away on October 17th, 2015 
at the age of 98, was a member of the Legislative 
Assembly from 1975 until 1982, representing the 
constituency of Melfort for the New Democratic Party. He 
served as the Minister of Industry and Commerce. 
 
Mr. Vickar was born in 1917 in the farming community of 
Edenbridge. Prior to becoming a Member of the 
Legislative Assembly, Mr. Vickar owned a car dealership 
with his two brothers. He was deeply involved in his 
community, serving as town councillor and mayor of 
Melfort. 
 
Mr. Vickar is survived and sadly missed by his wife of 68 
years, Florence; their children, Larry, Reva, and Faye; their 
spouses; their many grandchildren and great-grandchildren. 
 
In recording its own deep sympathy of loss and 
bereavement, this Assembly expresses most sincere 
sympathy to members of the bereaving family. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — Will the Assembly take the motion by the 
Deputy Premier as read? I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to join with the 
Deputy Premier in paying tribute to Norman Vickar. Mr. Vickar 
was elected to this Assembly as a New Democrat MLA in 1975. 
In his maiden speech he said this: 
 

This government continues the tradition of the party 
founded on the basis of concern for our fellow man. I am 
proud beyond measure to know that the concern for our 
fellow man and an attempt to better the lot for all is one 
principle which has not been cast aside by our government. 
It is often very simple and indeed tempting, Mr. Speaker, 
for a political party to forget those less fortunate when they 
gain the mantle of power. In our modern age it is too easy 
to forget those who, through no fault of their own, suffer 
economic, social, or physical handicap. I am proud and 
deeply honoured to be part of a government that has not 
forgotten. 

 
Concern for the common good and looking out for one another 
was a key value for Norman Vickar, and he lived that out as an 
MLA. Norman was the second Jewish member to be elected to 
the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly, and he was devoted to 
the Jewish community, including as president of the Jewish 
National Fund for Saskatchewan and Manitoba. He served as a 
town councillor and even mayor of Melfort; in recognition of 
his service, the government building in Melfort was named the 
Norman Vickar Building. 
 
[15:45] 
 
His family described Norman as the glue that kept his large 
family together, and they say he was happiest when he was 



November 23, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7769 

surrounded by his children, grandchildren, and 
great-grandchildren. In his final days, Norman was able to 
fulfill one of his final wishes to be able to vote in the federal 
election, and one of his last requests was a simple call to his 
children to “take care of mom.” 
 
Today we pay tribute to Norman Vickar. We thank him for his 
service to the New Democratic Party and especially to the 
people of Saskatchewan. And we express our deepest 
condolences to his wife, Florence, their children, Larry, Reva, 
and Faye, and their families. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Melfort. 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
rise in the House to pay respects to the late Norman Vickar, 
who served as MLA for the Melfort constituency for two terms 
and was the Minister of Industry and Commerce. It is with great 
sadness that Norman’s family announced his passing on 
October 17th, 2015, at the age of 98 years. 
 
Born and raised in Edenbridge, Saskatchewan, just north of 
Melfort, Norman was an active member of his community. He 
was president of the Hebrew Congregation B’nai B’rith, 
Melfort Rotary Club, Elks Lodge, and the Melfort Board of 
Trade. Norman also served as a town councillor for Melfort, 
followed by four years as mayor of our community, and I 
believe it was during those four years that Melfort became the 
city of Melfort. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1983 Norman moved to Manitoba, giving up 
his full-time job to become a full-time volunteer. He worked 
with Meals on Wheels, the Winnipeg Jewish National Fund, 
Shaarey Zedek Synagogue, and the Jewish Heritage Centre. 
 
I find it hard to believe, Mr. Speaker, that it was 1983 when he 
left our community. I moved there in 1972, and it seemed to me 
that it was a much longer time that he was there while I was 
there. But he continued over the years, since 1983, to visit very 
often, and it seemed like we would be in the same room often. 
 
He is remembered as a remarkable role model to his family, to 
his children, to his grandchildren and, as was mentioned, he was 
always happiest when he was around his children. Mr. Speaker, 
on a personal note, Norm was a leader in our community. He 
was a businessman. He was a volunteer, mayor, and MLA. 
Over the years I had a great deal of contact with Norm through 
business and with many other different events and projects 
around the community. Norm was a person who never forgot 
where he came from, whether it be Edenbridge or Melfort. In 
fact, the entire Vickar family is like that. They have always 
given back to the community. 
 
Whenever I had the opportunity to be in the same room with 
Norm, we would spend some time talking. The first couple of 
minutes would be maybe a little bit about politics, Sask Party 
versus the NDP. But once we got over that and we agreed to 
disagree on that, we would talk about community and we would 
talk about family, the real important things in life. 
 
Norm was a mentor to me when I held the office of mayor, as 
he was progressive and he was aggressive, traits that I believe 
are very important to be effective in that office. Norm was 

always willing to listen and to give advice when asked. It’s 
been over a year since I last talked to Norm, over a year since 
we gave each other some good-natured ribbing. I will miss him. 
The community will miss him. 
 
Our condolences to his wife of 68 years, Florence, who is a 
wonderful lady in herself, his children Larry, Reva, and Faye, 
and his brother Harry and all their families. May you rest in 
peace. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to add my 
words of condolences to the Vickar family as well. In the 
middle ’60s, our family ended up acquiring a farm not too far 
from Melfort, and in that area it was always a good sign when 
you saw the Vickar Motors sticker on the back of a car. So 
that’s my first memory of that name. But subsequently he ended 
up obviously providing great leadership to our province during 
the time of the Blakeney government. 
 
One of the places in Saskatchewan that captures one, and you 
don’t forget it, is to go to Edenbridge, to the synagogue and to 
the Hebrew cemetery. And very much, it’s been stated here 
today, that that place and that institution is in a huge part thanks 
to the Vickar family. 
 
A few years ago, actually 2010, our library got a book called 
Coming of Age: A History of the Jewish People of Manitoba. 
And as the member from Melfort said, Mr. Norm Vickar moved 
to Manitoba in 1983, but much of his family have strong 
connections there. But one of the things that is stated in this 
book is about the fact that Norm was the brother who was able 
to get into politics. And so I’ll read a quote here that I think 
identifies why he was so successful, and this on page 89 of this 
book: “Resolute and sociable, he was a natural politician. His 
values, he told author Erna Paris in 1980, were ‘Vickar values: 
ambition, hard work, and determination.’” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that that brief description that he gave of 
himself, I think, was true of all members of the Vickar family. 
 
It’s interesting to understand in this book — and it provides a 
history of the Vickar family — is that they actually moved to 
that place just north of Melfort from South Africa. They had 
moved from Lithuania to South Africa, four years down there, 
and then came to Saskatchewan to be farmers. And it’s, I think, 
a testament to the family and to Norm that he was the one then 
that ended up in politics in Saskatchewan, living out the dream 
of his father and uncles and continuing a legacy of service to 
the community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many people in Saskatchewan have these histories 
of working hard to build our province, and I would say thank 
you to the Vickar family and my condolences to them. Mr. 
Norm Vickar lived a good life, and he did a great job for 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I ask for leave to move a motion of transmittal. 
 



7770 Saskatchewan Hansard November 23, 2015 

The Speaker: — The motion before the Assembly is: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Norman Vickar, who passed away on October 17th, 2015 
at the age of 98, was a member of this Legislative 
Assembly from 1975 until 1982. He represented the 
constituency of Melfort for the New Democratic Party. He 
served as the minister of Industry and Commerce. 
 
Mr. Vickar was born in 1917 in the farming community of 
Edenbridge. Prior to becoming a member of the Legislative 
Assembly, Mr. Vickar owned a car dealership with his two 
brothers. He was deeply involved in his community, 
serving as town councillor and mayor of Melfort. 
 
Mr. Vickar is survived and sadly missed by his wife of 68 
years, Florence, their children, Larry, Reva, and Faye, their 
spouses, their many grandchildren, and 
great-grandchildren. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I ask for leave to move a motion of transmittal. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to move a motion of transmittal. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 8(2) of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 
transmit an audio/video record of the tributes, together 
with the verbatim record and the Votes and Proceedings, to 
the bereaved families in memory of the deceased members. 

 
I so shall move. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 8(2) of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 

transmit an audio/video record of the tributes, together 
with the verbatim record and the Votes and Proceedings, to 
the bereaved families in memory of the deceased members. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned to 1:30 p.m. 
tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:57.] 
 
 



 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7747 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7747 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7748 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7748 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7748 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7748 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7748 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7749 
  Draude ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7749 
  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7749 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7749 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7749 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7750 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7750 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7750 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 45th Canadian Western Agribition Begins 
  Bjornerud ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7750 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7750 
 Canadian Agricultural Hall of Fame Induction Ceremony 
  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7751 
 Saskatoon Symphony’s 85th Anniversary Gala 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7751 
 Long-Term Care Home Opens in Tisdale 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7751 
 Safe Homes for Single Mothers 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7752 
 Saskatchewan Film Week 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7752 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Surgical Wait Times and Provision of Health Care 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7752 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7752 
 Provision of Out-of-Province Medical Treatments 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7754 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7754 
 Emergency Room Wait Times 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 7755 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7755 
 Renewable Power Targets 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7756 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7756 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Renewable Electricity Targets for 2030 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7757 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7757 
CONDOLENCES 
 Adolph Sylvester Matsalla 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7758 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7758 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 7759 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7759 
 Robert Pickering 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7760 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7762 
  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7762 
 Joan Duncan 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7763 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7763 
  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7764 



 

  Toth .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7765 
 Mary John Batten 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7766 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7766 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7766 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7767 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7767 
 Norman Vickar 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7768 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7768 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7769 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7769 
  Cheveldayoff (transmittal motion) ........................................................................................................................................ 7770 
 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


