






















































Hansard: April 21, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 51A  TUESDAY, APRIL 21, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6961 
 April 21, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on Bill 611 — Requirement for a Royal 
Recommendation 

 
The Speaker: — Before introduction of guests, I have a 
statement regarding a ruling on Bill 611, requirement for a 
Royal Recommendation. Standing on the order paper for second 
reading under the name of the member for Saskatoon Centre is 
Bill No. 611, The Student Bill of Rights Act, 2015. The bill was 
introduced on April 16, 2015. 
 
It is the Speaker’s duty to review all bills with respect to rule 67 
of the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan. The rule states in part that any bill which 
proposes to impose any new or additional charge upon the 
public revenue must be first recommended by the Lieutenant 
Governor before it is considered by the Assembly. The practice 
in this Assembly is for bills to be introduced and read the first 
time, with further progress being contingent upon the Speaker 
affirming that they are in order under rule 67. In Saskatchewan 
practice, consideration is taken to mean the first opportunity for 
debate. Pursuant to rule 24(3), this bill could be designated for 
priority consideration today and taken up for second reading on 
Thursday. For this reason, it is necessary for me to rule today 
on the admissibility of this bill. 
 
When a private member proposes a public bill to the Assembly, 
the test is to determine if it imposes a new responsibility, task, 
or commitment on the government that requires expenditure 
from the public treasury. Bill No. 611 proposes a student bill of 
rights, which is set out in clause 3 and further defined by the 
interpretation clauses. Under The Education Act, 1995 the 
government is responsible for setting the operating grant for the 
provincial education system and in doing so is responsible for 
requiring compliance with any terms or conditions that may be 
imposed on a grant. In this regard, the minister has discretion to 
approve or reject any term or condition on funding. The bill 
limits that discretion, and in my view would impose a 
contingent liability on the government to meet the standards 
imposed by Bill No. 611, if it were to pass into law. It follows 
that it would be the duty of the government, through its 
responsibility to provide operating grants, to fund the costs 
connected with the imposition of the student bill of rights. 
 
Erskine May, 24th Edition, page 747, states that a Crown 
recommendation is required for “. . . any proposal whereby the 
Crown would incur a liability or a contingent liability payable 
out of money voted by Parliament.” May also states in the same 
section the following: 
 

If there is any doubt on the matter and it appears that the 
new proposal may entail an extension of previously 
enacted purposes of expenditure or an increase in the 
expenditure potentially liable to be incurred in pursuit of 
such a purpose, a Money resolution will be required. 

 
I have expressed my concern over the contingent liability that 

would result from the passage of Bill No. 611. For that reason I 
must rule that Bill No. 611 requires a Crown recommendation 
and because the member for Saskatoon Centre is not a member 
of the Executive Council, I must rule that the bill is out of order 
and direct that it be removed from the order paper. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would request leave of my colleagues in the legislature for an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker, and thanks 
to colleagues for the leave. I appreciate the chance to make 
some very special introductions of guests who have joined us 
today. 
 
It was a special day in the legislature when we were able to 
meet the recipients of this year’s Premier’s Commendation 
Awards, and I want to thank all of the members of the 
legislature on both sides of the House for attending the event 
and then the luncheon that followed thereafter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan, and dare I say really 
everywhere, we throw the word “hero” around pretty easily. 
And we should be mindful I think of the danger of debasing the 
coinage of that word, “hero.” Mr. Speaker, still even with that 
caution in mind, there is simply no other word that properly 
describes the people, the guests that I’m about to introduce and 
those that we had the chance to honour this morning at the 
ceremony for the Premier’s Commendation Awards. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, may I say at this point a word of thanks to 
the member for Wood River and the government’s military 
liaison for identifying a bit of a gap in the government’s, in the 
province of Saskatchewan’s awards and honours spectrum. We 
really didn’t have a way to recognize people who had stepped 
forward with a singular act of courage, and now we do. And I 
want to thank him for that idea passed to the government just a 
few years ago. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, let me introduce the guests and just say a 
quick word about why they would be here and receiving this 
citation, Mr. Speaker. And before I do that, let me acknowledge 
their family and friends that have joined them. Because this is 
obviously a . . . they, at least at that moment of courage whether 
they knew it or not, they were sharing a loved one, and 
sometimes in dangerous ways, with those who desperately 
needed help and therefore with all of us in Saskatchewan, so I 
want to thank them. 
 



6962 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2015 

I would ask, as I introduce and name each of the recipients, 
maybe they would just give us a wave so that we would know 
of whom we’re speaking and who’s being introduced. 
 
With us today is Travis Laycock of Saskatoon. Last July 19th, 
Travis rescued a couple whose car had left the road and became 
submerged in a deep slough. The incident occurred on Highway 
5 near Bruno. 
 
Also here with us today, Bill Nagel, the city of Regina. This 
February, Bill and his family were enjoying a ski vacation in 
Montana. This was where Bill came to the assistance of a 
four-year-old boy who had slipped from the chairlift and was in 
danger of falling nearly 40 feet to the ground. 
 
Darren and Chris Katzell are here today as well. Darren’s from 
Yorkton. Chris is from Saskatoon. This February the Katzell 
brothers saved a woman who was choking while eating in a 
food court in a Saskatoon mall. 
 
With us here as well are Blaine Switzer of Swift Current and 
Jonathan Thomason of Rush Lake. Mr. Speaker, we are 
honouring these gentlemen today retroactively because their 
actions actually took place before the advent of this particular 
commendation. But in October of 2011, Blaine and Jonathan 
helped rescue a woman trapped in a burning car after a highway 
accident. Blaine and Jonathan were assisted by a third man, 
Anthony Williams of Burlington, North Carolina. Sadly, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Williams passed away in 2013. He will receive the 
commendation posthumously in recognition of his exceptional 
bravery on that fateful day in October of 2011. And I have had 
the chance to call his dad and talk to him about the event, and 
let him know that his son would be receiving this 
commendation. 
 
And finally we are awarding the Premier’s Commendation in 
absentia to one of the best friends Saskatchewan has ever 
known. Bob McGrath, a fixture at Telemiracle for nearly 40 
years, announced at this year’s Telemiracle that this would be 
his last, that he would be retiring from the event. But, Mr. 
Speaker, we know just, we know the nature of his amazing 
contribution to Telemiracle to help raise over $100 million to 
assist Saskatchewan citizens who have very special needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s evident from the citations that were 
read this morning by the member for Wood River, and the 
summary that I just gave, that these are very worthy recipients 
of this commendation. And, Mr. Speaker, in addition to that 
award and in addition to the luncheon we had together, I would 
also ask all members to welcome them here to their Legislative 
Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the Premier in welcoming all of the recipients of these medals, 
and especially their families because, as you heard the brief 
stories about what happened to these people, you know that 
they put themselves into dangerous situations and it could have 
had drastic consequences for their family, and thankfully it 
didn’t. And so today we celebrate those acts of kindness, 
goodness that they have provided. So, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of 
the opposition, we greet these members and thank them and 

their families. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I request leave of the 
House for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave for an 
extended introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today it’s my distinct 
pleasure to introduce and welcome a very special guest to the 
province of Saskatchewan and to our legislature, Ms. Cecilia 
Villanueva, a Mexican consul for Alberta and Saskatchewan. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to welcome back to the 
legislature the Hon. Larry Schneider, honorary consul of 
Mexico, who resides here in Regina. 
 
This is Consul Villanueva’s first official visit to our province. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s noteworthy to mention that this is one of the 
newly appointed consul’s very first official visits since the 
consulate was established in July 2014. Now while in 
Saskatchewan, she will meet with the Lieutenant Governor, 
representatives from the University of Regina, and a number of 
government ministers and officials. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, earlier today the consul spoke at the 
business luncheon that was hosted by the Regina Chamber of 
Commerce. I think she had a pretty good turnout. I think she 
had a pretty good response. And from what I heard, the media 
was quite interested in what she had to say as well. 
 
No doubt when many people think of Mexico, their first 
thoughts would go to warm temperatures and wonderful sandy 
beaches, but there is a very strong relationship that has 
developed between Saskatchewan and Mexico on other 
situations, on other circumstances. Our country is more than 
just a friendship. It’s a growing business relationship as well. 
 
In 2015 we celebrated the 21st anniversary of the signing of the 
North American Free Trade Agreement between Canada, the 
US [United States] and Mexico. Since that time, in the 
intervening two decades, Saskatchewan trade with Mexico has 
grown more than five times while exports from Mexico to our 
great province have grown 42 times. Some of Saskatchewan’s 
top exports to Mexico include canola seed and canola oil, 
wheat, and of course potash. 
 
Saskatchewan’s top imports from Mexico — and this may be a 
bit of a surprise — include motor vehicles, passenger motor 
vehicles. Mexico has a very strong car industry now. They 
produce a lot of steel tubing and even tractors, which we may 
be starting to see in the fields sometime soon as seeding begins. 
The one thing they didn’t include on this list, which I’m certain 
we’re all familiar with, is the product Corona. It comes in a 
clear white bottle, and I’m told it is actually Mexico’s biggest 
export into Canada. 
 
We have had the pleasure recently of welcoming the 



April 21, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6963 

distinguished guest from the wonderful country of Mexico. The 
ambassador was here as part of our effort last fall to introduce 
Saskatchewan to the international community, and I remember 
in my conversation with the ambassador how excited he was 
about the prospects for further business developments and 
opportunities between our two jurisdictions. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, once again it’s my honour to introduce and 
welcome Ms. Villaneuva to Saskatchewan, and I wish her the 
best of luck in her new posting. I’m looking forward to my 
conversations with her when the House rises this afternoon. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to join with the member opposite and welcome these 
two distinguished guests to our Assembly here today, the consul 
from Mexico in Calgary, Consul Villanueva, to Saskatchewan. 
It’s a pleasure to have you here on your first visit to 
Saskatchewan. It’s also a pleasure to welcome Hon. Larry 
Schneider, honourable consul of Mexico here in Regina, of 
course former mayor and somebody who certainly gives back in 
so many ways to his community, along with his wife Shirley. 
 
[13:45] 
 
It’s a pleasure to welcome the consul here today to 
Saskatchewan on what has been identified as the first trip. It’s 
an important relationship between Canada and Mexico. It’s an 
important relationship between Saskatchewan and Mexico. 
Some of the trade that’s been identified is certainly important to 
us as a province, notably canola seeds and canola oil, wheat, 
and potash. And certainly some of the reciprocal trade was 
noted by the member opposite here today as well. 
 
I think it should be noted as well that if you come to 
Saskatchewan on a beautiful evening in July or August, you 
might find some of the trade from Mexico on proud display at 
one of the venues for which we’re most proud of. And I’m 
thinking of an evening at Mosaic Stadium where in fact you 
might find thousands of individuals sporting carved watermelon 
which may come from Mexico in celebration of Rider pride 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
These are important relationships, and we value your presence 
here today. We wish you constructive and productive meetings. 
We’re pleased to hear you’re meeting with the Lieutenant 
Governor as well as the University of Regina. We’re pleased as 
well that you’ve met with John Hopkins and the chamber of 
commerce here in Regina and some of the business leaders 
within our province. 
 
Thank you for being here, and I ask all members to join with 
me in providing a warm welcome. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to this Assembly, it’s my privilege to 
introduce in your gallery Mr. Greg Ross who is a councillor 
with the northern village of Pinehouse. Greg, if you’d give 
everybody a wave, please. 

Greg’s in town for a couple of days of meetings. I had an 
opportunity to talk to him this morning, and amongst other 
issues we discussed, I know Greg is very excited about the 
uranium deal announced last week because Pinehouse has a 
collaboration agreement with Cameco that’s shown the social 
benefits of that economic agreement, Mr. Speaker. And I’ve 
been to Pinehouse several times myself. The community 
leadership is just doing a fantastic job there, and I’d like to 
commend them for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members of the Assembly to please 
give a Greg a warm welcome to his Assembly. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to join with the Minister of Government Relations in 
welcoming Greg to his Legislative Assembly. As many of you 
know, Greg is my brother-in-law, and we share a close 
relationship. 
 
When our Premier, along with the Prime Minister Harper and 
Prime Minister Modi along with Cameco, signed that very 
important agreement, there was a loud, resounding cry of joy in 
Pinehouse because, you know, we may think that a lot of these 
agreements don’t mean anything to the local, but in fact this is 
local. This is providing jobs within this community so that 
people can have a good life. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want everyone here to welcome my brother 
Greg to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you and to all members of this Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce a school group that’s here today, grade 4 and 5 
students, 27 of them, from St. Gabriel School in Regina 
Wascana Plains. With them is their teachers, Ms. Debbie 
Okrainetz and Ms. Denise Reed, with chaperone Donna Sich. I 
welcome all of you here today, and I ask all members to join me 
in welcoming them to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’d like to introduce a constituent of mine. Seated 
on the floor of this Assembly is Ms. Bernadine Anderson who I 
hope won’t mind me saying is 92 years young and is from the 
village of Craik. Ms. Anderson is a very active lady. She’s 
joined here today by her daughters Shelly Kreutzer and Aleen 
Kutcher. 
 
Ms. Anderson worked in the Legislative Building from 1940 to 
1945 for the King’s Printer. She resigned from her job in 1945 
to marry Harvey Anderson who had just returned from World 
War II. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in welcoming Ms. 
Bernadine Anderson and her daughters to their Legislative 



6964 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2015 

Assembly, and in so doing, Mr. Speaker, to express a small 
measure of our gratitude to Bernadine for many decades of 
service to her country, province, and community. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’ll try and be quick. I have a school group from 
Sedley, grade 3 and 4, 19 of them, sitting in the west gallery. 
They’re accompanied by their teacher, Terelyne Vadeboncoeur; 
Trish Ferner, the educational assistant; and Charity Ziegler is 
the bus driver, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I had the great opportunity to be in Sedley a couple months ago 
and meet with these great students, and they had great questions 
at the time. I’m sure they’ll have even more questions after they 
see the goings-on in the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. But I would 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I took ice cream to them before, 
members. I would like all members to welcome them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition calling for support for better schools 
here in Saskatchewan. We know that far too many of our 
classrooms are overcrowded and under-resourced, and in fact 
the Sask Party government has eliminated hundreds of 
educational assistant positions and that students often do not get 
the one-on-one attention they need. And we know none of this 
is acceptable given the record revenues this government has had 
over the last eight years. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
call on this government to immediately stop ignoring 
schools and start prioritizing students by capping 
classroom sizes, increasing support for students, and 
developing a transparent plan to build and repair our 
schools. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
North Battleford, Lloydminster area, and Regina. I do so 
present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 
again today to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents 
as it relates to unsafe conditions on Dewdney Avenue created 
by this government, and the importance of urgent action to 
ensure safety on Dewdney Avenue, Mr. Speaker. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 

unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on 
Dewdney Avenue west of the city centre to ensure the 
safety and well-being of communities, families, residents, 
and users; and that those actions and plans should include 
rerouting the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial 
funding, and be developed through consultation with the 
city of Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions are signed once again by citizens of 
Saskatchewan. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. Homelessness is the major problem in La Ronge and 
other parts of the North, and it’s getting worse. Shelter is a 
basic need for everyone, but under this government it’s getting 
harder and harder for people to find adequate housing, 
especially families, seniors, women, and children who face 
abusive situations. Their problem is getting worse because of 
the rising level of poverty, skyrocketing home ownership costs. 
The prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the Saskatchewan 
government to build a homeless shelter in the Lac la 
Ronge area to meet the needs of addressing homelessness 
in the Lac la Ronge area. 

 
It is signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition in support of safe staffing 
levels in long-term care. The petitioners point out that many 
aspects of long-term care are deteriorating under this 
government, that the Government of Saskatchewan need to 
recognize the need for safe staffing levels to provide hands-on 
care to residents. The petitioners talk about the government’s 
removing the regulations requiring a minimum standard of care 
for seniors, which has resulted in neglect in some facilities, Mr. 
Speaker, and they also point out that chronic understaffing in 
long-term care facilities results in unacceptable conditions 
including unanswered calls for help, infrequent bathing, and a 
rise in physical violence amongst residents. I’d like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the government to 
commit to the creation of safe staffing levels for all valued 
members of the health care team and to reintroduce actual 
numbers of staff to match the level of care needs and the 
number of residents under their care in the long-term care 
facilities. 
 



April 21, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6965 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by folks from 
Saskatoon and Swift Current. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a 
petition in support of retaining Yarrow Youth Farm. The 
government closed Yarrow Youth Farm, and they’ve now 
created an open custody wing in Kilburn Hall, which is a 
secure-custody unit for youth considered at greater risk to the 
communities. The provincial Advocate for Children and 
Youth has declared he can’t endorse such a rationalization, 
as low-risk teens could be influenced and pressured by close 
proximity to high-risk youth who may be involved in serious 
crimes or gangs, and that Kilburn Hall is a more institutional 
environment that could intimidate and alienate teens that 
have committed minor offences. Here is the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the government to keep 
Yarrow Youth Farm open to ensure a caring home 
environment for youth who have committed minor 
offences and provide support to help these young people 
redirect their lives by setting more positive goals. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by individuals from Saskatoon and 
Martensville. I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 

Share the Love — Winter Sleep Out Fundraiser 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, on February the 14th, I had the 
pleasure to spend an evening under the stars to raise awareness 
about homelessness in the North. Scattered Site Outreach 
Program organized an event called Share the Love — Winter 
Sleep Out. The event was a Valentine’s Day fundraiser that 
raised over $13,000 for addictions services and homelessness 
projects in northern Saskatchewan. Fifteen people braved the 
elements and spent all night out in the cold. And I am proud to 
have taken part. 
 
Homelessness is an important issue in La Ronge and across the 
North, and there needs to be more supports available to people 
who need a place to stay each night. We were fortunate to have 
a number of important community leaders take part in the event, 
and I was glad to see Chief Tammy Cook-Searson of the Lac La 
Ronge Indian Band and her husband, Jimmy Searson, spending 
the night out in the cold. There was also strong support from 
local RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] officers who 
made donations and attended the midnight vigil for those we 
have lost to homelessness. 
 
I ask all members to join me in thanking Sheldon Merriman, 
Jackie Ballantyne, and participants, and all the volunteers and 

staff who helped make this event a success. It is only through 
the important advocacy work of community leaders that we will 
make real progress and end homelessness in Saskatchewan. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 

Premier’s Commendation Awards 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning the Saskatchewan Premier’s Commendation Awards 
were presented for the second time to eight outstanding 
individuals who have served our province honourably. The 
recipients demonstrated extraordinary heroism to save and 
improve the lives and comfort of others. This award was created 
on the suggestion of the member from Wood River to 
acknowledge those who have taken remarkable, selfless actions. 
 
The 2015 Premier’s Commendation Award recipients are Travis 
Laycock of Saskatoon who rescued a couple whose car became 
submerged in a slough off Highway No. 5 near Bruno last July; 
Bill Nagel of Regina who saved a boy from falling 40 feet from 
a ski lift in Montana this February; Darren Katzell of Yorkton 
and Chris Katzell of Saskatoon who saved a woman from 
choking in a Saskatoon food court this February; Blaine Switzer 
of Swift Current, Jonathan Thomason of Rush Lake, and the 
late Anthony Williams of North Carolina who helped rescue a 
woman from a burning car near Rush Lake; and Bob McGrath 
who spent nearly 40 years helping to raise more than $100 
million through Telemiracle for Saskatchewan citizens with 
special needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people are true heroes, and this award is a 
small way of thanking them for their immense contributions and 
bravery they have demonstrated. I ask all members to join me in 
congratulating all eight recipients of this noble award and 
thanking them all for what they have done to make 
Saskatchewan a better place. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Broadway Business Improvement District 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker I rise today to recognize the 
important work of a non-profit organization in my constituency. 
The Broadway Business Improvement District was founded in 
1986. It’s an organization that represents Nutana merchants, 
and its goal is to support and advance the interests of all 
businesses located in the Broadway corridor, as well as to 
promote good community relations with the surrounding area. 
 
[14:00] 
 
One of the first major projects for the BBID [Broadway 
Business Improvement District] was to lobby city hall for 
money to cover half of the approximately $1.1 million price tag 
of refurbishing Broadway Avenue. The merchants’ idea 
stemmed from a desire to transform a high-traffic area into one 
that was busy, colourful, and economically viable for small 
neighbourhood businesses. And, Mr. Speaker, I must say, their 
actions have yielded continued success. 
 



6966 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2015 

A variety of activities are undertaken every year to ensure that 
these goals are met: facilitating business advertising, planning 
promotional events, maintaining frequent communications and 
strong relations amongst merchants, effecting physical 
improvements to public land, and voicing the concerns of the 
collective merchant group to the local authorities. 
 
The past two weeks have seen the Broadway BID hosting a 
series of stakeholder engagement forums. Over 45 businesses 
met to express their ideas and participate in shaping the next 
steps for the business improvement district. It’s my feelings that 
these meetings will yield creative and innovative ideas which 
will continue to improve the Broadway Business District. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking the 
Broadway BID for their years of hard work. I look forward to 
their continued work to make Broadway one of the best 
neighbourhoods in Saskatoon. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Wascana Lake is Magical in the Springtime 
 
Mr. Marchuk: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty safe to 
say that we have survived another winter here on the prairies. 
Earlier this month our own Wascana Lake was recognized by 
the Huffington Post, an online national newspaper, as being one 
of the, and I quote, “Top 15 Canadian places that are magical in 
the springtime.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, Wascana Centre, especially around the lake, is 
exceedingly vibrant and scenic. People run, bike, walk, walk 
their dogs, appreciate history and nature, and quite simply enjoy 
life. Mr. Speaker, we are fortunate to have access to such a 
welcoming and scenic space right here in Regina. Not only is 
this space enjoyed for everyday activities like walking and 
jogging, but also as a place for celebrations, concerts, and 
family events. In addition to bringing our community together, 
Wascana Centre is home to a number of beautiful and historic 
buildings like the Royal Saskatchewan Museum and, of course, 
this building, the Legislative Building of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this space would not be quite as vibrant and scenic 
if not for the work of the Wascana Centre Authority. They 
ensure that the Centre remains an inviting public space to be 
enjoyed in every season. Mr. Speaker, the Huffington Post is 
absolutely correct. Wascana Lake is magical in the springtime, 
and we encourage everyone to get out and experience that 
magic for themselves. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 

Vaisakhi Festival Marks Punjabi New Year 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On Sunday I 
had the pleasure of bringing greetings at the Vaisakhi Festival 
presented by Sikh Society of Regina. The festival held each 
April marks the Punjabi new year and celebrates the founding 
of the Sikh community known as the Khalsa. Hundreds 
gathered at the Regina Sikh Temple to celebrate one of the most 
important days of the year for the Sikh community. 

Mr. Speaker, Sunday’s amazing celebration of the Sikh faith is 
a testament to the remarkable diversity we have here in Regina 
and across this province. The festivities were a celebration of 
the diversity which is making our community more 
understanding, more educated, more beautiful, and a much 
more interesting place to grow and live and raise a family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as Saskatchewan’s population has grown, so too 
has our Sikh community. The growing Sikh community in 
Saskatchewan has a long and proud history of contributing to 
our province’s proud tradition of multiculturalism and helping 
Saskatchewan live up to our motto: “from many peoples, 
strength.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in wishing the 
Saskatchewan Sikh community a happy Vaisakhi and thank 
them for the many contributions to our fine province. Thank 
you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 

Melfort Mustangs Win Canalta Cup 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased to 
rise in the House today to recognize the Melfort Mustangs who 
last Thursday won their first Canalta Cup in 19 years. By doing 
so, they rolled through the playoff series with victories against 
Weyburn Red Wings, the Nipawin Hawks, and the Notre Dame 
Hounds. This is a team that possesses a lot of talent and can 
score from almost any angle, and when you add to that a 
stand-up defence and very solid goaltending, you have a 
championship team. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to mention the Mustangs’ head 
coach, Trevor Blevins, a hometown Melfort boy. Trevor took 
over the reins midway through last season and coached them 
from last place to first place last year before bowing out early in 
the playoffs. And then they led wire to wire this year, winning 
first place overall for the first time. Mr. Speaker, Trevor was a 
player on the 1996 Melfort Mustangs team that was the 
championship team, and he became the first person to win the 
title both as a coach and as a player. 
 
The Mustangs now head to Fort McMurray next week to the 
western championships where the two top teams will advance to 
the Royal Bank Cup in Portage la Prairie. I ask that all members 
join me in congratulating the Melfort Mustangs in their title 
victory and wish them good luck in representing our province in 
the next couple of weeks. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society Fundraising Gala 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it was 
not that long ago that like-minded people from government and 
business imagined what a benefit helicopter emergency services 
could be to our health care system. 
 
I’m proud to stand here today to announce that the third 
anniversary of STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] 
launching its helicopter emergency services throughout 



April 21, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6967 

Saskatchewan is coming up very soon. Last Friday I, along with 
the members from Moosomin, Qu’Appelle Valley, Wascana 
Plains, Estevan, and Regina South were able to attend the 
STARS gala, which raised over $100,000 for our Regina base. 
Our government has promised a 10.5 annual commitment to 
ensure this program continues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, STARS saves lives. These services give VIPs, 
very important patients, the critical care they need in major 
emergencies in time to save a life, a limb, or prevent a lifelong 
disability. STARS physicians also provide overnight support by 
phone to paramedics and nurse practitioners who face 
emergency medical emergencies at collaborative emergency 
centres in Shaunavon, Canora, and Maidstone. They also 
initiate hands-on education in rural communities throughout our 
province. 
 
STARS is doing their part to train our emergency care providers 
to respond to whatever critical care situations they may 
encounter during their job. Mr. Speaker, these brave men and 
women are often landing near the site of an industrial accident 
or vehicle collision, and the difference they can make for the 
people they serve quite often means lives saved. I’d ask all 
members to join with me in congratulating STARS on another 
successful fundraising gala. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 

Quality of Patient Care 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Yesterday we learned that a care aid 
from Saskatoon who spoke out publicly has been suspended. 
The Premier’s chief of operations and communications leaked 
this publicly and the Health minister implied significant 
wrongdoing. I’ve seen the list of concerns. They relate to Peter 
speaking out and advocating for vulnerable seniors. To the 
Premier: he promised that care aids can feel free to speak out 
and raise concerns about the quality of care for vulnerable 
seniors. Why has that promise been broken? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well I’m interested, Mr. Speaker, to know 
what the deputy leader of the NDP [New Democratic Party] has 
seen. He’s just said he’s seen the specifics, and with some 
assurance gets to his feet and then poses his question with that 
as the preamble. Mr. Speaker, I can say this, that section 4.03 of 
the union contract between Health and SEIU West [Service 
Employees International Union] states that: 
 

An employee will not be penalized, harassed or disciplined 
for bringing forward, in good faith, an alleged wrongdoing 
to the Employer and/or any lawful authority either directly 
or through the Union. 

 
I can tell members of the House, with total assurance, that this 
provision of the contract has been upheld. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the list of complaints 

against this care aid specifies that he’s in trouble for speaking 
out. It specifies that he’s in trouble for raising concerns with 
managers. It says he’s in trouble because he posted on 
Facebook and he thinks . . . He posted on Facebook that he 
thought he might lose his job for speaking out. It says he’s in 
trouble for raising concerns about residents being abused. To 
the Premier: why is he not investigating the concerns Peter 
raised instead of just investigating Peter, trying to shut him up? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — I think, Mr. Speaker, I would counsel the 
member opposite, as a colleague, to exercise some circumspect 
in this particular case. Mr. Speaker, in a general sense I will say 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the member for Nutana has 
something to say from her seat. This is an important and serious 
matter. 
 
The Saskatoon Health Region, Mr. Speaker, has not, nor would 
they be disciplining any individual including the person in 
question here about speaking out on behalf of patients or any 
workplace issues. That has not happened, Mr. Speaker. It will 
not happen. But, Mr. Speaker, I will add this: the region, and 
therefore the government, will never tolerate by any employee 
of the government or partners of the government any actions 
that would jeopardize the health, safety, and well-being of 
either patients or co-workers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will say that in a general sense, the health region 
and the Government of Saskatchewan will not tolerate that, and 
were there to be, hypothetically, complaints perhaps made by 
colleagues and others with respect to the conduct of any 
employee, those will be investigated. And, Mr. Speaker, in 
large measure the investigation will take place while the 
employee would be suspended with pay, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I will assure again, members of the House, that no disciplinary 
action has been taken or would it be taken because this 
individual or any other stepped forward to express concerns 
about the workplace or about patients in the health care system. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the two complaints which 
pre-date Peter coming to the legislature to speak out are about 
him raising concerns to co-workers and management within the 
care facility, and it’s come clear from the complaints listed 
since that it’s nothing more than an attempt to shut him up and 
make other care aids afraid to speak out. 
 
The Premier’s own staff, senior staff, are doing all they can as 
well to discredit this care aid as this care aid has spoken out on 
behalf of Saskatchewan seniors. To the Premier: why is this 
government attacking care aids who speak out instead of taking 
the concerns seriously and fixing what’s broken in seniors’ 
care? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, I would just reiterate the comments 
that have already been made by the Premier that no employee of 
Saskatoon Health Region or any other health region would be 



6968 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2015 

disciplined for raising concerns that they brought forward, Mr. 
Speaker. In fact it is in the contract between Saskatoon Health 
Region and SEIU West, the union that does represent care aids 
in that health region, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the health region has indicated, if Mr. Bowden 
would sign a consent form that they would be at liberty to talk 
about the complaints that have come forward. I wonder how the 
Deputy Leader of the Opposition knows of all the complaints, 
whether or not he actually knows about all of the complaints, 
and has seen every single complaint that has come forward in 
this case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, the actions that have been taken by the 
employer in this respect have nothing to do with Mr. Bowden 
attending at the legislature during this legislative session. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Protection of Vulnerable Children 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the Social Services minister said 
yesterday it could take three weeks for this government to 
respond to the recommendations from the inquest into the tragic 
death of Lee Bonneau. To the minister: why so long? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and indeed I 
did say it would take between two to three weeks to have a 
formal response to the recommendations from the coroner’s 
inquest. But I also said that some of those recommendations are 
already under way because the Children’s Advocate had a 
report some time ago on this very same issue. 
 
Of the 18 recommendations from the Children’s Advocate, 
we’ve been giving quarterly reports. Three have been made. 
They’re public. As to what the Ministry of Social Services and 
the Yorkton Tribal Council First Nations agency are doing to 
comply with the recommendations of the Children’s Advocate, 
of those recommendations, 12 have already been fully 
implemented. Five are in progress and one is under 
consideration, Mr. Speaker. So a great deal of work has been 
done over the last two years. 
 
We’ve made it public, the work that’s been done to improve the 
system. Where work needs to be done, and we will, the officials 
will be going through the further recommendations, but it’ll be 
two to three weeks. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, there isn’t anything 
earth-shattering in these recommendations. And the government 
has heard this all before, time and time again, about caseloads 
that are too heavy, about lack of communications between 
different agencies, between different sections of the ministry 
and between different case workers and about vulnerable 
children who are falling through the cracks. 
 
So to the minister: why does this government need three weeks 
to respond to these recommendations? Why can’t it embrace 
these recommendations and start protecting vulnerable children 

in a much better way? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, as I said in my previous 
answer, a lot of work has already been done. It’s not unusual for 
the officials to ask for two weeks in order to give an official 
response to recommendations that come forward. That’s not 
unusual from when he was sitting at the cabinet table. It’s not 
an unusual amount of time to ask for two weeks. 
 
[14:15] 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, a lot of work has been done to address the 
very issues that he’s identified. We now have a dedicated First 
Nations and Métis service consultant to help us work with our 
First Nations agencies. 
 
We have changed from every three years to having annual 
audits of our First Nations agencies. We’ve added four 
additional staff to our quality insurance . As I said, Mr. Speaker, 
those are all in response to the Children’s Advocate 
recommendations. Many of the coroner’s inquest 
recommendations duplicate those, so work has already taken 
place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In order to improve the communication, which I think is 
definitely identified as a breakdown in this particular issue, we 
now have implemented a structured decision-making tool that 
our workers use in order to help them with their case file 
management. And I’ll have more initiatives that we have 
undertaken in the last two years in my next answer. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the Children’s Advocate does say 
some progress has been made since this little boy’s tragic death, 
but he says, and I quote, “There is still a long way to go.” And 
we have recommendations from the coroner’s inquest, and we 
have a Social Services minister that says it could take three 
weeks to respond to these recommendations. And when we 
have a Children’s Advocate saying this government has a long 
way to go to protect vulnerable children in this province, that’s 
incredibly concerning. 
 
So to the minister: what will it take for this government to get 
actually serious about protecting our most vulnerable children? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, this government has 
been extremely serious about protecting our most vulnerable 
children. Mr. Speaker, that’s why we increased the child and 
family services budget by 156 per cent from when that member 
sat at the cabinet table. Mr. Speaker, we’re not going to go back 
to when the NDP had authority over that file, when we had 90 
less workers in our province and more children in our care. We 
added 90 workers to help with the workload. We will continue 
to assess and evaluate whether or not that’s enough. But we’ve 
dropped the average workload for a worker to 16 from 21 where 
it was when the members opposite were in the authority to 
make those decisions. 
 



April 21, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6969 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve added supports to our foster families and 
we no longer have overcrowded foster homes, because when 
that member sat at the cabinet table, there was up to 21 children 
in one foster home alone. Mr. Speaker, that is totally 
unacceptable. But furthermore and very important, and it was 
identified in this particular situation how serious this is, we 
implemented electronic tracking system for our children. 
Because under the NDP, you could track a library book better 
than you could track our children in our province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the member neglects to mention 
that it costs $60 million, $60 million, for the Linkin system. 
But, Mr. Speaker, between 2010 and 2013 there were 81 deaths 
of children in this government’s care, not counting natural 
deaths. Ten of those deaths were homicides. To the minister: 
what is the updated number? How many children died in care in 
2014? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, that member needs to 
represent those numbers in such a way that they are actually 
letting the public know that includes car accidents, and a 
number of natural deaths that . . . in those numbers that’s he’s 
quoting. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want him to say now — because it was 
definitely identified with a First Nations agency who now have 
an electronic system since this incident happened but at the time 
did not, and didn’t have the way to share information from one 
office to another — is $60 million, is that too much to have an 
electronic system to help track our children, to help our 
front-line workers to be able to manage the case files they have? 
 
Is he saying that that was not money we should spend? Is he 
saying that we should not have increased the budget as much as 
we have in order to put supports in for families and for foster 
families and also for our families in order to keep their children 
at home? What is that member actually saying? Because he’s 
just implying that we should not have spent that money. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, can the Minister of Social 
Services tell us why she’s ended funding for the Radius youth 
companion program in Saskatoon? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, we have done a review 
of CBOs [community-based organization]. There are some 
CBOs that we will be discontinuing funding for because either 
there’s a duplication of services or we are now measuring 
outcomes and maybe the outcomes were not as strong as they 
should have been. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Samantha Neill is 
speaking out today. She has a child with severe cognitive 
disabilities and they rely on the youth companion program at 

Radius, and this government just cut $65,000 per year that went 
into this program. How can the minister possibly justify this 
cut? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, if Samantha is finding 
difficulty getting services for her son, I’m more than happy to 
meet with her as well as have officials meet with her to find the 
services that she needs. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the youth companion program 
started out as a pilot project in 2006 and then this government 
annualized funding for the program in 2008. And that was a 
good move, but now this government has slashed the funding 
just a couple of months before summer when this kind of 
support is needed the most. 
 
To the minister: what’s changed? Why is this government 
cutting $65,000 for a program that it used to think was 
important for young people with cognitive disabilities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Again, Mr. Speaker, there’s been no 
government in the history of this province that has dedicated 
more dollars to disabilities and disability issues than this 
government. So we’re more than happy to meet with this 
mother and ensure . . . 
 
Because we did a review of our CBOs, and if the results were 
not as strong as we were looking for or if there’s a duplication 
of services, Mr. Speaker, to make our dollars effective and 
efficient, we need to do those reviews. We can’t just blindly 
fund everything even though we’re not seeing the results that 
we’re hoping to get. Mr. Speaker, that is being responsible. We 
will help this mother find some services. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, the $65,000 cut will directly 
affect young people with cognitive disabilities and their 
families, and this minister should listen to the mom who’s 
speaking out today. She says, “I can tell you there are virtually 
no other resources for families in terms of locating potential 
caregivers for our children.” And she says, “This is completely 
unacceptable.”  
 
Will the minister listen to this mom and to the many other 
parents and reverse this cut that provides needed support for 
young people with cognitive disabilities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I will tell the 
member opposite because maybe he didn’t hear me. Yes. We 
will meet with the mom and we will listen to her. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 



6970 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2015 

Health Care Services and the Lean Initiative 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Almost two weeks ago, 32 test results were 
mixed up at the government’s lab and matched to the wrong 
patients. To the minister: what went wrong? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Certainly we regret the situation that occurred at the provincial 
lab a couple of weeks ago. Mr. Speaker, we are aware of how 
the error was made as it relates to automated equipment and 
how that was programmed to run a half-batch at the end of a 
day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can indicate that 32 patients were affected. Mr. 
Speaker, the physicians that are responsible for those patients 
have been notified, and the patients are being notified by the 
physicians. It’s not a large group of either patients or physicians 
with respect to this issue, Mr. Speaker. And so my 
understanding is that very shortly, that all the patients will be 
notified as all the physicians have already started making that 
notification process. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — We know that this government’s lean 
consultants have been active in the Saskatchewan Disease 
Control Laboratory. To the minister: did any processes changed 
as a result of lean contribute to these testing errors? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. No, my 
understanding is that what has taken place is that there’s been 
an increased workload as a result of monitoring done by the 
College of Physicians and Surgeons as it relates to the use of 
opiates, and the increased testing as a part of their monitoring 
program. Mr. Speaker, this was really the result of an increased 
workload as well as trying to add an extra half-batch of tests 
before the end of a workday, Mr. Speaker. So an error that we 
regret, Mr. Speaker, that is unfortunate, but that the lab is 
committed to ensuring that they put processes in place so that it 
doesn’t happen again. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate that the government 
says it doesn’t believe patient care has been compromised as a 
result of this mess. Of course it would be much better if the 
government could assure us that patient care has not been 
compromised. When 32 patients are given the wrong results, it 
can be traumatizing if not life-threatening, and this undermines 
the confidence that Saskatchewan people should be able to have 
in this government’s disease control lab. To the minister: how 
can we be assured that this won’t happen again? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would agree that 
this is something that we want to ensure that doesn’t ever 

happen again, Mr. Speaker. The lab has indicated that in the 18 
months that this piece of automated equipment has been used, 
that this is the first problem that has arisen. It was caught in 
short notice after a very small number of tests were mistakenly 
identified, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I can indicate though that 
the medical director of the laboratory and everybody at the 
Ministry of Health and our provincial disease control laboratory 
want to assure the public that measures are going to be put in 
place so this type of error doesn’t happen in the future. Mr. 
Speaker, I give my commitment that that is certainly the 
commitment of the provincial lab and the Ministry of Health, 
that this won’t happen again. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Hyperbaric Chamber and Plan for Moose Jaw Hospital 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Switching gears here, the fight for Moose 
Jaw’s hyperbaric chamber is getting stronger and it’s time for 
this government to commit to save it. Yesterday Moose Jaw’s 
mayor said: 
 

There is a lot of money and time and effort from residents 
that has gone into the hospital and will continue to go 
toward the hospital for a long time to come . . . There’s a 
real concern over the loss of this piece of equipment that is 
pretty cost effective and doesn’t take up a lot of room in 
the new hospital. The community is concerned, and 
council needs to be concerned. 

 
Moose Jaw’s mayor’s been raising these concerns for at least a 
year and a half. When will the Health minister finally listen? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
just as it relates to the previous issue that the member brought 
up, I just do want to confirm that no harm was caused to 
patients because of this error. But we do regret the error and 
will ensure that it doesn’t happen again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the hyperbaric chamber, obviously 
this is something that we have debated on a number of 
occasions, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve indicated, we are looking at 
what alternatives can be put in place to ensure that there are 
hyperbaric services provided to the people of Saskatchewan, 
knowing that not every Saskatchewan resident, not every 
Saskatchewan patient that uses hyperbaric services accesses 
those services in the province of Saskatchewan. I can say, Mr. 
Speaker, that it’s interesting that we do have numbers that are 
updated for this last year, the ’14-15 year, which indicate that I 
believe 12 patients used the service for just over 100 treatments, 
Mr. Speaker, which is about half the number of patients and 
treatments from even the previous year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it’s not a service that is used often, Mr. Speaker, but we are 
looking to see how we can provide that service either in Moose 
Jaw or in another location, Mr. Speaker, either as an in-patient 
service or an outpatient service, as is done in Calgary on an 
outpatient basis, or my understanding in Edmonton on an 
in-patient service. So we are looking at all those different 
options currently. 



April 21, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6971 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Moose Jaw firefighter Gord Hewitt says: 
 

It does pain us to see the hyperbaric chamber not being 
moved to the new hospital . . . We met with MLA (Greg 
Lawrence) the other day and discussed our commitment 
toward the chamber. Is it funding? What do we have to do 
to make this happen? 

 
What’s the minister’s answer to the people in Moose Jaw? 
What do we have to do to change this government’s mind and 
save the hyperbaric chamber? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
appreciate the opportunity to talk about what the two MLAs 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] from Moose Jaw on this 
side of the House have been able to accomplish for the people 
of Moose Jaw and area, and not just the fact that we are seeing a 
new hospital under construction, nearly complete, for the city of 
Moose Jaw to serve the Five Hills Health Region and southern 
Saskatchewan for many years to come, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. 
Speaker, also working with the health foundation and those two 
MLAs on a proposal, Mr. Speaker, to add an MRI [magnetic 
resonance imaging], a permanent MRI to the city of Moose Jaw 
in that same facility, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are having conversations with a number of 
groups both within Moose Jaw as well as outside of Moose Jaw 
as it relates to the hyperbaric services, Mr. Speaker, knowing 
that it serves a small number of people, yes, Mr. Speaker, but it 
does provide a service, Mr. Speaker. We’re looking to see 
whether or not that can be maintained within that existing city, 
Mr. Speaker, whether or not it makes more sense for example to 
have an adjunct service as it relates to cancer treatment, because 
we know that nearly half the people that use it is in relation to 
radiation, Mr. Speaker. Does it make more sense to be in 
conjunction with their radiation treatment? Those are the 
options that we’re considering, Mr. Speaker, and I hope to have 
an answer soon on that question. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Moose Jaw want 
to save the hyperbaric chamber. People throughout 
Saskatchewan want to save the hyperbaric chamber. 
Community organizations are even willing to help save the 
hyperbaric chamber. Absolutely everyone else gets it except the 
Sask Party government. Everyone else understands the 
tremendous value of the hyperbaric chamber except the Sask 
Party government. To the minister: why is this government so 
stubborn? Why is it refusing to follow common sense and keep 
the hyperbaric chamber in the Moose Jaw hospital? 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s just ensure that 

the record is correct on this. The NDP government thought so 
highly of the hyperbaric chamber and the services, Mr. Speaker, 
that they, what? Provided how many dollars for the hyperbaric 
services? Not a single dollar, Mr. Speaker. It is funded through 
Five Hills Health Region on an operational side, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s not a provincial service, was never deemed a provincial 
service under the NDP, as well as we know on the capital side, 
the fundraising that has taken place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are currently working through what options 
make sense in terms of providing hyperbaric services in the 
province, but I think it’s important that the people of this 
province know that in terms of an in-patient service, Mr. 
Speaker, the Moose Jaw hyperbaric chamber, the services has 
been used, Mr. Speaker, roughly 6 per cent of the time on an 
in-patient basis. So 90, over 90 per cent of the time it’s on an 
outpatient basis, so does it make sense to actually have that 
within an in-patient service, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve said it publicly. A hospital setting, an acute 
care setting is our highest cost real estate, Mr. Speaker, to 
operate and to build, Mr. Speaker. So on the service that is 
provided on the vast majority of times on an outpatient basis, 
does it make sense to have it as an outpatient service in a clinic? 
We’re looking at all those options right now. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan, the 
community of Moose Jaw, community organizations that want 
to support the hyperbaric chamber want to know what this 
government’s plan is and they want to know when they’re 
going to come up with this plan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I think the people of Moose Jaw and area know very 
well what the plan is from this side of the House, is that we’ll 
actually not just plan for a new hospital in the city of Moose 
Jaw, but we’ll actually build that new hospital in the city of 
Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and I know the people of Moose Jaw, I know the 
mayor of Moose Jaw and others, Mr. Speaker, are very excited 
about the fact that the new nearly $100 million hospital will be 
opening later this year, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s going to 
be able to provide services in a very efficient manner, Mr. 
Speaker, very much a state-of-the-art facility, not just in this 
province, but in this country, Mr. Speaker. And what the people 
of Moose Jaw and area will also be very well assured of, Mr. 
Speaker, because this is something that they definitely wanted, 
Mr. Speaker, was to ensure that we had additional MRI capacity 
in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve come a long way, Mr. Speaker, from the days where 
MRI services, people waited 12 months and 18 months and 22 
months for an elective MRI, Mr. Speaker. What we’ve done is 
added capacity in central Saskatchewan, in southern 
Saskatchewan, and that’s going to include the new Moose Jaw 
Hospital that will have the latest, newest MRI for the people of 
this province. 



6972 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2015 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to raise a point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — And what is the Government’s House 
Leader’s point of order? 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. During 
question period the Deputy Leader of the Opposition directly 
referred to a document and information as the basis for his 
question or series of questions, that he based it on this 
information. 
 
As we know through the rules and procedures of section 52, 
ministers are required to table documents referred to during the 
debate. I would ask that the member opposite hold himself to 
this same standard and ensure that this information . . . I think 
this legislature and this debate would be well-served by that 
information coming forward. We all know that information 
that’s been brought forward recently by members had some 
concern regarding accuracy. I think in this instance this 
information would, again, serve us well in this debate. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the member put his questions in 
accordance with the rules of order, and if you’ll examine the 
record, I’m sure that you’ll find that to be the case. He did not 
quote directly from the document, as my hon. colleague 
opposite knows is part of the conditions for the rule that he was 
citing, and as such, I would ask you to find that the member’s 
point of order is not well taken. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader quoted 
himself that this rule refers to ministers quoting from 
documents. It does not refer to members quoting from 
documents, therefore the opposition members do not have to 
table documents they may or may not quote from. This point of 
order is not well taken. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of the House 
Services Committee. 
 

Standing Committee on House Services 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on House Services to report that it has considered 
certain estimates and to present its 11th report. I move: 
 

That the 11th report of the Standing Committee on House 
Services be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Chair of the 
House Services Committee: 
 

That the 11th report of the Standing Committee on House 
Services be now concurred in. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
I recognize the Chair of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice to report. Mr. Speaker, this is a bilingual 
bill, Bill No. 147, The Class Actions Amendment Act, 2014 
without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered before 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill now be read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 147, The 
Class Actions Amendment Act, 2014 without amendment, and 
that the bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 
Bill No. 147 — The Class Actions Amendment Act, 2014/Loi 

de 2014 modifiant la Loi sur les recours collectifs 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move this bill be now read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General that Bill No. 147, The Class Actions 
Amendment Act, 2014 be now read the third time and passed 
under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 



April 21, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6973 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 150, The Residential 
Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered before 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill now be read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 
Whole on Bill No. 150, The Residential Tenancies Amendment 
Act, 2014 without amendment and that the bill be now read the 
third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 150 — The Residential Tenancies 
Amendment Act, 2014 

 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move this bill be now read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved that Bill No. 150, 
The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014 be now read 
the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready 
for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 

Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 162, The Enforcement of 
Money Judgements Amendment Act, 2014 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered before 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill now be read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
has requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 
Whole on Bill No. 162, The Enforcement of Money Judgments 
Amendment Act, 2014 without amendment and the bill be now 
read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 162 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments 
Amendment Act, 2014 

 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move this bill now be read 
the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General that Bill No. 162, The Enforcement of 
Money Judgments Amendment Act, 2014 be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 907 through 928. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 907 through 928. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
 



6974 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2015 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 178 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2015 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, today I’m pleased to rise and move second 
reading of Bill No. 178, to amend The Income Tax Act, 2000. 
This bill will implement income tax initiatives announced in our 
government’s 2015-16 budget on March 18th, 2015. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments include new growth tax 
incentives that will increase jobs and capital investment and tax 
credit program amendments to sustain valued programs and 
keep Saskatchewan strong. A number of technical amendments 
are also required to update our legislation as requested by 
Canada Revenue Agency, CRA. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll begin with the manufacturing and processing, 
the M & P exporter tax incentive first announced in the Speech 
from the Throne of October 22nd, 2014. The incentive supports 
our government’s growth plan goal to increase manufacturing 
exports and help keep our economy strong. The incentive will 
provide non-refundable tax credits for each of the 2015 through 
2019 taxation years to eligible corporations that expand the 
number of their full-time employees above the number that 
were employed in 2014. 
 
Eligible businesses are those that annually export at least 25 per 
cent of their manufactured goods to the rest of Canada or 
internationally. Eligible businesses that manufacture or process 
goods for sale are defined in the federal income tax, or are 
principally involved with the commercial development of new 
economy products for export, including interactive digital 
media products and creative industry products. 
 
The M & P exporter tax incentive consists of two components, 
a general hiring tax credit and a head office tax credit. The 
hiring tax credit will offer non-refundable tax credits equal to 
$3,000 each year for each incremental full-time employee hired 
by an eligible business. The head office tax credit will offer 
non-refundable tax credits equal to $10,000 each year for each 
incremental full-time head office employee hired by an eligible 
business, subject to minimum qualifying and incremental 
employment thresholds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an employee cannot be claimed under both tax 
credits. However, an employee who cannot be claimed under 
the head office tax credit due to the qualifying requirements 
may be claimed under the hiring tax credit. Tax credits earned 
in a year will be applied against Saskatchewan corporation 
income tax otherwise payable for that year or in any of the 
subsequent five taxation years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in support of our government’s plan for growth 
and commitment to encourage new capital investment, the 
2015-16 budget announced the creation of another important 
new growth tax incentive, the corporation income tax rebate for 
capital investment in primary steel production in Saskatchewan. 
The incentive will be available to eligible primary steel 
producers that make a minimum capital investment of $100 
million in new or expanded production capacity. 

It will provide a rebate of the new or incremental Saskatchewan 
corporation income tax payable by the corporation as a result of 
the new investment. The amount of incremental tax that is 
eligible to be rebated under this incentive will be based on the 
proportionate increase in the facility’s productive capacity 
resulting from the investment. 
 
[14:45] 
 
The tax incentive will be available for a five-year period. It will 
rebate the full amount of incremental tax for each of the first 
two years of the rebate period followed by 75 per cent of the 
incremental tax in the third year, 50 per cent in the fourth year, 
and 25 per cent in the fifth and final year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a new growth tax incentive, there is no cost to 
the provincial treasury because this incentive is based on 
incremental tax revenue from new investment. New capital 
investment brings additional construction jobs, operations and 
maintenance jobs, and more business for local suppliers. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve already seen the impact of this incentive. 
Late last month steelmaker Evraz announced a $200 million 
production expansion in Regina which will create 40 full-time 
jobs. 
 
The 2015-16 budget also carefully manages expenditures, and 
this includes tax expenditures which result from tax credit 
programs. The research and development, R & D tax credit, 
graduate retention program, GRP, and active families benefit, 
AFB, are tax credits that are being adjusted and better targeted 
to ensure their ongoing sustainability. Effective April 1st, 2015, 
the existing R & D tax credit is being replaced by a 10 per cent 
non-refundable R & D tax credit. Non-refundable tax credits 
earned in a year can be applied against Saskatchewan corporate 
income tax, CIT, otherwise payable for that year or in any of 
the subsequent 10 taxation years or the previous three taxation 
years. 
 
These changes are expected to reduce program costs by $18 
million in 2015-16 and will maintain a sustainable level of 
support for innovation and research activities in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s GRP provides and will continue 
to provide up to $20,000 in tuition rebate benefits to graduates 
that live and work in Saskatchewan. Since the program’s 
creation in 2008, more than 56,000 post-secondary graduates 
have taken advantage of this program, receiving nearly $200 
million in tuition rebates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, graduates currently receive the tuition rebate as a 
reduction in their income taxes otherwise payable. Where the 
rebate amount is greater than the amount of income taxes 
payable, the excess has been paid to the graduate as an income 
tax refund. Starting with the 2015 taxation year, tuition rebates 
must be applied against Saskatchewan income taxes otherwise 
payable. Any rebate amount that cannot be applied against taxes 
payable will be carried forward and added to the next year’s 
instalment amount. 
 
Graduates will be allowed 10 years to fully claim their tuition 
rebate entitlement against taxes otherwise payable. This 
three-year increase will be put in place to better enable 
graduates to utilize their GRP benefits under the newly adjusted 



April 21, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6975 

program. Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan graduates will continue to 
benefit from the most aggressive retention program in the 
country. 
 
The 2015 budget announced that effective for the 2015 taxation 
year, the AFB will be income tested in order to target families 
earning $60,000 per year or less. The tax credit rebates up to 
$150 per child per year in eligible registration fees or other 
program-related costs. Saskatchewan families with children 
under 18 years of age are eligible for this refundable credit. 
Income testing will better target the benefit to those families 
who need financial assistance the most in order to register their 
children in cultural, recreational, and sport activities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill also contains five technical amendments 
to update provincial legislation as requested by CRA. The 
federal Act was recently amended retroactive to December 21, 
2002 to remove special rules that set out the taxation year of a 
testamentary trust as any 12-month period for which the 
accounts of the trust are prepared from section 104 of the 
federal Act and move them to section 249 of the federal Act 
where the general definition of taxation year resides. The first 
technical amendment to the provincial Act removes any 
reference to section 104 of the federal Act. 
 
The federal Act was also amended retroactive to January 1, 
2012 to simplify the definition of total charitable gifts and to 
move the list of qualified donees to section 149.1, which sets 
out the rules of conduct for all charitable organizations. Mr. 
Speaker, the second technical amendment to the provincial Act 
ensures that the reference to the definition of total charitable 
gifts in the federal Act remains accurate. 
 
The federal Act was also amended retroactive to February 27th, 
2004 to add a provision to clarify the treatment of foreign 
interest income for the purposes of computing the foreign tax 
credit. The third technical amendment to the provincial Act will 
ensure that the provincial legislation parallels the federal 
legislation. 
 
Next the federal Act was amended effective for the 2014 and 
subsequent taxation years to remove the requirement for a 
specific application for the federal goods and services tax credit, 
GSTC, and allow the benefit to be automatically applied for 
when the individual files a tax return. Mr. Speaker, since the 
Saskatchewan low-income tax credit is administered in 
conjunction with the federal GSTC, it is important that 
provincial legislation be amended to similarly remove the 
requirement for these specific applications. 
 
Finally, the federal Act was amended effective June 26th, 2013 
to add provisions to allow a refund of excess instalment 
amounts paid on account of a taxpayer’s tax liability for a year. 
Since instalment amounts include both federal and provincial 
taxes, the provincial legislation needs to be amended to 
similarly allow provincial instalment amounts to be refunded. 
This technical amendment will properly align provincial and 
federal legislation for administrative clarity. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, the CRA, which administers our 
income tax system under the tax collections agreement, has 
requested that each of these technical amendments be made to 
reflect recent changes in federal legislation. 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of the Act to 
amend The Income Tax Act, 2000. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved second reading of 
Bill No. 178, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2015. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member for 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to stand today to give initial comments on Bill 178. I 
think it’s really important to basically explain to the people of 
Saskatchewan some of the changes that are required, as the 
minister has alluded to and explained as to what’s in store for 
some of the changes around this particular bill, Bill 178. And 
there was made reference, or a passing reference to a number of 
initiatives that were attached to this year’s budget. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the Assembly, the 
opposition continually see evidence that this particular budget 
and the challenges attached to it and the huge debt being left 
behind is going to be a problem for generations to come. And 
this is another example, Mr. Speaker, as we see some of the 
changes that have been identified by the minister that are 
attached to this Bill 178. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to spend a whole heck of a lot 
of time on the technical changes that the Canada Revenue 
Agency has requested of this particular government. Obviously 
the CRA have their processes and, of course, each provincial 
jurisdiction must be able to follow the rules and regulations 
established by the Canada Revenue Agency. That’s, of course, 
good governance and also part of what is necessary from every 
jurisdiction across the province, is that once CRA determines 
some of the technical changes required, then every province has 
to abide by that. 
 
I want to spend a bit of my time, Mr. Speaker, if I may, on some 
of the points that the minister raised around some of the savings 
that they’re trying to achieve through their budget that they 
presented just last month. 
 
The changes that we looked at include the graduate retention 
program savings. I think the amount that they’ve identified is 
$30 million. The program that at one time, Mr. Speaker, that 
many people were able to enjoy, young people that came out of 
school or came out of the post-secondary institutions were able 
to enjoy as a tax opportunity, a tax savings opportunity once 
they graduated in Saskatchewan and were planning to work 
there, Mr. Speaker, they have converted this program and it’s 
not what they campaigned on. They have converted this 
program to now a non-refundable tax credit, and only those 
earning a certain amount of income would be able to cash in on 
this particular non-refundable tax credit. And before many, 
many other groups and organizations, many groups and ages of 
people and various degrees of income were eligible for this 
program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we’re finding now, the changes that this particular 
government has put in place really limits those savings and 
those opportunities to those graduates that are making higher 
incomes, thereby leaving a whole host of young people 
emerging into the labour market with no opportunity to take 
advantage of the graduate retention program that has been in 



6976 Saskatchewan Hansard April 21, 2015 

Saskatchewan for several years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other component that the minister has alluded 
to includes the active families benefit which is really, Mr. 
Speaker, a $6 million savings. Many people out there in 
Saskatchewanland certainly wouldn’t argue a tremendous 
amount by saying those that earn greater incomes should not be 
able to have programs of this sort afforded to them. 
 
But what happens, Mr. Speaker, many of us would argue back 
that some of these programs are indeed valuable. And then if 
you compound some of the challenges on the middle class, you 
start taking away some of the tax credit for graduating in 
Saskatchewan. You start taking some of the benefits for the 
active families benefit. You start increasing their power bills. 
You see the rate of food prices going up, Mr. Speaker. The 
inflation rate, of course, is always a challenge for many farmers, 
people, and families. And, Mr. Speaker, you compound all 
those matters, you compound all those pressures on the middle 
class, it does have a dramatic negative affect overall. And that’s 
exactly the reason why, Mr. Speaker, we stand in our place and 
we vote against the budget, and we continue holding the Sask 
Party government to account. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, some of the ideas that people have come 
forward and have offered, some very, very astute and 
well-researched ideas on how this government could actually 
save money through their budgetary processes, what we’re 
finding is the Saskatchewan Party government simply does not 
listen. They do not in any way, shape, or form take advice and 
certainly direction from people that are trying to be as helpful as 
they can, Mr. Speaker, in making sure that the economy 
continues to grow but we are also able to manage our finances 
as a province very well. 
 
One of the examples I would use, Mr. Speaker, in the brief time 
I have to respond to this particular bill, is the Regina bypass 
project. The Regina bypass project, Mr. Speaker, has been 
identified by a number of individuals in the city here of course 
and as well throughout the northeast portion of the city and 
points beyond, where they have identified a great amount of 
savings on this particular project.  
 
They have approached the Minister of Highways. They’ve 
approached a number of MLAs. They’ve approached a number 
of people associated with the Sask Party, and basically some of 
their advice on how we save hundreds of millions of dollars on 
this project has not been taken, Mr. Speaker. This would have 
been easily, easily a good place to begin saving instead of 
putting up the graduate program savings benefit, instead of 
taking away the active families benefit, Mr. Speaker, instead of 
taking away the R & D tax credit, the things that they 
campaigned on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, several individuals have come forward and said to 
us, look, we have the ways and means in which we can explain 
to government exactly how they can save 200, $300 million on 
one of the most ambitious projects in the history of 
Saskatchewan, and that is the Regina bypass project, Mr. 
Speaker. They have come forward with some very compelling 
arguments, some very succinct points on how, and a very 
intelligent, active role in showing and teaching the government 
how they can save an incredible amount of money on the 

bypass, Mr. Speaker, only to be met with resistance, only to be 
met with ministers that aren’t paying attention to their concerns, 
and only to be met with a bunch of hurdles that aren’t necessary 
for them to get their point across. 
 
[15:00] 
 
I’m actually very pleased that the Premier is aware of some of 
the issues that we’re bringing forward of this particular bill, as 
these gentlemen have been trying to get the attention of the 
Premier, to explain to the Premier that the Regina bypass 
project is one area that he needs to spend a lot of time on to be 
able to show how they can save a tremendous amount of 
money. Mr. Speaker, these individuals, these gentlemen have 
spent tons of time to explain to the government that you don’t 
have to sacrifice the programs that the Minister of Finance has 
identified in Bill 178, that there’s other ways and means in 
which you can save the Saskatchewan taxpayers tons of money. 
They have been mentioning this from time to time. They’ve 
been fighting this battle for months on end, Mr. Speaker, and 
they’ve been trying to get the attention of the Saskatchewan 
Party government by saying look, the Regina bypass project is 
not the best project in the world in terms of the affordability. 
 
They have to make sure that they bring this plan forward that is 
functional, that is affordable, and that can serve the city and the 
region for years and years to come, Mr. Speaker. They are 
advocating for one simple thing: to have the audience of the 
Premier and the cabinet ministers and even the Sask Party 
caucus so they can explain how they can save a ton of money, a 
ton of money on making sure that the Regina bypass is done 
properly and is done functionally and has done as much as it 
can in terms of ensuring safety for many of these citizens, 
traffic that travel this particular route, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For them the bottom line is putting money into a Regina bypass 
that does not bypass the city is really illogical. It is not 
something that the people of Saskatchewan would accept if they 
had all the details and all the information that these two 
gentlemen in particular have at their disposal. 
 
So I would challenge the Premier, who is sitting in the 
Assembly today, to ensure him that given the time, afford the 
time to these gentlemen that are advocating an incredible 
amount of savings with the Regina bypass. They’re advocating 
for an hour of your time to explain the value of their proposal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that’s one of the things that we wanted to 
raise. We have tons of examples throughout Saskatchewan of 
how people are able to be able to save a lot of money if they’re 
listened to and certainly if they are respected enough to gain 
audience with those that are making these decisions. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, we have a lot more to say about 
the programs that are being slashed today. We’re getting a lot of 
advice and information from people that are encouraging this 
government to listen to their advice. And, Mr. Speaker, what 
we’re seeing is a continual debt that’s being built in 
Saskatchewan, compliments of the Saskatchewan Party 
government. We’ll have a lot more to say on the debt that 
they’re racking up for universities, municipalities, and of course 
the taxpayers of Saskatchewan. 
 



April 21, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6977 

So on that note, Mr. Speaker, we have more to say on this, and 
we will seek advice from many other organizations and people 
on this matter. Until that time, Mr. Speaker, I move that we 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 178. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 178, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2015. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. To facilitate the work of committees this afternoon 
and this evening, I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 
p.m. tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:04.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Ruling on Bill 611 — Requirement for a Royal Recommendation 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6961 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6961 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6962 
  Elhard ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6962 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6963 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6963 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6963 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6963 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6963 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6964 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6964 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6964 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6964 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6964 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6965 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Share the Love — Winter Sleep Out Fundraiser 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6965 
 Premier’s Commendation Awards 
  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6965 
 Broadway Business Improvement District 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6965 
 Wascana Lake is Magical in the Springtime 
  Marchuk .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6966 
 Vaisakhi Festival Marks Punjabi New Year 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6966 
 Melfort Mustangs Win Canalta Cup 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6966 
 Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society Fundraising Gala 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6966 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Quality of Patient Care 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6967 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6967 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6967 
 Protection of Vulnerable Children 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6968 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 6968 
 Health Care Services and the Lean Initiative 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6970 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6970 
 Hyperbaric Chamber and Plan for Moose Jaw Hospital 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6970 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6970 
POINT OF ORDER 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 6972 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6972 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 6972 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on House Services 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6972 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6972 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 147 — The Class Actions Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi sur les recours collectifs 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6972 
 Bill No. 150 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6973 



 

 Bill No. 162 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments Amendment Act, 2014 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6973 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 6973 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 178 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2015 
  Krawetz.................................................................................................................................................................................... 6974 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6975 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


