
























































Hansard: March 02, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 26B  MONDAY, MARCH 2, 2015, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6363 
 March 2, 2015 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, this House resumes. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 162 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 162 — The 
Enforcement of Money Judgments Amendment Act, 2014 be 
now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad 
to join debate tonight on Bill No. 162, The Enforcement of 
Money Judgments Amendment Act. This is following up on the 
enormous success of the two years ago introduction of The 
Enforcement of Money Judgments Act. I don’t know if you’d 
want to call this one the re-enforcement of money judgments 
Act, Mr. Speaker, but there you go and here we go again. 
 
Now we’re all for continuous improvement. I don’t know if it’s 
déjà vu all over again again or how this might go, but anyway 
they brought in some changes two years ago and here we go 
again. 
 
This particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, again making 
it easier to collect on those who owe money on their debts, 
particularly and very important as regards maintenance 
payments in the case of spousal support. We think that’s a good 
thing. This particular piece of legislation contains amendments 
allowing for wages to be garnished for a longer period of time, 
changing the period from one year to two years. It simplifies the 
process for seizing a bank account. Section 27 makes it easier 
for sheriffs to seize land being sold by those owing money, and 
section 30 creates a director of sheriffs, appointed by the 
minister, who will be developing the new forms for the Act and 
taking on all other responsibilities to be determined by the 
minister. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got a new civil service position devoted 
to this. I will be interested to see what the status is of that 
position, whether it’s . . . where it is in the planning the stage or 
if they’re ready to hire or that director’s just ready to get in 
there and start enforcing money judgments. I will be interested 
to see all of that. 
 
But again, Mr. Speaker, this falls on a piece of legislation 
brought in two years ago, and again as it relates to making it 
easier to collect on spousal support, it’s important. But it’s 
interesting that I guess this being the trajectory we’ll, I imagine, 
see another piece of legislation within a couple years 
reinforcing the maintenance supports. In terms of the people 
living outside of the province who have assets in Saskatchewan, 
it’ll be interesting to see how The Reciprocal Enforcement of 
Maintenance Orders Act, how that . . . what the incidence of 

that is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again these are questions that are maybe better addressed at 
committee, but I know that other of my colleagues have 
participated in the debate on Bill No. 162, and others are hotly 
anticipating their turn to have their say on this piece of 
legislation at this stage of the proceedings, Mr. Speaker. So 
with that, I would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 162, The 
Enforcement of Money Judgments Amendment Act, 2014. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 162, The Enforcement of Money Judgments 
Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 163 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 163 — The 
Education Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi 
de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 
always good to join debate in this Assembly, take my place and 
say my piece on Bill No. 163, An Act to amend The Education 
Act. 
 
Now this one’s, this one’s instructive, Mr. Speaker, as to the 
manner in which this government has conducted its business, its 
legislative business, this one right off the top in section 6 
allowing the minister to set the beginning of the school year 
before Labour Day when Labour Day falls on or after 
September 5th. 
 
Now of course, Mr. Speaker, there are all number of personal 
digital assistants in this building reinforcing, each one of them 
having their own calendar function. And you’d think that the 
calendar would have been something this government had 
considered bringing forward the initial change to the legislation, 
having perhaps been swept away by the excitement of an 
election campaign, Mr. Speaker, where they thought, well 
here’s a great one. We’re going to make summer longer, and 
who wouldn’t want that? But as is too often the case with this 
government, Mr. Speaker, they leapt before they looked, and 
they didn’t check the calendar. As a consequence, we’re here 
again today with a piece of legislation where they’re fixing a 
mistake of their own making. 
 
In a province like Saskatchewan, where there has been that long 
history of partnership and co-operation with the education 
sector, with teachers, with trustees looking to the interests of 
students, you’d have to think that if some of that fundamental 
work that’s been again part of the history and the tradition of 
the way that we’ve approached education in this province, if 
that work had been done in the first place, we wouldn’t be here 
today talking about section no. 6 and this government stepping 



6364 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2015 

forward to replace a mistake that they have made. 
 
That’s not the sum total of the legislation, Mr. Speaker, but it’s 
certainly a more salient point in terms of the legislative item I 
see before us here today. So again, perhaps if they could 
consult, if they, you know, talk to more people than just 
themselves in caucus or to themselves at an election rally or 
with the sector or took a look at what the tradition has been, we 
wouldn’t be here on that particular point. But there you go 
again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In terms of section 8, giving school divisions more flexibility 
when it comes to spending money on schools, housing or other 
facilities wherein northern school divisions are offering houses 
to teachers as part of the compensation package, Mr. Speaker, 
clarifying that aspect of the legislation, fair enough. Again, 
hardly earth-shaking there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Section 9, removing the requirement for the board, for 
individual boards to get a quote on loans before passing 
resolutions to borrow money. This would seem to aid and abet 
the hiding of higher interest rates on P3 schools which again, as 
the auditor pointed out in British Columbia, caused 3.5 per cent 
more on average in that province.  
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, if they’re going to get into impacting the 
ability of individual boards to borrow or not or how that all 
works, you’d think that the time would’ve finally come wherein 
instead of having the individual school boards go out and 
borrow money on the private market, after this government took 
away the access to the local property tax base, you’d think that 
it would’ve naturally followed that there should’ve been some 
recognition of the economies to be gained by allowing access 
by individual school boards to the provincial borrowing rate. 
That situation hasn’t been fixed yet by this government and it’s 
certainly not fixed by this, this piece of legislation. 
 
Section no. 3 renaming the Prince of Wales Scholarship Fund as 
the Education Scholarship Fund, allowing for the inclusion of 
other scholarships as well as the Prince of Wales. Again, you 
know, fair enough, Mr. Speaker, but I guess when you’ve got, 
when you’ve got to fix a mistake you’ve got to have a few other 
things in the window to distract from the fact that you’d messed 
up the situation around Labour Day, and you need some things 
to give you a bit of cover. And as fine as that might be, I tend to 
think it belongs in that category. 
 
And then a number of changes have been made to the French 
version of the Act, as the French language capacity of this 
government continues to grow wherein the “programme 
d’études à domicile” becomes “programme de scolarisation à 
domicile.” [Translation: “home-based education program.”] 
Again, Mr. Speaker, hardly earth-shattering, but again nice. If 
you’re going to use the French language, best to get it correct. 
Or changing “élève bénéficiant d’un programme de soutien 
intensif” becomes “élève à besoins particuliers. [Translation: 
“pupil with intensive needs.”] Again, Mr. Speaker, quoi de 
faire, quoi de faire? [Translation: what to do, what to do?] 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s an interesting piece of legislation, a bit of 
a grab bag, but again in terms of the main point for this piece of 
legislation, it’s to fix a mistake of this government’s own 
making, one that need not have been made if they’d actually 

consulted with the sector. 
 
And then the second more salient point is regarding the way 
that school divisions are forced to go to the private lending 
institutions, which costs more money which goes to paying 
interest than if this government, having again removed the 
access to the property tax base, had seen the thing through and 
in turn allowed for that preferential borrowing to take place at 
the rate which the government is able to accomplish. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I know other of my colleagues are 
interested to join in the debate, and I would move to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 163, An Act to amend The Education Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 163, The Education Amendment Act, 2014. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 164 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 164 — The 
Health Information Protection Amendment Act, 2014 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise tonight and speak on this bill, The Health 
Information Protection Amendment Act, 2014 which has been a 
long, long time in coming. 
 
I mean, we all can remember various infractions of privacy 
when it comes to medical records. Perhaps the most grievous 
was that night on March 25th, 2011 when it was reported in the 
paper that a dumpster in the south end of Regina was full of 
thousands of medical records, and the shock that we all had 
when in that day and age, in this day and age, we’re still 
dealing, dealing with this. And it really is a shame that it’s 
taken this long to get to this point. And then there are people of 
course that think this bill doesn’t go far enough and that we 
could be doing much more to make sure records are properly 
tracked and then destroyed when they are no longer in use. 
 
And I think this is an important one. I do have to say though 
that we appear to be making some significant movements on the 
privacy issue in the province, but I’m glad to see this here. But I 
know there’s much more that we can be doing in terms of 
privacy legislation, and we look forward to much more 
legislation in the months ahead to catch up with the sad 
attention that this file has been getting over the last few years, 
not only in terms of health but in terms of labour and workers’ 
comp privacy. 
 
All of these issues all fit together in terms of a mindset of how 
we approach privacy as a right that citizens have come to expect 
in today’s society, in a society that our privacy’s been under 
attack all the time. Whether it’s drones flying around your 
neighbourhood and wondering who’s got that drone, what are 



March 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6365 

they looking for, or just simple tracking on your Internet with 
the pop-ups, all these things are happening at an alarming rate 
and we need to do as much as we can to keep on top of this. 
This has to be one of the government’s foremost priorities in 
terms of basic rights, that citizens should, and have the right to, 
expect that we are going to have top-notch health information 
protection when it comes to privacy. 
 
[19:15] 
 
So what this does, it talks about replacing Sask Health 
information at work, and does some word tidying up with 
eHealth. Section 6 allows the minister to appoint someone to 
take control of records that have been abandoned. Very 
important. We know that when practices are no longer 
operating, there’s a question mark about what happened to all 
the files inside and making sure that there’s some way of 
making sure that there’s been no abandonment of the files, that 
there’s some control over the records. 
 
Section 8 makes abandoning health records a strict liability, and 
so it’s easier to convict someone of abandoning records. And it 
also makes snooping an offence to protect people who have 
their privacy breached by unnecessary searches into their 
personal information. And we hear of stories of that and we 
want to make sure that what people have, not only when it 
comes to health information, there’s a real difference between 
need to know and like to know. Sometimes people feel like, I’d 
like to know this because it would be helpful. And maybe it 
would be helpful. But what do you really need to know? What 
do you really need to know? 
 
And so we think that we have many questions about this piece 
of legislation and we’ll have questions in committee about this. 
It’s one that was, I said, when we think about the landscape out 
there in terms of privacy and issues in the privacy world, there 
are many, many areas that we have to be turning our sights onto 
in Saskatchewan. And we’re happy to see that health 
information is one area that we’re taking a look at. But we’ve 
got to, we’ve got to make sure that we don’t say this is the only 
one and we’re going to put it aside for another five to eight 
years. 
 
So I just want to take a minute and talk about what the minister 
talked about. He talked about this as a result of support from 
recommendations of the health records protection working 
group. They made 11 recommendations. Four of these 
recommendations require legislative changes. So I’m curious to 
know what were the other seven. We’ll make sure we have 
those questions for the minister. What were the seven 
recommendations that didn’t require legislative change and 
what are the steps to implement all 11 changes that were 
recommended? 
 
We’d also like to know who’s actually on that group, working 
group. Is it all bureaucrats or is it inclusive of the public? Who 
from the public is involved in that? And it would be very 
interesting to know who’s in that working group and how they 
fit in and how they utilize some of the information or some of 
the recommendations from the Privacy Commissioner. 
 
So he talks about a strict liability offence in terms of 
amendments to HIPA [The Health Information Protection Act] 

and if records are found abandoned or unsecured, the trustee 
responsible for the records will need to show they took all 
reasonable steps to prevent their abandonment. This means they 
won’t need to prove that the trustee intended to abandon the 
records. We know in the past and we’ve heard from the 
Minister of Justice on some of these issues that there wasn’t 
enough evidence or enough to go forward on, and I hope this 
closes that gap. 
 
Okay. It also talks about making it an individual offence for 
wilful disclosure of personal information. It makes it clear that 
it also applies not only to trustees but to individuals who are 
employees of the trustees. And the third amendment is a 
snooping offence which we’ve talked about. 
 
So we think we will have lots of questions when this gets to 
committee, but I know that others will want to have some 
comments about this. It’s an important piece of legislation but 
we will want to know how does this fit into the bigger picture. 
This is an important area that clearly some four years now — 
March 25th — and here we are March 2nd approaching the 
four-year anniversary of that find, the medical records 
discovered in Regina. So government’s not moving really fast 
on this and I think this needs to be a priority. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move adjournment of Bill 
164, The Health Information Protection Amendment Act, 2014. 
Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 164, The Health Information Protection 
Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 165 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 165 — The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2014 
(No. 2)/Loi n° 2 de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la 
réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hazard 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Appreciate 
the opportunity to rise again and enter into the debate on Bill 
No. 165, An Act to amend The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Act, 1997. 
 
And it’s a shorter Act. It’s one that really just deals with the one 
issue that the Premier had raised about making agreements with 
other provinces in terms of the sale of liquor, of alcohol. And so 
this is an interesting piece because we know that when we have 
tried to raise the issue about buy local, we’ve been shut down 
from the other side, saying every day is buy local. But here’s a 
bill that really . . . And we understand and especially when it 
comes to specialty products or wine or different types of 
alcohol, people’s tastes really call out for wines and different 



6366 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2015 

spirits from across the country, across the world. But I 
understand what’s going on here. 
 
But it would be interesting to know what kind of consultation 
went on with the local distilleries. Somebody talked about the 
one in Lumsden with the pickle juice, was it . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Pickle vodka. And how is pickle vodka ever 
going to make a comeback when it’s having to compete, having 
to compete with other products across Canada?. How on earth 
will pickle vodka ever have a chance to make it on the 
provincial scene when it’s up against some mighty giants from 
other provinces? 
 
So we understand this, but this would’ve been a great 
opportunity really to instead really promote buy local. In fact 
here’s an opportunity where they could’ve coupled this 
together. A nice wine pairing in fact — buy local, buy Canada. 
What an opportunity. What a marketing thing. But here really 
they’re going out for buy Canada, buy British Columbia. 
 
And we really wonder about this. How have they really thought 
this all the way through? We’ll have lots of questions in 
committee in terms of what is the impact on the local market 
when we see that there’s so many, so many producers who are 
really trying to make it in a significant niche. 
 
You know, one of my favourites is the Cypress Hills wines and 
they do some really nice stuff. And if you’ve had an 
opportunity . . . I don’t know how many people have been down 
to Cypress Hills Winery. It’s a beautiful little place down by the 
park and really well worth the trip and just really nice how 
they’ve taken different plants and made them, whether it’s 
rhubarb wine or different types of products. It’s just great. But I 
really want to give them a shout-out because they’re great. 
 
And I know west of Saskatoon, Perdue is another great winery 
there and there’s people working really hard to make it in 
Saskatchewan and using the farmers’ markets, using whatever 
they can to make it in Saskatchewan because if you make it here 
then you can make it throughout. 
 
And then of course we’ve talked about the craft breweries. We 
can go on and on about that and how they would like to have 
some changes to regulations so they can make it, and their own 
special unique challenges that they have. 
 
But we see before us this bill so that we can make it easier to 
purchase alcohol from another province and bring it here into 
Saskatchewan. Not necessarily a bad idea but is it the one that 
should be the priority for this government? I’m not sure. I think 
buy local takes a priority. I think buy local is a great idea and 
should be a priority for this government, and not necessarily 
shopping around. 
 
But with that, I know that there’ll be lots of questions for this in 
committee and there’ll be lots of my colleagues who will want 
to speak to this as well. So I would like to move Bill No. 165, 
An Act to amend The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act, 1997 
be adjourned. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 165, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 166 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 166 — The Local 
Government Election Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again, 
glad to join debate tonight on Bill No. 166, The Local 
Government Election Act, 2014. 
 
Referencing the minister’s second reading speech which was 
given in this House December 1st, 2014, I think it’s important 
to point out that: 
 

. . . we heard from the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities, or SARM; the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association, or SUMA; and the 
Saskatchewan Association of City Clerks. The New North 
and the school board associations were also consulted but 
they did not request any amendments. I would like to thank 
the many stakeholders who have provided valuable insight 
and feedback over the past year as we have moved through 
this process. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that this piece of legislation started 
up with consultation with a follow-up survey after the 2012 
municipal elections, wherein canvassing municipalities for any 
issues they may have encountered and identifying areas for 
clarification and possible amendments. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I want to reference that off the top by way 
of saying that it is important, when you’re dealing with local 
government elections, that as best you can, you want to put the 
power and the responsibility squarely in the hands of the people 
that seek to be governed and that seek to govern. 
 
I guess, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the actual changes to the 
legislation, I know that we’ve certainly gone through updating 
our own elections Act — a couple of different iterations over 
the past few years here, Mr. Speaker. But again, in terms of 
provisions of around where polling stations might take place, 
hours of balloting, how people might be registered to vote, what 
constitutes an advanced voter, there are a number of these 
measures that are anticipated by this legislation. 
 
And again though, Mr. Speaker, this legislation is, as has been 
contended by the minister, and we’ll take him at his word, was 
developed in response to local input from local governors 
themselves, and it would seem to carry that forward fairly well. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I’d move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
166, The Local Government Election Act, 2014. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 166, The Local Government Election Act, 



March 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6367 

2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 167 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 167 — The Local 
Government Election Consequential Amendments Act, 
2014/Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 
intitulée The Local Government Election Act, 2014 be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thanks again, Mr. Speaker. As was stated 
right off the top, these are consequential amendments flowing 
from Bill No. 166 wherein there are amendments made to the 
one bilingual act, The Education Act, 1995. Again it’s not 
exactly stop-the-press material, Mr. Speaker, in terms of what is 
being contemplated here. It’s again flowing from the main 
activity which takes place in Bill No. 166. 
 
But with that, Mr. Speaker, I would look forward to the 
comments from various of my colleagues on this interesting 
piece of legislation. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 167, The Local Government 
Election Consequential Amendments Act, 2014. 
 
[19:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 167 The Local Government Election 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 168 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 168 — The 
Government Relations Administration Act, 2014 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’m very happy 
to rise in the Assembly tonight to enter the debate for the 
discussion on Bill No. 168, I believe we have. Yes, the 
government relations administration amendment Act. 
 
The minister gave some fairly extensive comments in his 
introduction of this bill back in December of last year when it 
was introduced, and I think those are certainly appreciated 
because there’s quite a bit going on with this bill. And I think 
it’s important to sort of piece it apart and try and understand 
exactly what the government is doing here. 

What they’re attempting to do is to rearrange the administration 
for municipal governments. There were a number of Acts that 
have developed over the years that specifically addressed the 
relations between the provincial government and various urban 
and rural municipalities. Those four Acts that are now being 
repealed once this Act is enacted would be The Urban Affairs 
Act, The Rural Affairs Act, The Rural Development Act, and The 
Northern Affairs Act. 
 
These are bills that go beyond the actual roles and 
responsibilities of the rural municipalities or the urban 
municipalities or the northern administration district. And those 
bills, like The Rural Municipalities Act and The Urban 
Municipalities Act, deal generally with the role of the 
municipalities. What these bills focused on was the role of the 
provincial government in relation to those municipal 
governments. 
 
I think when you’re looking at consolidating these four bills 
into one, for efficiency purposes I presume, I think there is 
definitely something that gets lost in the translation or in the 
reorg. And that is a bit, I think, sad in a way, Mr. Speaker, 
because we know that all of those bills have a very specific 
history in this province, that they came through evolution and 
through the evolution of government relations over the years. 
And I think a good example of that is if you take a look at The 
Northern Affairs Act as it currently is written. In the new bill, 
they have incorporated some of the I guess principles or guiding 
guidelines that we found in the previous bill, but I think that 
some has been lost as well. 
 
Now The Northern Affairs Act is not very long. It’s only two 
pages. There’s only one main section really and that’s section 8. 
And it tells us a story about the government’s relation to 
northern affairs. For example, one of the clauses says . . . This 
is all in terms of the responsibilities of the minister. Currently 
the minister is responsible for coordinating, investigating, 
monitoring, evaluating, plan and promoting “. . . practical 
measures to foster and advance the general development of the 
north.” 
 
Now that doesn’t show up in the new bill in the same language. 
I think they made an attempt at it in clause 3(2) to talk about 
responsibilities in northern Saskatchewan, but I think that old 
clause sort of tells us the very important role the government 
plays in coordinating and planning and evaluating programs 
that are designed specifically for the northern part of our 
province. 
 
Interestingly in the bottom part of that section, 8(1) in The 
Northern Affairs Act, the important part here, and I’m going to 
read this to you, Mr. Speaker: “The minister is responsible for 
matters related to northern affairs in Saskatchewan and may 
. . .” And there’s a whole bunch of things that he can do to do 
that, and here’s the role of the minister here: 
 

to ensure that the Government of Saskatchewan is advised 
as to the views of residents of northern Saskatchewan 
respecting the delivery of programs and the provision of 
services in northern Saskatchewan by the ministries and 
agencies of the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 
The key point here, Mr. Speaker, in that clause is that the 



6368 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2015 

minister is responsible to hear the views of the northern 
residents as to whether those programs are working or whether 
they’re not. I think that’s a very important clause, and it’s one 
that really identifies what the role of the government is vis-à-vis 
the northern folks and also what their role is and how important 
their voice is. That doesn’t show up in this new bill. It’s gone. 
 
I think when you start doing these kinds of amalgamations of 
Acts, those important nuances can get missed. I assume, Mr. 
Speaker, they deliberately have removed that role of the 
government, and they’ve deliberately removed the requirement 
for the minister to be advised as to the views of northern 
residents or views of residents of northern Saskatchewan. And I 
think that’s a sad thing. 
 
I think that’s something that we hear today in the legislature 
from people from rural Saskatchewan. They have views that are 
not being heard, and they’re not being listened to. And that’s 
something that I think is disappointing when we have to see 
citizens come to the legislature to make those kinds of demands, 
to become active politically. I guess it’s interesting to see that 
happening. But for the residents of northern Saskatchewan, we 
know that their access to this building is much more difficult 
than it would be for folks that live an hour away. 
 
So the concern here is, how will this government now approach 
their role or their determination of what the views of northern 
residents are? And I think that’s something that’s simply 
missing in this new bill, and I don’t think the minister came 
close to addressing that in his comments when he introduced 
the bill. Certainly when we get to committee, that’s something I 
think we want to really take a close look at is, why is the 
government getting rid of that responsibility to listen to 
northern residents? Because we know, and I think any one of us 
who have experience in small communities know that people on 
the ground have a good sense of what’s going on, and quite 
often as you get through layers of government or layers of 
health regions or layers of school administration, you don’t 
always get the real sense of what’s going on. 
 
In The Northern Affairs Act, there was a requirement for the 
government to actually listen to the views of northern residents, 
and that has been removed in this new bill. I think that’s 
unfortunate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other bills that are being repealed and replaced with this 
new bill, the one is An Act respecting Rural Affairs. This was a 
bill that came in in the ’70s. Again it was just sort of, what is 
the role and powers of the minister in relation to rural 
municipalities in Saskatchewan? And in this case, the existing 
bill talks about the role of the minister. He’s responsible — and 
this is section 7 of the current Act — he’s responsible for all 
kinds of programs including: 
 

community planning in, and development in and of, 
municipalities; 
 
roads and transportation in or affecting municipalities; 
 
the taxation of properties, businesses and special franchises 
in municipalities; 
 
the provision of financial, administrative, technical and 

other support services to municipalities; and 
 
the co-ordination and carrying out of joint ventures relating 
to municipalities . . . 

 
Now if you go to the new bill and you look for those roles and 
responsibilities, you’ll see that they’re somewhat there. This is 
in clause 3(1), and it talks about the responsibilities of the 
ministers, but it’s changed. And it’s much more, I would say, 
bureaucratic in the language. But I think when you look at 
clause 7 of the existing bill and the idea that there’ll be “the 
provision of financial, administrative, technical and other 
support services to municipalities,” clearly we see there’s a big 
role for government in relation to . . . well, in government 
relations with other levels of government including the urban 
and rural municipal levels. And this is important. 
 
What I’m hearing when I’m out travelling these days, 
particularly from the farm communities, is a worry that a lot of 
the RMs [rural municipalities] are not being . . . that the 
government isn’t connected to what’s going on in rural 
municipal land. And indeed one individual phoned me not too 
long ago and has actually had to sue his local RM for building a 
road on his property without permission. When he phoned the 
Premier’s office, they basically said, we don’t touch that. That’s 
not us. We don’t want anything to do with it. So they’ve taken a 
very hands-off approach to these kinds of disputes. 
 
The minister pointed out in his initial comments that there’s one 
special part in this bill, and it’s in the part of the bill where it’s 
the consequential amendments. He pointed out that there’s no 
ability for the ministry to step in when there are disputes. And 
I’m hoping that these consequential amendments to The Cities 
Act, The Municipalities Act, and The Northern Municipalities 
Act will help the ministry be more available to RMs when there 
are disputes, either with individual ratepayers or interdisputes 
between various RMs. 
 
We saw that the Privacy Commissioner just came out with a 
report on an RM near Regina here, and there’s a number of 
recommendations made there as well that we’re hoping will be 
implemented, including an advocate or an ombudsman of some 
sort for rural people to be able to make complaints when things 
aren’t being done properly. 
 
So the new section that the minister’s talking about in the 
consequential amendments part is basically the second half of 
the bill. And you’ll find it starting . . . I just have to find it here. 
In the new bill it starts on page 4, and it’s basically the 
consequential amendments section. So what they’re doing is 
they’re adding this piece to all three of those bills — The Cities 
Act, The Municipalities Act, and The Northern Municipalities 
Act — and it’s identical for all three of these bills. They now 
have this new section, and what it talks about is it gives the 
minister another power here to review or mediate certain 
intermunicipal disputes. So we see that when we have cities in 
disputes with RMs, when we have northern rural municipalities 
in disputes with northern communities, this is a new power for 
the minister to be able to come in and impose or dictate the 
solution to some of these disputes. 
 
So just to quickly go through those, the new sections that are 
being added here, the minister can appoint someone to conduct 



March 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6369 

a review of the dispute and make recommendations and give 
advice. The minister can also appoint someone to mediate and 
assist those in the dispute. He also has to give notice if he’s 
going to act under these sections, and the person that he 
appoints can actually establish the terms and conditions for the 
conduct of the review or the mediation. 
 
I think another interesting part and the very last part of these 
new additions is the compulsory dispute resolution required by 
the minister. So what happens here is that instead of going 
through the dispute resolution mechanisms set up in the first 
part of the section, the minister can actually at any time refer 
that dispute to the Saskatchewan Municipal Board to hold a 
hearing and make a decision to settle the intermunicipal dispute. 
I think that’s a heavy tool, and we’ve seen this government 
enact other legislation that is imposing upon rural 
municipalities. 
 
I know we have The Planning and Development Act in 
Saskatchewan already where I think over the years past it has 
been a good tool for municipalities that have connections . . . 
say a rural municipality close to a city that’s growing outward. 
And that bill was there for that purpose. But we see the minister 
adding yet another tool here in the minister’s tool box to ensure 
or enforce resolution of disputes when municipalities are having 
trouble doing that. 
 
I think one thing that I think has been very important for 
municipalities and particularly school boards is an ability for 
the minister to force municipalities to collect and remit the 
education and property taxes because apparently some 
municipalities are not doing that appropriately, and there was 
nothing within the current legislation to require municipalities 
to behave. The minister pointed out it’s going to be used as a 
last resort, but it is something that is simply a gap right now, a 
regulatory gap. So presumably they will be able to use this 
where the municipality doesn’t comply with its legislative 
requirement to levy, collect, and remit the education property 
taxes. 
 
So in terms of the four main changes that the minister pointed 
out, he says the first thing the bill does is to “. . . reflect the 
[new] ministry’s current mandate as it relates to municipal 
affairs, northern affairs, public safety, and First Nation and 
Métis relations.” I’m not sure that the way the bill is rearranged, 
the relationship with northern residents has appropriately 
captured that, and these are things we’ll want to examine a little 
bit further as we continue in the debate. 
 
[19:45] 
 
Secondly, he said it’s going to “. . . consolidate and standardize 
the general authorities of the minister now contained in four 
separate statutes . . .” into one. So in terms of consolidation, I 
think the bill probably does meet that goal that he’s identified. 
 
And then he talks, thirdly, about the “. . . new ministerial 
authority to deal with certain situations,” and that’s certainly the 
one I just mentioned about the collection of education property 
taxes and proper remittance. 
 
Finally, it’s these “. . . consequential amendments to the three 
[main] municipal Acts to help resolve intermunicipal disputes.” 

I think we need to see more support for individual ratepayers in 
these types of bills as well. I understand that that kind of 
support has waned over the last few years since this government 
came into power, and that the folks that were doing that work 
no longer exist in the public service. So I think that’s part of the 
loss when we have a government that decides to cut 15 per cent 
of the public service off the top without any thought or sort of 
foresight into the effect that it’s going to have on the people that 
were using those services, requiring those services, needing 
those services, and are no longer getting them. It’s really 
unfortunate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So at this point I think that others of my colleagues are going to 
want to be able to speak to this bill. It’s an interesting bill and I 
think it reflects a much more bureaucratic approach to relations 
with municipal authorities. And perhaps it’s just a sign of the 
times and the way we do government relations. But at this point 
I would like to adjourn debate on Bill No. 168, The Government 
Relations Administration Act, 2014. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 168, The Government Relations 
Administration Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 170 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 170 — The Fire 
Safety Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to enter into this debate. It’s a very important one. The 
short title, The Fire Safety Act, but the long title is An Act 
respecting Fire Safety, Fire Prevention and Emergency 
Response Services and making consequential amendments to 
other Acts. And of course just recently, in the last few weeks, 
our province was caught in a news story about a fire up in Loon 
Lake, the Makwa Sahgaiehcan Reserve and in the tragedy when 
young lives were lost. 
 
It really doesn’t matter whether it’s young or old. And we think 
of the stories from Quebec of a seniors’ home with lives lost of 
course, or the train derailment disaster in Quebec, again where 
we’re seeing regulations coming out of the federal government 
around that, just how critically, critically important this kind of 
legislation is and how we have to make sure we get it right, that 
there are no unintended consequences, that in fact what we 
value in our community is safety. 
 
And number one among that is fire safety. And I think of other 
issues like water quality, that type of thing, but nothing really, 
from the beginning of time, really, in terms of fire, has always 
made us really fearful. And this is really important to make sure 
that we get this right. 
 
So tonight we are talking about this bill, and I think that it really 



6370 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2015 

reaches many corners. But I do have lots of comments, and I 
know there’ll be lots of questions about this bill in terms of the 
kind of priorities that this kind of government is making. It can 
bring forward legislation like this, and that’s fair enough. But 
will it have the resources to make sure it really works? 
 
My colleague just talked about the 15 per cent reduction of 
staffing. I’d be curious to know if there is enough staff to really 
enforce this kind of legislation. And I think that’s really 
important because we can do one thing. We can make a piece of 
legislation, and we can dress it all up we want to, but if 
nobody’s inspecting it, nobody’s putting teeth in it, then we 
have a real, real problem. 
 
And so we think it’s timely that in fact you can have . . . this is 
updated. It’s been some 20-some years I guess since the last 
piece of legislation, and much, much has changed. But are we 
really dealing with the kind of changes? 
 
Now we all, both sides of the House had a successful lobby day 
with the firefighters I think was back in November, late 
November, 23rd I believe. They made their case about some 
very important issues. And really how they framed it is, it’s not 
just about loss, but in fact having good fire protection and all 
the regulations and codes that come along with it is more of an 
investment in our people and in our communities. 
 
The wonderful thing about Saskatchewan is how it’s growing, 
and we’re seeing many signs of that in terms of new homes, 
new workplaces, that kind of thing. But the problem is that it’s 
all susceptible to fire if it’s not looked after. And so it’s very 
important that we make sure that our legislation speaks to that. 
 
Now we see some of the changes, and it’s kind of unique — the 
appointment of a fire chief for park land or a regional park and 
how you appoint fire chiefs for hamlets and that type of thing. 
But we really do have some questions to make sure that there 
will be teeth to this, that in fact it means what it says, and 
people will feel that and they will feel safer in their homes 
because of this legislation. It won’t be a piece of legislation that 
the odd inspector will refer to because we want to make sure 
there is enough inspectors out there to do the work. 
 
So I just want to take a minute and refer to the minister’s 
comments because really he talks about three things that this 
bill will do and accomplish: “. . . update the powers, definitions, 
and other terminology to better reflect the current realities and 
requirements . . .” And that’s fair enough. As I had said and he 
referred to the fact that the bill that it replaces is from 1992, so 
that’s been a while. “Second, it will provide local authorities, 
their firefighters and fire inspectors with more transparent rules 
regarding entry in situations involving fire, along with 
additional measures to prevent the risk of fires and other 
emergencies.” 
 
Interestingly it doesn’t speak to two in and two out, which I 
know those folks have been lobbied with, and particularly the 
Minister of Labour. It’s an occupational health and safety 
regulation that the firefighters have lobbied for many years they 
get the kind of protection that when two firefighters go into a 
burning building, there are two outside to support them in case 
something goes wrong. And in fact many of the municipalities, 
many of the cities now actually do that as a practice but they 

don’t have it in regulation. It’s best practice and it’s a safe 
practice, and I think that it’s time that we deal with that. So it’s 
interesting they talked about fire entry or entry into situations 
while on fire but they won’t talk about the two in and two out. 
And that’s very, very important and I think this would be the 
time to ensure that’s in place. 
 

And third, the new Act will provide the province, through 
the fire commissioner, with clear authority and greater 
ability to assist and support communities and local fire 
departments when requested or required by a fire situation 
or emergency event. 

 
Now I just want to go towards the end of his comments, about 
halfway through when he talks about: 
 

The proposed new Act maintains the autonomy 
municipalities currently have to pass bylaws regarding fire 
service levels and any other fire safety and prevention 
matters. Most importantly, it maintains the autonomy 
municipalities currently have to decide what fire services 
they will provide and how best to provide them. Whether 
volunteer or paid departments or shared services and 
mutual aid agreements with other municipalities and First 
Nations, the new Act ensures these are accommodated and 
are not limited in any way by legislation. In fact, the new 
Act will better facilitate inclusion of First Nations, regional 
entities, and private industries in fire service agreements. 

 
So it recognizes the challenges that are out there and whether 
it’s regional entities, private industry, municipalities, but it does 
recognize First Nations and service agreements with them and 
how they have to be handled. And so we will be talking, we’ll 
be asking questions specifically about how can we ensure that a 
situation that happened up in Loon Lake doesn’t happen again, 
you know. We want to make sure that everybody’s interests are 
recognized and protected. But at the end of the day I think we 
all recognize the fact that any loss of life is too much and we 
don’t want to see any of that kind of stuff happening. And we 
can all learn. And it will be interesting to hear more about what 
the fire commissioner has in mind in terms of fire inspections 
and really fire prevention. 
 
This is a huge, huge issue. As I said earlier in the afternoon, in 
my riding of Saskatoon Centre we have an older housing stock. 
What’s interesting about that, it’s maybe more at risk to burn 
because of wiring and different things like that, but it takes 
longer to burn compared to new houses that, once they catch on 
fire, they tend to burn more quickly. We all have the different 
challenges in our own communities. But it is a sad day when 
you recognize that fires do happen in all our communities and it 
really doesn’t matter whether it’s a smart meter that caused the 
fire or whether it was some other error in judgment that caused 
the fire — an accident, an electrical thing. 
 
These are potentials that we need to make sure we’re on top of 
and we have the supports, and the fire chief or the fire 
commissioner feels that they have the support of the province, 
both in terms of the resources and the legislation to make sure 
that communities, and whether they be municipalities, First 
Nations, or private interests, that they actually are getting the 
support quickly. You know, I mean we see this and I’m not sure 
what the minister had in mind in terms of private entities, but 



March 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6371 

we could think of NGOs [non-governmental organization] that 
might be in terms of tire recycling. We’ve seen fires start with 
tires that can be long lasting and the fumes that come out from 
that can be really, really deadly. So we want to make sure that 
this bill is all-inclusive and meets the needs of everyone, and 
it’s not just something that people want to say is done and now 
we’re all good. No, we’re not all good. Fire prevention is a 24-7 
issue and constantly has to be updated. And hopefully this 
legislation looks into the future and provides those people who 
are charged with providing safety, fire safety in our 
communities, all the tools we have. 
 
Now we know that for example the firefighters came here and 
they talked about additional funding for fire safety. This is 
important. And as they said — and I agree with this — it’s an 
investment. It’s an investment when we talk about protecting 
our infrastructure, our homes, and our families. This is not just 
a reduction in cost. This is actually something that makes our 
communities even stronger, and I think firefighters are really 
part of that safety network that we feel we have to have in our 
communities. 
 
You know, we’ve done a lot of work in terms of recognizing the 
different illnesses that are caused by firefighters fighting fires, 
particularly with the new kind of smoke that can come out of 
the different synthetic materials that we’re using now. It’s not 
the same kind of challenge it used to be. It’s much more 
hazardous, and it can be really quite traumatic. And so I think 
we need to make sure we listen to people who are in the field, 
who are fighting fires, who are preventing fires every day. And 
I think this is a huge, huge issue. 
 
And so I think it’s important to make sure that we do and the 
government does recognize staffing both within the fire 
commissioner’s office but also to make sure communities have 
the resources to make sure they have the right resources, the 
right mix so they can make a difference and make sure people 
feel safe as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that we can also make 
sure that firefighters feel like they have . . . And this goes right 
across the board. I actually feel this is one that we’re going to 
have to deal with with some especially rural areas where they 
can be caught in very traumatic situations with fire and the 
effect of post-traumatic effects among firefighters, but 
specifically around professional firefighters. 
 
I can only imagine the stress that many folks feel up in Loon 
Lake just because of the way that it’s all played out. And while 
our hearts and sympathy go out to all involved, these folks live 
with the aftermath of the fire for a long, long time. And you 
think about that, and I come back to the train derailment, the 
post-traumatic stress that happens after a major explosion like 
that and how it affects the community there as well. 
 
[20:00] 
 
I think there’s lots that we can be looking at here as well. It’s a 
very important issue and of course I think we need to listen to 
our firefighters. They do talk about Bill 85 that really set back 
the professionalism of firefighters, particularly when it changed 
the threshold of communities in which the bargaining process 
now does not apply to and moving it up from 10,000 to 20,000, 

moving eight communities out of that. And I think that was a 
shame to do that, especially the way it was done by the 
government of the day, that people were really caught off guard, 
didn’t have time to explain to the minister the impact of taking 
some eight communities out of the bargaining process that 
professional firefighters have enjoyed in our province. 
 
Having said that, I think that this is important that we take a 
look at this. We have some real clear priorities of the fact that 
we need to make sure firefighting is properly resourced 
throughout the province. And we know that in fact there will be 
some interjurisdictional issues but, at the end of the day, what 
we want to make sure is that people are safe in their 
communities. And that’s an important . . . underlining all of our 
province, that no matter where you live in Saskatchewan you 
should be safe, whether it be from fire, whatever. 
 
But today we are talking about fire, and I think this is important 
that we take a real hard look at this. And of course we’ll be 
looking to see, how is this legislation backed up in the budget? 
Because as I said, it can be a priority on legislation, but is it a 
priority when it comes to resourcing? And that’s the question 
that will be before us. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move adjournment of 
Bill No. 170, The Fire Safety Act. Thank you very much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 170, The Fire Safety 
Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 172 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 172 — The 
Naturopathic Medicine Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Again a pleasure to join debate on Bill No. 172, The 
Naturopathic Medicine Act. It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker. I 
come to this with a bit of knowledge, not a whole lot, but a bit 
of personal experience. Regina Elphinstone-Centre is home to a 
number of naturopathic practitioners, and when I think of these 
individuals, Mr. Speaker, they are some of the healthiest people 
you can imagine, so they must be doing something right. I guess 
the thing that I’ll be interested to see, Mr. Speaker, is whether 
or not this legislation that replaces The Naturopathy Act, 
whether it or not this does in fact improve their situation and 
what it adds to their ability to help people stay healthy in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As regards, you know, self-regulating bodies’ legislation from 
time immemorial, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the legislation in front 
of us deals with the different, different measures around 
governance, around who can be a naturopathic doctor. You 
know, what titles are applicable, what it takes to be a 



6372 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2015 

naturopathic doctor, what it takes to gain admission to the 
college, what are the disciplinary procedures, what are the 
penalties involved. A lot of it’s fairly standard operating 
procedure as regards regulatory bodies, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And as such, again it would seemingly be in line with the 
previous legislation. And as regards housekeeping or updating 
the legislation, making sure the terms are current, fair enough. 
But we will be interested to gather more information or 
clarification, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with regards to some 
contentions made by the minister in his second reading speech. 
For example, the enabling of the practitioners under the Act . . . 
Here we go. 
 

The new Act will modernize this legislation It will ensure 
the regulations governing naturopathic doctors will meet 
patients’ needs and that these naturopathic doctors are able 
to work to their full scope of practice. 

 
Well I guess, Mr. Speaker, what is it about the current 
legislative regulatory regime that has not enabled the ability of 
naturopath practitioners to practise to the full scope of their 
practice? What is it about the current legislative regime that 
does not enable that? 
 
And that is not made clear in the minister’s remarks. It’s 
referenced, but it’s not referenced particularly. So what was the 
problem? What has been changed? And how will that enable 
the full scope of practice? 
 
It does again, it goes through the different things that you’d 
expect in any self-regulating body’s legislation, but it talks 
about how the new legislation “. . . will align with the 
requirements of the Agreement on Internal Trade and the New 
West Partnership Trade Agreement.” Again that’s a fine and 
good thing, Mr. Speaker, but how is it particularly that the 
previous legislation was not aligned with the requirements 
under the Agreement on Internal Trade or with the New West 
Partnership Trade Agreement? 
 
Beyond that, Mr. Speaker, it’s not a lot of new material being 
provided here as different from the current regulatory regime as 
far as I can tell. Again, Mr. Speaker, we look for better 
opportunity to gain the understanding. Is this housekeeping for 
housekeeping’s sake? 
 
Is there impetus around the different trade agreements? And 
again, you know, enabling our practitioners to be recognized 
appropriately in other jurisdictions, that’s great. But again, what 
is it about the current regulatory regime that does not 
accomplish that and as such has been remedied? Because it’s 
come back to where I had started, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Again, I have the privilege of knowing some people that are 
naturopathic practitioners, and again these are some very, very 
healthy people, and they’re obviously doing something right. If 
this legislation helps them to do an even better job, then great. 
But if there’s something in here that takes away from that 
ability, again you want to make sure that credentials are 
meaningful, that you have clear expectations in place. But what 
is it about this legislation that rises above either responding to 
calls from the Agreement on Internal Trade, the AIT, or the 
New West Partnership Trade Agreement, or is this 

housekeeping for housekeeping’s sake? We await greater 
answers to those questions, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But with that, I would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 172, 
The Naturopathic Medicine Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 172. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 174 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 174 — The 
Registered Teachers Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it is my 
honour to be able to rise this evening and speak to Bill No. 174, 
The Registered Teachers Act. This is a new initiative that this 
government is bringing forward. We had some extensive 
comments from the minister when he introduced this bill last 
December, and he talked a little bit about where this is coming 
from and why. He had a number . . . a shopping list of what he 
believes the bill is attempting to do. 
 
And I think the most important thing is the firstly on his list, 
and that’s the establishment of a Saskatchewan Professional 
Teachers Regulatory Board. So that’s a new innovation. If I 
understand correctly, a couple other provinces have undertaken 
to have a similar kind of board. 
 
The concern identified was that teachers and administrators 
were being disciplined in three different areas. Teachers that 
were from private schools were being disciplined when 
necessary by the ministry. Teachers that were teaching in 
classrooms for the public school system were being disciplined 
. . . or the disciplinary matters were being governed by the STF 
[Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation]. And then we have the 
administrators, and their disciplinary processes were managed 
by the League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 
Superintendents. So now all of these are being mushed into one 
board, The Saskatchewan Professional Teachers Regulatory 
Board. 
 
So the Act establishes the board of directors, prescribes the duty 
of this board to serve and protect the public and to exercise its 
powers in the public interest. So that’s a good thing. The bill 
also prescribes the objectives of this board, and they must 
establish the certification standards for teachers and standards 
of professional conduct and competence of teachers. 
 
Fifthly, the board is given the . . . Now they’ll be the ones 
issuing teacher’s certificates. I remember, Mr. Speaker, I got 
my teacher’s certificate. I think it was 1984 or 5. I forget which 
year, but anyways 1984 or 1985, and I got my plastic piece of 
paper or my plastic card, and it said I’m now a class A teacher 



March 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6373 

in this province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I always wondered, you know, what point do you actually 
really become a teacher? Is it when you finish your last exam? 
Is it when you get your card? Is it when you get your first 
teaching job? Or is teaching and learning a lifelong process, and 
these cards are just part of that process? So that’s an aside, but 
it was something I thought about at the time. And you know, 
am I still a teacher? I haven’t taught formally in a classroom for 
many years, coming up 30, but I teach piano at music camps. 
 
So I think it’s an interesting concept when you think about the 
teaching process. And many people are teaching all the time, 
but they’re not certified. So there’s different nuances here and I 
think, you know, other professions I think you could make 
similar examples. 
 
But we now have this new board that’s going to coordinate all 
this and issue teacher’s certificates, and then there will be other 
things the board must do. They’re responsible “. . . for intake, 
investigation, hearing, and ruling on allegations of professional 
misconduct and incompetence.” 
 
And then finally there’s a couple other things he talked about. 
There’ll be a public register where we can actually look and 
find the certificate of a registered teacher, and they’ll establish a 
professional conduct committee and a disciplinary committee. 
 
So the minister tells us that I think it’s . . . I believe I saw it in 
his comments and I better make sure that I’ve got that. But there 
will be a lot of money. Oh, I know where it was. It was in some 
of the press afterwards, Mr. Speaker, in his scrum, and he 
indicated in one of his scrums that the cost is going to be about 
$2 million a year. And you know, I see that that’s I guess what 
it would cost to establish this kind of board. 
 
My question I guess is, you know, we have roofs caving in. We 
have crowded, crowded situations in many classrooms, and a lot 
of students aren’t being able to access the learning they need to 
access because there’s so much shortfall in the education 
system. Yet we’re now spending $2 million per year — this 
isn’t just to establish the board — but $2 million per year to 
operate this disciplinary board. We have these pieces in place 
right now, but this new board is going to cost $2 million per 
year. 
 
So I think that’s one of the things in terms of the public debate. 
We need to see, you know, is this an appropriate expense or is 
this something that could be done on a cheaper, less expensive 
manner, and why is this necessary at this point in time? He 
didn’t sort of indicate why he’s pushing this through at this 
point in time, if there’s any time-sensitive issues, why we have 
to go forward with this new board which is a fairly major 
retrofit, I would suggest, of the existing processes. I don’t know 
if there’s been problems. We don’t really hear of any existing 
problems, so why is this necessary at this point in time? It’s not 
really clear. 
 
[20:15] 
 
Certainly we agree that, you know, protecting the teaching 
profession is important. We agree that teachers are 
professionals that need to be treated as professionals. I’m not 

sure that that’s something this government can say that they’ve 
done on a consistent basis with teachers. So perhaps there’s 
more introspection required with this government to say, are we 
treating teachers professionally when we see them not even 
getting an opportunity to vote on their own contract settlement? 
I think that’s, that’s something that’s concerning. 
 
So it’s going to cost a lot of money; it’s going to cost $2 million 
a year. And we also are concerned about where this is coming 
from because we’re not sure where this bill’s coming from and 
what the problems are that led to this, deciding to amalgamate 
these three systems into one. 
 
So at this point I think other of my colleagues want to have an 
opportunity to speak to this bill, and at this point in time I will 
retire my own comments and move to adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 174, The Registered Teachers Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 174, The Registered 
Teachers Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 175 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 175 — The 
Registered Teachers Consequential Amendments Act, 
2014/Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 
intitulée The Registered Teachers Act be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is another one 
of the consequential amendments bills that we’ve talked about 
often today and that is the requirement to do some amendments 
in both official languages. In this case, again it’s The Education 
Act. There are a number of changes required to be made dealing 
with some of the sections that deal with teacher certificates, 
termination and suspension, and qualification, employment, and 
teachers. 
 
So that’s basically what you find in this amendment Act. I did 
want to mention, in the previous bill there’s a number of 
consequential amendments there as well. And then so The 
League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 
Superintendents Act is amended, section 60 of the bill; The 
Teachers’ Federation Act is also amended in 61 quite 
extensively; and teachers’ life insurance Act is amended’ and 
The Teachers’ Superannuation and Disability Benefits Act is 
amended. 
 
So you can see those bills were never translated into French. 
And you know, I’m not exactly sure why certain bills were 
translated into French and others weren’t; that’s part of our 
constitutional history that I’m not as up to speed on as I perhaps 
should be. But in this case we have The Education Act is a 



6374 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2015 

bilingual Act, and so Bill No. 175 makes a number of 
consequential amendments to that bill as a result of this new 
initiative on the part of this government for a new regulatory 
board for teachers. 
 
So at this point I think that’s the extent of my comments for this 
consequential amendment Act, and I would move to adjourn the 
debate on Bill No. 175, The Registered Teachers Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2014. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 175, The Registered 
Teachers Consequential Amendments Act, 2014. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 176 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 176 — The 
Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a pleasure enter into this debate on No. 176, An Act to 
amend The Traffic Safety Act. And it’s a relatively short one 
and it’s one that has caused quite a bit of concern, you know, 
because clearly there is a priority for safety. And I’ve talked at 
some length about fire safety, and now we have traffic safety 
which also is a huge, huge issue in Saskatchewan. And the 
minister in his own comments talked about in 2013, Mr. 
Speaker, excessive speed was a factor in 24 deaths, distracted 
driving was a factor in 33 deaths. And that’s 57 deaths lost 
needlessly because of high-risk driving behaviours, so clearly 
we need to do something about that. 
 
Now we did have the Traffic Safety Committee travel around 
the province to talk about different concerns. We would have 
liked to go a little bit longer, more in-depth consultations, 
because clearly when you’re dealing with such clear priorities, 
you know for example, a fire safety one took several years. And 
the traffic safety one was a response very quickly and probably 
should have had some more thought into it because the minister 
does even admit that it was responding. The bill was introduced 
in December, that he first spoke to in second readings, 
December 8th actually was a response to a piece of legislation 
that they had a problem with in June when people, businesses 
were finding out their vehicles were actually being seized. And 
it was no fault of the business but that’s what the reality of the 
law was. 
 
And of course this is something that happens with this 
government. Oops. Another oops. We just heard one just prior 
about The Education Amendment Act. Another oops where they 
don’t really think through their legislation that have these 
unintended consequences. And I would think, you know, a big 
number of pieces of legislation that we’re dealing with are 

dealing with fixing up the little mistakes that were made. 
 
And we’re concerned about, were there consultations in this 
case. And here you have a story that was in The StarPhoenix, 
December 4th, 2014, and this is “Kevin Boychuk from K3 
Excavating isn’t satisfied with the changing laws regarding 
seizure of a company’s vehicle for offences committed by 
employee who is driving on December 4th, 2014.” The story is 
“Business owner blasts vehicle impound changes.” 
 
So I’ll read parts of the story because I think it’s really 
instructive to how this government has really failed to properly 
consult and get to a solution that really meets everyone’s needs. 
It starts out saying: 
 

Changes to the law allowing police to impound a company 
vehicle if an employee is caught driving while using a 
cellphone have failed to satisfy a Saskatoon business 
owner. 
 
Kevin Boychuk, who owns K3 Excavating Ltd., blasted as 
insufficient proposed changes introduced Thursday that 
would punish drivers of company vehicles by pulling their 
licences and allow for an appeal so companies can retrieve 
impounded vehicles rather than wait seven days. 

 
And I quote: 
 

“They don’t have any sense of practicality in this 
program,” Boychuk said Thursday. “When this happened, 
it was like a baseball bat to the gut. I felt violated and I still 
feel violated.” 

 
It goes on to say that: 
 

Boychuk also complained that he was not consulted by the 
provincial government or SGI [Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance] and would have recommended police be 
granted the ability to seize and impound a company 
driver’s personal vehicle if caught. 

 
Now the minister of the day says, “I think it strikes a good 
balance.” But clearly we need to do better than that. Boychuk 
says, and I quote: 
 

“I think they’re missing the boat,” said Boychuk, who 
added he had a safety plan before his company vehicle was 
impounded in August. [And he goes on, and I quote] “This 
has got nothing to do with safety.” 

 
So interesting insight. So we have to make sure we understand 
why SGI and this minister feel so strongly when business on the 
other hand feels actually the opposite, feels like they needed to 
have more consultation. So somewhere in between there is the 
reality that we need to do better particularly when their lives are 
at risk. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know many of my colleagues will want to 
speak to this and we’ll have questions in committee. So at this 
point I’d like move that Bill No. 176, An Act to amend The 
Traffic Safety Act be adjourned. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 



March 2, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6375 

debate on Bill No. 176, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 
2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 177 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 177 — The 
Insurance Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Again it’s always a point of pride to rise and join debate in this 
Assembly, to take your place, to comment on the legislation and 
the issues of the day. And that’s certainly, certainly the case 
with this piece of legislation. 
 
I’m referring to Bill No. 177, The Insurance Act. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this was introduced on one of the last days of the 
sitting in the fall and is a very significant piece of legislation. It 
is 293 pages of legislation, Mr. Speaker, and that’s a lot. And it 
certainly deals with some highly technical matters as regards 
insurance, as regards hypothecation, as regards the buying and 
selling of policies. And I guess, Mr. Speaker, one of the things 
that I want to say early on about this legislation is that I think 
it’s been brought forward in earnest to keep the legislative 
framework in which this very critical part of our financial sector 
does its business and that the industry in Saskatchewan is no 
more or less advantaged or disadvantaged by this legislation, 
compared to other jurisdictions. 
 
Now in the second reading speech of the minister, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, certainly the minister went through it, there’s a bit of a 
— again 293 pages — a bit of a phone book in terms of the 
breadth and width of regulations that are there to be delved into. 
 
But one of the things that he’d said right off the top was that 
“The proposed amendments are a result of an extensive review 
project that has involved ongoing consultation with the 
insurance industry and other jurisdictions over several years.” If 
that is indeed the fact, Mr. Speaker, it will be interesting to see 
what undertakings this government makes as regards the 
hearings or the committee consideration of this legislation and 
whether or not there will be expert witnesses brought forward. 
 
I understand there’s a technical briefing that will be undertaken 
later this week, and certainly we in the official opposition 
appreciate that opportunity. But what is being done to work 
with the broader public as regards the basic validity of this 
legislation and whether or not there are areas that have 
unintended consequences or areas that need to be brought to the 
broader attention of the public? 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, and perhaps you have received these 
inquiries yourself, but certainly I myself as a legislator have 
received two separate inquiries that raise some very I think 
valid points that are again fairly technical in nature but raise 
some concerns about the way that this legislation will impact 

insurance policies in Saskatchewan. It’ll be interesting to see 
whether or not, again, with something that’s so comprehensive, 
so extensive, Mr. Speaker, whether or not this government is 
ready to hold it up to the scrutiny of bringing in expert 
witnesses to have their say in committee. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, you know, as we’ve seen with other 
pieces of legislation, seemingly relatively straightforward 
pieces of legislation, Mr. Speaker, on what should be relatively 
straightforward matters, the law as brought forward by this 
government often has not come afoul of the law of unintended 
consequences. And if they aren’t done right, then of course 
we’re here. We’ve seen proof of this again here tonight, that if 
you don’t do it right the first time, well you’re going to have to 
come back to the legislature and fix it. 
 
[20:30] 
 
And I don’t have the confidence in terms of . . . Well again I 
think the minister’s an honourable fellow. I think he’s got a 
ministry that does some great work, but there are some 
questions that are raised around this legislation that deserve a 
greater answer. 
 
So we’ll be interested to see what the willingness is of the 
government to bring in people to have their concerns addressed 
and to see what sort of efforts will be undertaken to ensure that 
something as vital as an insurance policy is not harmed or hurt 
in any way by the actions of this government, but in fact that 
this is as good as the minister’s second reading speech where 
they seek to strengthen and modernize the industry to meet the 
challenges of today. And if they’re as good as their word on 
that, Mr. Speaker, there have been questions raised about this 
legislation that demand an answer. 
 
So I’ll be following this with great interest, Mr. Speaker. Again 
there have been some very interesting concerns raised about it, 
around whether or not things like the trafficking provision 
versus no-trafficking position in the legislation, whether or not 
that has the intended effect of helping, of safeguarding 
consumers against folks using unsavoury practices and trading 
in their policies; whether or not things like a reverse mortgage, 
how that is impacted by this legislation. 
 
Again there are more detailed questions than this forum or this 
particular stage of the legislation will allow for the best 
addressing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And certainly if other 
colleagues, certainly our critic and other of our colleagues that 
have more expertise, more experience in this matter, I look 
forward to gaining their insights on this legislation. 
 
And again it would be interesting to see what the willingness is 
of the government to open this bill up to the broader scrutiny 
that is possible at committee stage. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I 
would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 177. Thank you very 
much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
177, The Insurance Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



6376 Saskatchewan Hansard March 2, 2015 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of 
Immigration, Jobs, Skills and Training, Tourism, Innovation, 
and Trade. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has moved that this 
House adjourns. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 20:33.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 162 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments Amendment Act, 2014 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6363 
 Bill No. 163 — The Education Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6363 
 Bill No. 164 — The Health Information Protection Amendment Act, 2014 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6364 
 Bill No. 165 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) 
 Loi n° 2 de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hazard 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6365 
 Bill No. 166 — The Local Government Election Act, 2014 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6366 
 Bill No. 167 — The Local Government Election Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Local Government Election Act, 2014 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6367 
 Bill No. 168 — The Government Relations Administration Act, 2014 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6367 
 Bill No. 170 — The Fire Safety Act 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6369 
 Bill No. 172 — The Naturopathic Medicine Act 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6371 
 Bill No. 174 — The Registered Teachers Act 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6372 
 Bill No. 175 — The Registered Teachers Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 
 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Registered Teachers Act 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6373 
 Bill No. 176 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6374 
 Bill No. 177 — The Insurance Act 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6375 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


