




















































Hansard: March 03, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 27A  TUESDAY, MARCH 3, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hickie, Darryl SP Prince Albert Carlton 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 6377 

 March 3, 2015 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you, I would like to introduce a group of students sitting in the 

west gallery from Walter W. Brown School from Langham. 

There are 27 grade 8 students. They’re accompanied by their 

teacher, Julene Friesen, and teacher’s assistant, Monica Neal. 

We hope you enjoy the proceedings today, and we’ll meet later 

for a photo and a discussion in room 218. So please join me in 

welcoming this group of students from Langham to your 

legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

introduce someone in the east gallery. That’s Mr. Chris 

Gallaway, originally from Estevan and then Saskatoon and now 

Edmonton. Chris was very active in politics in my riding for 

many years, and he’s now doing the good work at The Council 

of Canadians. So I’d like to welcome through you, Mr. Chris 

Gallaway to his Legislative Assembly. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 

a petition calling for greater protection for Saskatchewan 

citizens from developers who default on fixed-price contracts. 

And we know that in September 2014 this government walked 

away from a new 48-unit affordable housing project in Regina, 

allowing a private developer to instead take control of and then 

rent the units at full market price. This government allowed the 

private developer to back out of a fixed-price contract without 

any penalties, setting a dangerous precedent for this type of 

default. And further when asked to explain the government’s 

decision, the Minister of Social Services said, and I quote, 

“You’re assuming that there’s these desperate homeless 

people,” showing how disconnected this government is from the 

reality within our communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: cause the government to 

recognize that there are indeed desperate homeless people 

in our province and to immediately reverse its policy of 

now allowing private developers with whom the 

government has close relationships to default on 

fixed-price contracts for affordable housing projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 

petitions on behalf of concerned citizens as it relates to the 

unsafe conditions created by that government on Dewdney 

Avenue with their failure to properly plan heavy-haul truck 

traffic that’s now inundated Dewdney Avenue, causing damage 

and putting lives at risk. And certainly this is an issue for those 

that live in the area directly on Dewdney Avenue, but for all 

users of this residential artery because it’s quite simply unsafe 

conditions. 

 

And the prayer reads as follows: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 

government to immediately take action as it relates to the 

unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 

damage caused by the heavy-haul truck traffic on 

Dewdney Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the 

safety and well-being of communities, families, residents, 

and users; and that those actions and plans should include 

rerouting the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial 

funding, and be developed through consultation with the 

city of Regina, communities, and residents. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

These petitions today are signed by concerned residents here in 

Regina. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 

petition for real action on climate change. And the petition 

reads as follows: 

 

The undersigned residents of the province of Saskatchewan 

wish to bring to your attention the following: Saskatchewan 

produces the highest greenhouse gas emissions per capita in all 

of Canada. Saskatchewan’s emissions have continued to grow 

to 74 million megatonnes and show no signs of decreasing. The 

Saskatchewan government has failed to tackle climate change, 

reduce emissions to the province’s own targets, or put in any 

plan to protect the natural environment, and slashing programs 

such as the Go Green Fund and the EnerGuide for Houses 

energy efficiency program set the province on a backwards 

course. 

 

So I’d like to read the prayer that reads as follows: 

 

They respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 

Saskatchewan enact a real plan and allocate appropriate 

funding in the provincial budget to tackle climate change 

by reducing greenhouse gas emissions, helping families 

transition to energy efficient homes, and encouraging 

everyone in the province to take real action to protect the 

environment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by folks from the city of 

Prince Albert. I so submit. 



6378 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2015 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Athabasca. 

 

Aboriginal Storytelling Month 

 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise in 

my place today to bring attention to the Aboriginal Storytelling 

Month that was recognized over the month of February. We all 

know, Mr. Speaker, that storytelling is an essential part of 

Aboriginal cultures for First Nations and Métis peoples, and it’s 

right across the province that telling of stories is what keeps our 

languages, identities, and communities strong. Our people’s 

oral histories are preserved from generation to generation 

through the sharing of stories by elders and community leaders. 

 

But storytelling isn’t just about the past Aboriginal peoples, Mr. 

Speaker. Storytelling will be a critical part of unlocking a bright 

future for First Nations and Métis people everywhere. And 

every year our province loses out, when we don’t engage the 

Aboriginal community to the extent we do, almost $1 billion of 

potential economic activity because Aboriginal people are not 

as engaged as they should be. But before we can have a strong 

economy, we must have strong nations; and before we have 

strong nations, we need to have strong languages. 

 

Storytelling is an essential part of rebuilding our nation and 

languages and so, Mr. Speaker, I ask all the members to join me 

in recognizing Aboriginal Storytelling Month. I hope that all 

members will remember the importance of storytelling to the 

past, present, and future of our province. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Strong Performance of Saskatchewan Curlers at 

Canada Winter Games 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 

recognize the outstanding performance of Saskatchewan’s 

men’s curling team at the 2015 Canada Winter Games. The 

Canada Winter Games men’s curling draws were held at the 

Prince George Golf and Curling Club in British Columbia from 

February 15th to 20th. 

 

Saskatchewan was represented by a team that curls out of the 

state-of-the-art Moose Jaw Ford Curling Centre. The team, led 

by skip Carson Ackerman from Chamberlain, includes Brett 

Behm at lead, Kacey Rodland at second, Mitchell Dales at third, 

and coach Patrick Ackerman. They won all of their games 

during pool play, finishing with a perfect four win, zero loss 

record. 

 

Thanks to this strong performance, the team obtained a bye into 

the semifinals. The semifinal game got off to a good start, with 

Saskatchewan taking three in the first end, but eventually the 

team from Ontario won 9 to 5. Ackerman and the team then 

moved on to the bronze medal game against hosts from British 

Columbia. While this game resulted in a loss, Team 

Saskatchewan’s strong performance throughout the week 

earned them a fourth place finish. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 

Team Ackerman on their strong showing and congratulating all 

the athletes who proudly represented our province at the 2015 

Canada Winter Games. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Athletes Represent Saskatchewan at Canada Winter Games 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the Assembly today to 

recognize the remarkable accomplishments of another 

Saskatchewan athlete. Brittany Hudak is a cross-country skier 

from Prince Albert. She represented our province at the 2015 

Canada Winter Games in Prince George where she took home 

three gold medals in the 1.2-, 2.5-, and the 5-kilometre 

Para-Nordic women’s cross-country races. Given her 

impressive performance at the games, it was no surprise that she 

was chosen to be our province’s flag-bearer in the closing 

ceremonies. This is in addition to the gold medal she won 

earlier this year at the International Paralympic Committee 

World Cup in Asahikawa, Japan. 

 

What is even more remarkable about her success is that she has 

only been cross-country skiing for two years. And I can tell 

you, Mr. Speaker, as an average cross-country skier, that it 

takes most people years and years of continuous improvement 

in this sport to develop the type of mastery that Ms. Hudak has 

clearly attained. 

 

In addition to her impressive performance at these Canada 

Winter Games, a number of other Saskatchewan athletes 

climbed to the top of the podium, including North Battleford’s 

Matthew Hudec, Saskatoon’s Lucas Morin, and Jeremy 

Ruddick of Martensville. 

 

I’m sure that I speak for all members when I say that I am truly 

proud of all the athletes who represented our province’s 

Saskatchewan spirit on the national stage. Mr. Speaker, I ask 

that all members join me in congratulating Brittany Hudak and 

all of the other athletes who represented our province with 

distinction in Prince George. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Deputy Whip. 

 

Saskatchewan an Attractive Jurisdiction for 

Mining Investment 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week the Fraser 

Institute annual survey of mining companies was released and, 

lo and behold, humble Saskatchewan was ranked the most 

attractive jurisdiction for mining investment in Canada. Yet 

even better than this, Saskatchewan was also recognized as 

being the second most attractive worldwide destination behind 

Finland. This ranking looked at many factors of 122 

jurisdictions, including geological attractiveness and the extent 

to which government policies affected investment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is just one more example of how 

Saskatchewan is continuing to be the best place to live as well 

as invest in. This government has worked hard to offer 

competitive resource royalty structures, reliable and transparent 

policies, as well as an overall wealth of resources for the 

companies that do choose to work here. This is a province that 



March 3, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6379 

is staying strong and able to compete with economies 

worldwide. 

 

Even more so, policies such as the MARS [mineral 

administration registry Saskatchewan] staking system has 

allowed companies to bypass red tape and spend less on 

administration and more on exploration and development. 

These types of policies show Saskatchewan to be open for 

business and to continue to remain strong — something we can 

all be proud of. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would invite all members to join me in 

congratulating the hard-working men and women in our mining 

sector. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 

 

Rural Women’s Month 

 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 

pleased to rise in the House today to announce that March has 

been proclaimed Rural Women’s Month. This month 

recognizes the important contributions of Saskatchewan’s rural 

women to the economic and social development of the 

province. This includes rural women of all ages and from all 

backgrounds. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are so very lucky to have all these amazing 

women working on farms, working in the community, and 

raising families. In addition to their jobs, many rural women 

serve their communities through involvement in schools, 4-H 

clubs, sports organizations, hospital boards, churches, 

agricultural societies, and other charity work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is because of the hard work and dedication of 

these women that many of Saskatchewan’s rural communities 

are thriving today. They continue to be resourceful, resilient, 

compassionate, and key agents of economic, political, and 

social development across Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, in my 

own community it isn’t unusual to see women running and 

managing their own farms or out in the field working alongside 

their partners. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this opportunity to thank all rural 

women for their countless contributions to their communities, 

and I ask that all members join me in celebrating Rural 

Women’s Month. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 

Rivers. 

 

Canadian Challenge International Sled Dog Race 

 

Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week the 

18th annual Canadian Challenge International Sled Dog Race 

kicked off in Prince Albert. Featuring mushers throughout the 

North, this event started February 23rd with teams crossing the 

finish line five days later. The competitors passed through many 

beautiful areas of our North, including Great Blue Heron 

Provincial Park, Anglin Lake, and the world-renowned Elk 

Ridge Resort. 

 

This traditional race is run completely by volunteers and is the 

longest sled dog race in Canada. It features 12-dog teams which 

run a 520 kilometre track, and 8-dog teams which run a 320 

kilometre track. The Canadian Challenge also has junior teams 

and an open division. 

 

This year’s 8-dog sled race winner is local Earl Stobbe from 

Christopher Lake who completed the race in less than 48 hours. 

Rick Wannamaker won the 12-dog race. The race follows a 

very similar route used for years by trappers, the North West 

Mounted Police, as well as First Nations travelling between 

Prince Albert and La Ronge. 

 

I would ask my colleagues to join me in congratulating all 

participants as well as thanking the efforts of all volunteers, 

especially the veterinarians and race marshals who keep this 

race running smooth. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Sutherland. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Grand Opening of Ability in Me 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On January 8th, I 

had the opportunity to attend a significant event in Saskatoon 

with the members from Saskatoon Silver Springs, Saskatoon 

Meewasin, Saskatoon Eastview, Minister of Social Services, 

Minister of Education, and the Premier. 

 

This event celebrated the grand opening of the non-profit 

corporation Ability in Me, also known as AIM. AIM helps to 

provide affordable and effective services to family members 

who have Down Syndrome. AIM’s goal is to create specialized 

education programming that will enable and support the 

inclusion of individuals with Down Syndrome in school and 

community life. 

 

Our government has invested $200,000 into the AIM program 

to help, support, and enhance those living with Down 

Syndrome. With AIM, several families are being provided with 

support and services they need. This includes teachers for 

speech language services for their classrooms. 

 

I’d like to personally thank all those involved with the volunteer 

board and those made it possible for AIM to become a success. 

Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 

the AIM program. It will truly make a difference with the 

families and children who have Down Syndrome in Saskatoon. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Essential Travel 

 

Mr. Broten: — A couple of weeks ago I attended a health 

summit in Stony Rapids. The northern health authority 

organized it, and many northern First Nations leaders and 

municipal and business leaders were there, and very important 

issues to this remote northern region of our province were 

addressed. 



6380 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2015 

Now, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t expect the Premier to show up, 

and we know from the chamber of commerce report that the 

Premier has not once gone to the far remote North of the 

province since becoming Premier. But the folks in Stony 

Rapids, they were certainly disappointed that this government 

did not bother to send a single representative or official, 

claiming that it did not meet the criteria of essential travel. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. What exactly is 

his definition of essential travel? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the hon. 

member for his question. Mr. Speaker, I have made trips to the 

North, two relatively recent tours to the North, and we plan to 

be getting into more remote parts of the North this spring. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m sure we’ll be discussing not just health care but 

issues around education and infrastructure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can share with members of the House that over 

the last number of years, since our government was elected, 

we’ve invested an unprecedented amount of resources in health 

care for this province. Health care, yes for our cities and yes for 

rural areas of what we would refer to as southern Saskatchewan, 

but also those investments will of course have been deployed in 

northern Saskatchewan in terms of 2,600 additional nurses of 

every designation and over 400 doctors and capital deployment 

right across this province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When we took office in 2007, there was a considerable deficit 

in terms of human resources in health care in the northern part 

of the province and across Saskatchewan. There was a 

considerable deficit left behind by members opposite in terms 

of infrastructure as well right across the province. And we’ve 

been working over the last number of years to close the gap, to 

reduce that infrastructure deficit, to reduce the human resource 

deficit. We know there’s more that’s required, and our 

government’s committed to continuing with that process, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — The question was, what is this Premier’s 

definition of essential travel? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in terms of the freeze and the 

discretion, the spending discretion we’ve asked government to 

deploy, whether it’s third parties in the health regions, whether 

it’s ministries themselves or Crowns, obviously we want to 

continue to provide the basic services for Saskatchewan people. 

There are certain meetings as well that are necessary in terms of 

economic development that are going to happen in various 

sectors, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We would want . . . I remember, for example, in the bear-pit 

session at SUMA [Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 

Association], there was a question from the floor about how 

some, in terms of some social services casework, had 

understood that the freeze was impacting those who would be 

dealing with the casework. And, Mr. Speaker, the minister at 

the time, on the occasion of the SUMA bear-pit, indicated that’s 

not the intent of the freeze. Mr. Speaker, we want to be able to 

provide the basic services and, to the extent travel’s necessary 

to do that, we’ll do it. We want to continue to see the province 

grow. To the extent that travel’s necessary for that to occur, 

we’ll support that as well. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Travel and the Lean Initiative 

 

Mr. Broten: — Well, Mr. Speaker, no clear definition. And 

certainly it’s puzzling why, Mr. Speaker, not a single 

representative from the government could go to such an 

important forum in the Far North. Mr. Speaker, the Premier 

talked about his visits to the North. A round of golf at Elk 

Ridge or a pit stop at La Ronge hardly constitutes getting to the 

North and understanding what the challenges are. And, Mr. 

Speaker, if that trip was there, there’d be a better understanding 

of what the needs are. 

 

You know, I spoke with folks at the health forum at Stony 

Rapids and, when I said the government is spending $1.3 

million to send another 140 health care workers to the United 

States for a John Black lean field trip, they were absolutely 

outraged. Rightfully so, Mr. Speaker, because it is another 

example of this government’s misplaced priorities. The forum 

at Stony Rapids brought leaders together to address very 

important issues to this remote region of the province, which is 

far, far more important, Mr. Speaker, than sending 140 health 

care workers to Seattle or Utah to tour an airbag factory, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

To the Premier: how exactly do these John Black lean field trips 

to the United States count as essential, but an important health 

forum in northern Saskatchewan does not? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Certainly, Mr. Speaker, there would have been representation 

from the health system that would have attended this meeting in 

Stony Rapids. The focus of that was a partnership charter as 

well as developing an action plan, Mr. Speaker, and so certainly 

I know for a fact that the CEO [chief executive officer] of the 

Athabasca Health Authority had attended the meeting and is 

providing information to the ministry on how we may be able to 

help and facilitate the work that was done. 

 

But I can say, Mr. Speaker, that when it comes to support to 

health in northern Saskatchewan, this government, the record of 

this government is pretty clear. Athabasca Health Authority, in 

the last year of the NDP [New Democratic Party], received $4.8 

million as their budget; last year just over $7 million, Mr. 

Speaker, a 46 per cent increase. Mamawetan Health Region, 

Mr. Speaker, 16.1 million under that government; under this 

government, 28.1 million, a 75 per cent increase. So, Mr. 

Speaker, this government certainly is working with all of our 

partners to improve health care all across this province, 

including the North. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 



March 3, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6381 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, there were no government 

officials at this meeting. They were doing introductions and 

they talked about government officials, and there were crickets 

chirping, crickets chirping because no one could bother to send 

one individual to go pay attention. You had chiefs. You had 

private sector, Mr. Speaker. You had representatives from the 

health region. And they don’t care, but they have $1.3 million 

to send health care workers down to the States for an airbag 

factory, Mr. Speaker. Talk about misplaced priorities. 

 

The Premier should listen to what senior health administrators 

have to say about these US [United States] field trips. If he did, 

he would see how absolutely non-essential they truly are. 

Here’s what a senior health administrator has to say about these 

US tours, Mr. Speaker. “We will need to determine what it 

means to be a certified lean leader. Will we still require a North 

American tour? In general, how important are trips to Seattle?” 

 

My question to the Premier: why does he call these trips, these 

John Black lean field trips essential when even senior health 

administrators question the value and the importance of these 

US tours? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

think the public will know that we have decided to end the 

contract early with JBA [John Black and Associates]. It’ll be 

ending at the end of March, Mr. Speaker. We have a contractual 

obligation until that time, Mr. Speaker, and we will fulfill those, 

just the same as JBA has obligations to us, and they will fulfill 

those obligations, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But I know that yesterday and today in fact, Mr. Speaker, when 

we talked about the savings and the quality improvement that 

we have seen from lean, the Leader of the Opposition in 

reference yesterday said, “I thought the spreadsheet was a good 

laugh.” 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, because of the work of lean, because of the 

work that we’ve done with JBA, we are going to see, compared 

to last year where 24 per cent of babies at risk due to 

complications of a highly contagious respiratory virus, that will 

go from 24 per cent not getting their full course to 100 per cent 

getting their full course. That will save us $240,000 in actual 

cash and 1.1 million in complications and hospitalizations, Mr. 

Speaker. What does the Leader of the Opposition find laughable 

about that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, if they were serious about ending 

the John Black version of lean, they would cancel the 140 trips 

that are going ahead very soon to the States, but they’re not. It’s 

all about the optics here. They’ll say they’re ending early and 

then just send everyone on down to Seattle and Utah to tour the 

airbag factory. It makes absolutely no sense, especially when 

you have these needs here in the province. 

 

I think these trips are a huge waste of time and a huge waste of 

money. I think they’re another example of the misplaced 

priorities we’ve seen coming from this government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

But the Premier doesn’t have to listen to me if he doesn’t want 

to. He can listen to senior health administrators who question 

the value and the importance of these trips. But this Premier 

thinks that these John Black lean field trips are so important, so 

awesome that he needs to spend taxpayers’ dollars to send 

another 140 people down to the States. That’s over and above 

about the 700 health care workers this government has already 

sent. No wonder, Mr. Speaker, more and more people in 

Saskatchewan are starting to question the bad choices being 

made by this Premier. 

 

To the Premier: how can he justify spending $1.3 million for 

another 140 people to go on a field trip to the US but not one, 

not a single government official could attend an important 

health forum in Saskatchewan’s Far North? How on earth can 

he justify that? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

an example I’ve given in this province, in northern 

Saskatchewan, as it relates to this particular respiratory virus. 

The children of northern Saskatchewan have been treated very 

well. Their full course of shots had been given 100 per cent of 

the time. 

 

But in southern Saskatchewan, that was not the case. In fact, 

Mr. Speaker, while the course of shots were given while the 

child was still in the hospital before discharge, it was the 

follow-up that needed to be a part of that. We had families 

travelling a couple of hundred kilometres, Mr. Speaker. We 

were able to reduce that by streamlining and standardizing the 

process, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I said before, this is the work that we are 

achieving through lean, what we’re learning from JBA and 

what we had learned prior to JBA and what we’ve learned after 

that to the point where $240,000 will be saved by not having to 

throw away medication and over $1 million saved in reducing 

complications and hospitalizations, Mr. Speaker. This is why 

we’re doing this, so that all of those kids, all of the kids in this 

province don’t have to go through this, Mr. Speaker, or their 

families. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Costs and Benefits of the Lean Initiative 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Yesterday the government tabled a document 

that listed minimal savings as a result of anything that could be 

remotely connected to lean. The actual savings achieved are 

incredibly meagre, and very few of those actual savings have 

anything whatsoever to do with John Black. So that document 

on its own is very unimpressive, but it’s especially 

unimpressive in the context of the total cost of the lean pet 

project. 

 

To the minister: when can we expect him to table a document 

that outlines all the costs related to this government’s lean pet 

project? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 



6382 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2015 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 

savings that have been identified, Mr. Speaker, both the hard 

dollar amount as well as the things that we have been able to 

defer or avoid — cost avoidance into the future, which is the 

potential of a cost, Mr. Speaker — because of the work that we 

are doing is $125 million. 

 

Yes, Mr. Speaker, some of that predates the John Black and 

Associates contract signed in 2008, for example over $50 

million because of the fact that we have changed the way that 

we do blood inventory in this province. Now, Mr. Speaker, I 

want to inform the House though because the Leader of the 

Opposition has said . . . I think he agrees that that was a good 

thing to do, that we reduce the blood inventory, the discard that 

we’re throwing, the blood we’re throwing away, that that was a 

good thing to do. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that was done by ministry staff and some of our 

front-line staff getting together with the support of Kaizen 

Institute lean advisers, Mr. Speaker. So there was in fact a 

consultant that was used that gave us that good work, Mr. 

Speaker, and that is a part of the 125 million that we have saved 

to date. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — I didn’t actually hear a total in that answer, 

Mr. Speaker. We know about many, we know about many of 

the lean costs. We know about consultants, senseis, workshops, 

Kaizen promotion offices, and all of that adds up to a massive 

amount of taxpayer money, but this government still won’t 

disclose the total costs of all lean spending. In fact we asked the 

Ministry of Health for the lean-related travel expenses of just 

eight ministry officials, and we were told it would take 177 

hours to figure out that, and we would have to pay $5,400 for 

the staff time to do so, just for the Ministry of Health to 

calculate the lean-related travel costs for eight officials. 

 

To the minister: why on earth would it take the government 177 

hours to figure out the lean-related travel costs for just eight 

officials? 

 

[14:00] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since 2008, 

April of 2008, we have saved $125 million, Mr. Speaker, and 

improved quality in the health care system. I won’t go into what 

was done in Five Hills Health Region under the NDP in lean, 

Mr. Speaker. I’m just going to use the 2008 number. But, Mr. 

Speaker, it was $125 million, and to date we’ve invested $40.5 

million in lean, so 40.5 million versus 125 million in savings. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, it’s outrageous that this 

government doesn’t even know how much it’s spending on the 

John Black lean pet project. It can’t even tell us how much has 

been spent on lean-related travel for just eight officials, just 

eight, Mr. Speaker. The government says it would take 177 

hours to calculate that. 

 

And here’s the contrast. John Black has this government using 

stopwatches to track everything nurses do, right down to the 

second. “Nurse walks, 10 seconds; nurse checks, grabs, 4 

seconds; nurse walks, 17 seconds; nurse turns around, 1 

second.” This government is actually following nurses around 

and timing everything they do down to the second. Yet this 

government isn’t even keeping track of its own lean-related 

expenses. 

 

To the minister: when will this government put down the 

stopwatches, pick up the calculators, and finally tell 

Saskatchewan people the truth about the full cost of its lean pet 

projects? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. I think the 

members were fairly supportive of Releasing Time to Care 

when that was first introduced to the province. If you look at 

Releasing Time to Care, the first thing that you need is a 

stopwatch, Mr. Speaker. So this has been a part of lean with 

JBA. It’s been a part of lean prior to that. It’s been a part of 

Releasing Time to Care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to be clear — $40.5 million. That includes 

1.5 million in travel for North American tours as of February 

6th, 1.3 million paid to physicians as of February 11th, and 

$195,000 for patient and family involvement because all of our 

events we ensure that we have a patient or family 

representative. We of course will pay some honorarium for 

them to be a part of that, Mr. Speaker. And so that was 

$195,000, including the JBA contract and what we paid prior to 

that — $40.5 million. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Maintenance of Educational Facilities 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Yesterday the Education minister was 

unable to answer the most basic questions about the state of our 

school buildings. No answers despite the fact that a special 

investigation into schools in just one school division found that 

five of those schools in that one division are deemed not 

structurally sound from a special engineer’s investigation. 

There’s now temporary posts, two-by-fours, two-by-sixes 

propping those schools up to ensure basic safety. This is more 

than alarming. That school division says that those structural 

problems would not have been identified with a routine 

inspection. They needed an engineer to come in and do a special 

inspection. 

 

A very straightforward question to the Minister of Education: 

how many schools in other school divisions have undergone 

this sort of special inspection? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, thanks for the question. 

We don’t assume responsibility for what takes place in each and 

every school in our province. We provide funding for capital, 

for operating. We provide emergent funding. We provide a 



March 3, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6383 

variety of other funding sources, but how those funds are to be 

allocated, how those things are, we respect the autonomy of the 

boards to do that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member opposite is referring specifically to 

Prairie Spirit School Division, and what I would like to do is 

point out for him some of the money that’s gone to Prairie 

Spirit School Division in the 2014-15 year: preventative 

maintenance budget provided by the province, $1.137 million; 

emergent funding for some of the emergency items that they 

identified, $861,581; ongoing capital projects, $6.7 million; 

relocatable classrooms, $1.36 million — over $10 million in 

this last year alone, Mr. Speaker, in that school division. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, in light of five schools 

being deemed structurally unsound from a special investigation, 

schools that weren’t safe for kids, for the Minister of Education 

to brush off his responsibility is absolutely disgusting, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

He didn’t answer the question, so I’ll narrow it down just a little 

bit more. Could the minister clarify today if schools in Moose 

Jaw and Prince Albert have undergone the same sort of special 

investigation that found these schools to be unsafe? Can he 

assure parents here today that those schools in Prince Albert 

and Moose Jaw are safe? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the school divisions in our 

province work hard. They’re competent and they’re capable. 

With the resources they have, they do a good job. They do an 

effective job. When they find a problem such as they did in 

Prairie Spirit, they acted and they did the right thing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will continue to provide funding for them. Mr. 

Speaker, our total school infrastructure spending is up 268 per 

cent. In our first seven years in government, we spent $700 

million. In their entire previous seven years before that, they 

spent $190 million. This is at the same time they closed 176 

schools. Mr. Speaker, they have not got a good track record. If 

they’re willing to stand up and say, this is what they’re 

responsible for prior to us forming government, that would be a 

good thing. They should assume some responsibility for the 

shortfall that was in our province. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s alarming that that 

minister is brushing off his responsibility. The school divisions 

of this province care about this deeply. They’ve been hamstrung 

by that government on this front who haven’t supported them. 

And you would think that five schools that were found to be 

unsafe in one small review, one small review would be a 

wake-up call to that minister to work with school boards to 

make sure that every school in this province is safe for the kids 

that are entering into them. 

 

My question to the Minister of Education: has there been a 

similar sort of special inspection supported by the ministry 

working with school divisions to make sure that schools in 

Regina and Saskatoon are safe for kids? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to say this to the 

members opposite, where some of the money has gone to. This 

is where some of the expenditure has gone to. To the member 

for Athabasca, we provided $4 million towards a brand new 

school at Turnor Lake. Mr. Speaker, to the member from 

Cumberland, I would say this. We provided $30 million, $33 

million in renovations at Churchill High School in La Ronge. 

To the member for Saskatoon Nutana: $14 million for 

renovations for Nutana Collegiate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for the member for Regina Elphinstone-Centre: 

two replacement schools, Sacred Heart and Seven Stones in 

progress and not yet gone to tender but under way. Mr. Speaker, 

to the member for Regina Lakeview: replacement school for 

Connaught now under way. Mr. Speaker, for the member for 

Saskatoon Riversdale: $16 million for St. Mary School. Mr. 

Speaker, I will come back more after the next question because 

I’ve got more for the members opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Trip Taken by Creative Saskatchewan Executive Officer 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, it’s bad enough that this 

government pretends that it was essential to send the Creative 

Saskatchewan CEO to Hollywood for the Oscars, but it’s 

especially bad that the Minister of Culture refuses to say why 

Saskatchewan people should have to pay for a big Canada Day 

party in Hollywood. Does the minister have an answer yet? 

Why should Saskatchewan people pay for this vanity project 

when there are huge unmet needs here at home? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Parks, Culture 

and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 

refute the claim by the member opposite that this is a vanity 

project, but we’re still under advisement with exactly what 

that’s going to look like. But I’ll remind the member opposite 

that Creative Saskatchewan was created to provide support for 

all the creative industries, and Creative Saskatchewan has a 

mandate to bolster the development of creative industries in 

realizing their economic potential within and outside the 

province through business, product development, and market 

access. This involves meeting with stakeholders within and 

outside the province to develop relationships and access 

markets. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we go outside our boundaries to 

market our products. Mr. Speaker, it’s absolutely vital that we 

don’t sit back and wait for others to come to us. In relation to 

this, the Canada project will be beyond just the creative 

industries, Mr. Speaker. It will be to market Saskatchewan, 

period. I’d like to thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 



6384 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2015 

Ms. Sproule: — With answers like that, it’s no wonder that 

more and more Saskatchewan people are starting to question the 

choices that this government is making because of its wildly 

misplaced priorities and wasteful pet projects. 

 

To the minister: why won’t this government just scrap these 

plans for the big party in Hollywood paid for by Saskatchewan 

taxpayers? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Parks, Culture 

and Sport. 

 

Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 

talk about Creative Sask for a little bit here, just in relation to 

some of the positive things they’ve been involved in. Creative 

Saskatchewan has distributed over $6.4 million in direct grant 

support to the creative industry sector and $2.1 million to 

designated creative industry associations — significant dollars, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I’d also like to talk about some of the creative sectors, what 

they’ve said about Creative Saskatchewan. Mary Lynn Podiluk 

used a market travel grant to attend the NICHE magazine 

awards where her piece won the engagement ring category. 

WolfCop received production and marketing funding for the 

project and has obtained international distribution deals, and 

high demand for the film led to a promised sequel, Mr. Speaker, 

currently in development. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I have more examples, but I thank you. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

SECOND READINGS 

 

Bill No. 152 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 152 — The 

Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 

2014/Loi de 2014 portant modification corrélative à la loi 

intitulée The Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential 

Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise to speak to Bill No. 152, An Act to make a consequential 

amendment resulting from the enactment of The Victims of 

Domestic Violence Amendment Act, 2014. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this bill relates to the previous bill, The Victims of 

Domestic Violence Amendment Act, 2014, which we were 

dealing with yesterday. The effective name of the legislation is 

changed to “the victims of interpersonal violence.” And, Mr. 

Speaker, it includes things under that legislation now, including 

some kinds of the electronic communications and others trying 

to deal with the types of violence and intimidation that are 

present in our society today. 

 

So now this particular bill goes into the Queen’s Bench 

legislation, The Queen’s Bench Act, which is The Queen’s 

Bench Act, 1992, section 2, and basically says that a family law 

proceeding as defined in that legislation will include any 

application made under The Victims of Interpersonal Violence 

Act, which is a new name for The Victims of Domestic Violence 

Act. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this once again is important as it relates to having 

bilingual legislation in Saskatchewan, but more importantly I 

think it affirms and confirms that the Queen’s Bench court of 

our province has the overall supervision of the procedure under 

The Victims of Interpersonal Violence Act, as it will soon be 

called. And the importance of that is that many of these cases 

involve defining a balance between the rights of individuals, 

whether they’re the victims or the perpetrators, and also the 

community, to make sure that the community is protected. And 

we have traditionally relied on the Court of Queen’s Bench as a 

place where some of these tough questions can be dealt with if 

they’re not specifically cleared up in the procedures of the 

legislation. 

 

[14:15] 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that we continue to make 

sure that we follow the direction of the courts around having 

bilingual legislation. It’s also important that we affirm the role 

of the courts in being the final arbitrator or arbiter of many of 

the things that happen in these difficult situations that arise. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this bill will be dealt with along with the main bill 

when it goes to committee, and I have no further comments at 

this time. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 152, The Victims of 

Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 2014 be 

now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 

designate that Bill No. 152, The Victims of Domestic Violence 

Consequential Amendment Act, 2014 be committed to the 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 150 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 



March 3, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6385 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 150 — The 

Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This particular piece 

of legislation, The Residential Tenancies Act, and a bill to 

amend The Residential Tenancies Act is legislation that 

attempts to modernize and update provisions of the legislation 

that has been in place for quite a number of years. 

 

Now I think what it’s important to recognize is that there are 

some fundamental changes that are being made here around 

eliminating the concept of social housing in the legislation, and 

we don’t fully know the implications of that as it relates to this 

legislation and we don’t necessarily understand why that is 

happening. We can take some educated guesses based on some 

of the activities of the government where they have been 

effectively backing away from any kind of investment in social 

housing that will provide low-income housing or income for 

special people in the way that traditionally has happened in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We know that the federal government has also moved out of 

this area, leaving it to the provinces, but unfortunately it 

appears that this whole area is being not necessarily abandoned 

but is very much being downplayed. And so here we have in 

this legislation this sense that the term social housing isn’t even 

really part of the picture any more, and I’m not totally certain 

what the consequence of that is for the housing issues in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now what we know is in a time like we have now where 

interest rates are low, where mortgages are relatively reasonable 

in cost, if you can put it that way, that there are opportunities 

for people who have money for down payments to purchase 

homes. And it also though is a time when people are looking to 

build residential tenancy, rental places, and getting money for 

that. But unfortunately, some of the length of time that some of 

the borrowing has been set up for does not go into the longer 

terms that we used to have in our social housing programs 

across the country. And so some of the questions around the 

ability to have effectively subsidized housing for lower income 

people, I think, are part and parcel of some of the protections 

here. But what this legislation itself deals with is the whole area 

of protection of renters, protection of landlords, in the 

residential tenancy arrangement. And we see, I think, a bit of a 

shift from more protection for tenants to perhaps a little better 

protection for some of the landlords. 

 

Now I know that there will be people on both sides of that issue 

that will have strong opinions. I know that we don’t know the 

full effect of what some of these changes are going to be in the 

legislation. It does appear that a number of issues are being 

delegated to the minister or to officials in the department. That 

is sometimes a reasonable thing to do. Other times it creates 

uncertainty for everybody because it’s not always entirely clear 

what the policy decisions will be. 

 

So we have pretty detailed legislation. We do have, continue to 

have the role of the Rentalsman who will end up being an 

arbiter in many of the situations involved with the legislation. 

But we don’t necessarily know, where some of these powers 

have been moved to the ministry, exactly what some of the 

long-term policies will be. 

 

It’s always interesting to look at legislation like this and see 

where the amendments are made to regulatory powers, and it’s 

interesting to see that in section 81 there’s an amendment made 

to the regulation-making section to add a clause (h) which 

ensures that regulations can prescribe exemptions from either 

the Act as a whole or a part of the Act. So all of a sudden we 

have the minister, and possibly with the assistance of the 

Premier and cabinet, creating exemptions from the Act which 

may or may not be discussed by the public in the legislature 

before they’re made. 

 

And so any time we see these kinds of clauses in legislation 

should give all of us pause as we look at them because these 

exemptions may or may not be favourable to tenants, or 

landlords for that matter. 

 

I think everybody agrees that when laws are clear, when they 

have very clear ways of being understood and enforced, it’s 

better for everyone. Every time you add a little bit of 

uncertainty into a law, it creates further problems for this, for 

the whole area. And so we end up maybe having some of this 

flexibility in the regulatory power helping certain simple 

procedural things, but it may . . . can also allow for exemptions 

from some of the clear, strong protections in the Act. And so I 

think that we need to be very careful as we move forward in 

looking at the legislation. 

 

Now there are a number of updates to the legislation around 

how people get notice of various proceedings under the 

legislation. I think practically we know that options of 

delivering by registered mail or posting notice or doing some of 

these things need to be adjusted to take into account how we 

communicate in the 21st century. But once again, we need to 

make sure that people receive proper notice when the issue 

involves their home, the place where they live, and the concern 

that they have about making sure that their home can be 

protected. 

 

Now there are some other changes to the legislation which I 

think come as a result of different incidents that have happened, 

different cases that the Rentalsman might have had, the 

different cases that might have gone to court. I think that we 

will get a chance to ask some of the officials about some of 

those kinds of questions, but I know that we’ll be . . . won’t be 

able to understand all of the different changes that are here. But 

ultimately what we want in legislation is we want legislation 

that’s clear. We want legislation that protects the public, both 

the landlords and the tenants, and we want the rules to be 

understood by all. We’re hoping that that’s the ultimate result of 

this legislation. At this point we still have some questions, and 

so we will ask those questions when we get a chance. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 150, The Residential 

Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a second time. Is 

it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



6386 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2015 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 

designate that Bill No. 150, The Residential Tenancies 

Amendment Act, 2014 be sent to the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — The bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 155 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 155 — The Health 

Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 

Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 sur les directives et les subrogés en 

matière de soins de santé be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve had an 

opportunity already to speak to Bill No. 155, The Health Care 

Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act, 

2014. My remarks here will be very limited. 

 

This bill in essence repeals and replaces The Health Care 

Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act 

with a new bilingual Act. And the minister points out that since 

the Supreme Court of Canada’s 1988 decision in R. v. Mercure, 

the Government of Saskatchewan has enacted approximately 57 

bilingual Acts. This translation program is designed to meet the 

needs of Saskatchewan’s francophone community, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve already, as I’ve said, I’ve spoken to this bill and my 

colleagues have as well and to put some things on the record, 

but we look forward to the opportunity in committee to ask 

more fulsome questions and have a more detailed discussion. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 155, The Health Care 

Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act, 

2014 be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 

designate that Bill No. 155, The Health Care Directives and 

Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act, 2014 be sent to 

the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and 

Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — The bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

Bill No. 156 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 156 — The Health 

Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 be now read a second 

time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Like the previous 

bill before, the accompanying bill, I’ve had the opportunity to 

speak to Bill 156, The Health Care Directives and Substitute 

Health Care Decision Makers Consequential Amendments Act, 

2014 as have most of my colleagues. Just to let you know, the 

general public know what this bill is about, it makes 

consequential amendments to four Acts that reference The 

Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision 

Makers Act including The Adult Guardianship and 

Co-decision-making Act, The Electronic Information and 

Documents Act, The Health Information Protection Act, and 

The Public Guardian And Trustee Act. 

 

And the minister went on to say that The Health Care 

Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act is 

being repealed and replaced with the bilingual version, which 

we just heard about previously with Bill 155. Again we’ve all 

had an opportunity to speak to this in the House, but we look 

forward to a more thorough conversation in committee. And 

with that, I will conclude my remarks. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 

motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 156, The Health 

Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 be now read a second 

time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 

designate that Bill 156, The Health Care Directives and 

Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Consequential 

Amendments Act, 2014 be sent to the Standing Committee on 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 

The Speaker: — The bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice. 

 



March 3, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6387 

[14:30] 

 

Bill No. 159 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 159 — The 

Family Farm Credit Repeal Act be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s 

certainly my honour to rise in the Assembly today and have the 

opportunity to speak in these debates here in the House, and this 

bill is no exception to that. The Family Farm Credit Act that is 

being repealed is an important piece of our history. I think the 

minister pointed out in his opening remarks or introductory 

remarks when the bill was read a second time that this is 

dealing with a bit of our history that is no longer. And I think it 

speaks volumes about the evolution of farming in Saskatchewan 

and certainly my family history is no exception to that rule, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

What we see right now . . . Maybe to go back a little bit in time, 

The Family Farm Credit Act was enacted, I think he said, yes 

1979. And at that point when you look at the history of farm 

financing in Saskatchewan, a number of farmers were having 

trouble accessing sufficient capital for farm acquisitions. I think 

we all remember, well those of us who can, 1979 interest rates 

were . . . Mr. Speaker is far too young I’m sure to remember 

1979, but the rest of us who do remember — I was actually 

graduating from high school and I worked at the credit union 

for a couple of years after that at home — interest rates were 

skyrocketing. 

 

And I know farmers were having trouble accessing capital to 

make farm purchases, and the credit union system of the time 

didn’t have the local capacity to make those kinds of long-term 

loans. So I think it speaks volumes about where farming was in 

the late ’70s and early ’80s and the need for that kind of body. 

In this case it was Co-operative Trust Company of Canada, to 

be able to make those securities and do that kind of lending. 

 

I believe that the minister indicated that times have changed. A 

review was done of the Act a couple years ago, and at this point 

in time there are no securities at all that are being issued under 

the Act. And of course, the Co-operative Trust Company of 

Canada has now been restructured and we have Concentra Trust 

and Concentra Financial which have their head office right here 

on Albert Street in Regina. I did read at the time that this 

Co-operative Trust Company of Canada was the only company, 

financing company like that with headquarters in 

Saskatchewan. So I think that’s something we can be proud of 

and it’s certainly an important part of our co-operative history 

here in the province. 

 

I guess what’s really telling though about this bill and the fact 

that this type of financing is no longer being used, I think is first 

of all other banks caught up. There was actually . . . Farmers 

were able to access more types of lending, and so this specific 

type of lending became redundant probably because it was 

successful. I mean it was something that worked, and I think the 

other financial institutions recognized an opportunity and were 

able to adjust and make those kinds of changes so that 

producers had access to funding from different kinds of sources, 

in raising capital from different kinds of sources. 

 

The other thing I think that this bill speaks to though is some of 

the challenges that farmers are facing here in Saskatchewan 

locally. Local farmers and young farm families are facing some 

problems accessing capital these days because of a different 

story. And what we know is happening here is although 

Saskatchewan farm land prices are still probably lower than 

other provinces because of recent changes to the farm land 

ownership Act, but what’s happened is because those prices are 

still low, they’re still very popular across the country for sure 

with all kinds of investment agencies including, we know, the 

Canada Pension Plan Investment Board. 

 

And so it’s kind of a conundrum, Mr. Speaker, because the 

lower prices make them attractive, these kinds of lands 

attractive for purchase by outside investors and people that 

aren’t actually farmers or producers. And I know that some 

studies are being done by third parties now so to determine who 

the new landowners look like, what they look like here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

But some interesting statistics from the Ministry of Agriculture 

were released. And this is Stats Canada results from the 2011 

census, and what we see on one chart that they’ve prepared is 

the size of Saskatchewan farms, and this is the difference in 

only five years between 2006 and 2011. These numbers are 

very telling. In every category . . . They had several categories 

of farm size in this list. In every category, up to 3,500-acre 

farms — so anything under that: 10 acres, 10 to 70 acres, and 

all the way up — every single one of these categories saw a 

decrease, in some cases up to 20 or 30 per cent decrease in 

those types of farms. 

 

So we see the number of farms dropping dramatically over five 

years. And I mean this is something that has continued since 

2011 and certainly would have been a big change since 2003 

when the law changed. So it would be very interesting to know 

what those numbers are today, four years later, and the total 

numbers from when the law changed. But at any rate, what we 

know is that the number of census farms that existed in 

Saskatchewan in May of 2011 was close to 37,000 farms. 

Within five years it had declined over 16 per cent, almost 17 per 

cent. 

 

So what I’m hearing over and over again, Mr. Speaker — and 

this is from farm families, from communities, from young 

producers — is that this trend, which is what it appears to be, I 

mean when we see a decline in 16 per cent of the number of 

farms and also a percentage change of 15 per cent of farms over 

3,500 acres have grown. So we have a 15 per cent increase in 

farms over the size of 3,500 acres. Now let me think. If I do the 

math, that’s probably five sections of land because there’s 640 

acres in a section. So those farms that are over five sections 

have increased by 15 per cent in a five-year period, and we saw 

a decline in the number of farms by 16 per cent. 

 

People are raising a number of alarm bells with this trend, and 

certainly some of the articles that are out there talk about things 

like food security. There’s some concerns that as the farms get 

larger, it is actually a threat to food security. There’s a think 



6388 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2015 

tank in Oakland, California that describes this kind of land grab 

as a global phenomenon that threatens food security because we 

know that the smaller the farms are, the more local they are and 

the more the local food sources are protected. It’s not so much 

an issue in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but it is certainly a 

global issue. 

 

One of the things that we could see this government do is 

actually start collecting better data and have more available data 

on non-farmer investments because this attractive price of land 

in Saskatchewan, although it’s very much out of the reach of 

young farmers and young individuals who’d like to start 

farming, but it is still very attractive to the large investment 

funds. And this one article is from a magazine called trend and 

it’s the fall 2014 issue. This is page 7, and there’s a quote there 

that says, “We need to start collecting data about non-farmer 

investments because right now we don’t have a lot of 

information.” This is a Mr. Ron Bonnett who’s president of the 

Canadian Federation of Agriculture. 

 

He goes on to say, “We need to collect information that tells us 

how many of these investments are happening, where they’re 

happening, and what type of investments they are. Are they 

intended, for example, [just] to supply capital to people who are 

farming, or to own the land and then rent it to farmers?” 

 

And he says this is a responsibility of the governments to 

undertake that kind of information. Now I don’t know if the 

minister is intending to start collecting that kind of information. 

We’ll certainly want to ask him that question and a few more 

when we have the opportunity in the committee coming up 

soon. 

 

I know Prince Edward Island has taken a very different 

approach and actually there is still a limit for, I think, 1,000 

acres for individuals and 3,000 for corporations that don’t 

actually live in Prince Edward Island. But that’s certainly not 

the example or the situation here in Saskatchewan. 

 

There’s a woman named Bertha Campbell who’s also a farmer 

from Prince Edward Island and a representative for the 

Canadian Federation of Agriculture, and she also says that the 

Carver report — this was a PEI [Prince Edward Island] report 

— suggested that to prevent land grabbing you have to collect 

this data. And again I’m hoping that this is something the 

ministry will start collecting if they haven’t already done so and 

certainly start providing it for people so that they understand 

these significant changes to farm land acquisition and certainly 

the way farming itself is being conducted here in Saskatchewan. 

 

I guess this kind of bill really highlights for me the evolution of 

farming in Saskatchewan. I mean even in my own family, my 

grandfather homesteaded in 1909 and my brothers are two 

farmers that are third-generation on the farm, and now they’re 

actually winding down their operations. And a lot of our farm 

land is being sold as well, and it’s just part of the story, I think, 

of Saskatchewan farming. 

 

But when you see a 15 or 16 per cent decline in the number of 

farms in five years and you see an increase in the number of 

large farms by 15 per cent in the same five-year period, these 

kinds of trends are concerning, not just to producers, but to 

local communities because, Mr. Speaker, what we see is that 

there’s the support and the local community networks that exist 

when producers actually own the land and live in the 

community that is being . . . People are concerned about that 

and are feeling that there’s a bit of a threat to the safety and 

security and local autonomy of communities when the land is 

owned by someone that doesn’t live in Saskatchewan. 

 

I know the numbers, I think one of the numbers I heard most 

recently was about 8 per cent of farm land in Saskatchewan is 

now owned by outside-of-province investors. And that is a 

trend that will have a significant impact on farm life in 

Saskatchewan but also small communities and small towns and 

even some of our larger urban centres like Yorkton and 

Melville and Assiniboia and Humboldt and North Battleford. 

All of these communities will be affected by the decline in 

population and by the lack of local concern when land is owned 

by someone who lives far away. 

 

So at this point I think we’re looking forward to having 

questions for the minister and his officials in the committee 

structure here in the legislature. And I think I look forward to 

being able to ask some questions about the ministry’s plans 

with respect to this situation that arises and as a result of The 

Family Farm Credit Act being repealed. I mean it’s all part of 

the continuum, and I look forward to those questions. Thank 

you. 

 

The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is a motion 

by the minister that Bill No. 159, The Family Farm Credit 

Repeal Act be now read a second time. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Second reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 

referred? I recognize the Government House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. I designate that Bill No. 159, The Family Farm Credit 

Repeal Act be sent to the Standing Committee on the Economy. 

 

The Speaker: — This bill stands referred to the Standing 

Committee on the Economy. 

 

Bill No. 149 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 149 — The 

Health Administration Amendment Act, 2014 be now read a 

second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to enter 

the discussion today about Bill No. 149, The Health 

Administration Amendment Act, 2014. In the minister’s second 

reading speech, well just in a nutshell, what this bill does is it 



March 3, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6389 

allows for transfer of health registration functions from the 

ministry to eHealth Saskatchewan, and so that’s why the 

necessary amendments to this bill. 

 

The minister talks about the approximately 1.1 million people 

who hold health cards. Those health cards are our eligibility for 

our health benefits in the province because we are part of the 

health registration program. 

 

So this bill, as I said, is very simple. It transfers health 

registration from the Ministry of Health to eHealth, and eHealth 

is now able to make decisions about how the data is stored 

without having to go to the ministry for permission, and 

reflecting the fact that eHealth is now responsible for health 

card registration, Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think it’s an interesting conversation around eHealth here in 

Saskatchewan in general, Mr. Speaker. More than $500 million 

has been spent to date on getting electronic health records or 

eHealth up and running here, and the reality is we still don’t 

have electronic health records, a fulsome set of records that we 

rely on, Mr. Speaker. That’s in contrast to the government’s 

news release that they had on January 20, 2015. If you read the 

headline and you would read the opening sentence, you would 

think that eHealth is a done deal, Mr. Speaker. The headline is, 

“Core electronic health record for Saskatchewan complete; 

access to electronic information benefits patients.” 

 

[14:45] 

 

A comprehensive provincial electronic health record 

(EHR) for Saskatchewan residents is complete. Health 

providers with access to the EHR Viewer can now see 

their patients’ diagnostic imaging results, completing the 

core components of an EHR for Saskatchewan residents 

[Mr. Speaker]. 

 

So that’s the government’s news release. So anybody, a lay 

person who reads this . . . Well we must have eHealth records. 

And there are some very good things. There is progress being 

made, Mr. Speaker, but what I have heard people say, with the 

amount of money that has been spent to date, the fact that we 

still don’t have electronic health records is questionable, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

I want to tell you a little bit about what the viewer does and 

then I want to tell you about what is missing, Mr. Speaker. So 

the health viewer includes patient prescription and allergy 

information from community pharmacies — incredibly 

beneficial — immunization histories for people . . . And I could 

have this date wrong, but I recently had someone contact my 

office who was born in 1979, and was told that his records, his 

paper records, were not in existence anymore, and he was trying 

to track them down. We haven’t connected again yet to figure 

out where that’s at. 

 

Immunization histories are incredibly important. I know I’ve 

really appreciated seeing with both my kids where they’re at 

with their immunizations and where they need to be. 

 

“Supports to help physicians better manage their patients’ 

chronic disease, including diabetes and coronary artery 

disease.” Again a very good thing and I know doctors have said 

that’s a very important thing. 

 

“Standardized operative reporting for breast cancer surgeries; 

hospital admission, discharge and transfer summaries, 

providing family physicians with valuable patient information; 

and discharge summaries from hospitals in the Saskatoon 

Health Region . . .” Only in the Saskatoon Health Region, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We have to point out that the government says that more than 

90 per cent of laboratory results from health regions and the 

Saskatchewan Disease Control Laboratory are in eHealth 

viewer, Mr. Speaker, which is great, but we have to look at 

where some of the gaps are. 

 

I understand that the Humboldt hospital, which is a big part of 

the Saskatoon Health Region, is not yet part of the eHealth 

viewer yet, Mr. Speaker, which is a problem. As I said, it’s a 

big part of the Saskatoon Health Region and some people might 

not realize that. 

 

When it comes to imaging, diagnostic imaging, Mr. Speaker, 

private clinics account for about . . . It’s about 30 per cent of 

records that are not included in eHealth records, Mr. Speaker. 

All the health region records, diagnostic . . . All diagnostic 

images, Mr. Speaker, in health regions for the most part are 

included, but those private clinics, 30 per cent is a good chunk 

of people who aren’t included in the eHealth records. And I 

know the government has said that they’re working towards 

that, but we aren’t there yet. 

 

So to send out a press release saying, hey, core components 

finished and we have eHealth records, I think leads people to 

believe that they will go to their doctor’s office and they’ll see 

their doctor with electronic health records and think that their 

information can be found anywhere throughout the province. 

And that could not be further from the truth, Mr. Speaker. 

 

My own doctor has been on the cutting edge of using eHealth 

records for a very long time. And I could go visit her today for 

something, and end up in the hospital tomorrow for that very 

condition that perhaps she was treating me and they would have 

no idea in the hospital that I’d ever seen my doctor the day 

before. There are huge disconnects in the information still. 

 

I understand there’s a working group, Mr. Speaker. And the one 

thing that I hear from physicians and other health care providers 

who have access to this information, Mr. Speaker, that they 

want to be able to have access to the information that will help 

them provide us better care, whether it’s . . . They need access 

to that information, whether it’s at the bedside, on their mobile 

device, or sitting in their offices to be able to again provide us 

with the best possible care. For more than half a billion dollars, 

Mr. Speaker, we are still so very far away from that. And so this 

government has much work to do on that front. I know there 

have been improvements, and it’s great as we go along, Mr. 

Speaker, but to say that we have electronic health records or 

leave people with the impression that we’re there, that we’ve 

arrived, is giving people information that isn’t entirely the case, 

Mr. Speaker — well not the case at all, really. 

 

So I would like to say electronic health records are very 

important. And another piece of this is ensuring that we protect 



6390 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2015 

people’s privacy, and that is a huge issue around electronic 

health records as well. The doctors and other health care 

professionals are trying to figure out . . . They don’t want one 

giant repository where all the information will be kept. In the 

conversations that I’ve had with people, it’s about pulling out 

essential pieces of information and having them in a particular 

repository. But it’s not about every piece of information about 

me or you in that repository, Mr. Speaker, but those things that 

folks can come to consensus about. Those are the things that 

will make health care providers have the ability to treat us 

better. And I know that those are discussions that are ongoing. 

 

But so Bill 149, The Health Administration Act, again is about 

transferring health registration from the ministry to eHealth, and 

of course you can’t talk about eHealth without talking I think 

about this recent news release. But I know we’ll have an 

opportunity in committee to ask some more specific questions 

and narrow that down a little bit and drill a little bit deeper as 

well. 

 

I’ve got colleagues who would also like to speak to this bill, so 

with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move to adjourn debate. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 149, The Health Administration Amendment 

Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 158 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 158 — The 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2014 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to enter into this debate on Bill No. 158, An Act to 

amend The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Act and to repeal The 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2013. And of 

course it is very timely as we are in the early days of March, 

and people are considering . . . This is probably the time of year 

most people are thinking about their retirement. Have they put 

money away? Have they put it into RRSPs [registered 

retirement savings plan], that type of thing, particularly young 

people? And you look at them and you say, so have you done 

what you should be doing, putting money aside? 

 

Unfortunately though the reality — and we can look at the news 

stories that we have quoted — that unless you’re in a retirement 

plan, either one that is a public sector type of plan or a private 

sector plan in your workplace, the odds are really high you 

haven’t done that. In fact we heard on Monday when the RRSP 

season was closing that more than half of Canadians bought no 

RRSPs this past year. And we know the reason why. It’s just 

simply unaffordable. It’s simply unaffordable. It’s a priority 

though but it is really unfortunate that we are in the 

circumstance that we have right across this country, but 

probably even more highlighted here in Saskatchewan because 

we know the cost of living has gone up. And it would be 

interesting to know, over the last 8 or 10 years, how has the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan done in terms of contributions. 

 

And I’ll talk a little bit about the minister’s comments, about 

how he feels it is the answer, and it’s an appropriate retirement 

tool. It may be for some. You know, savings are savings and it’s 

a good thing and in particular if there are ways to enhance that. 

Fair enough. I think that’s the thing. But we can’t mislead 

people, particularly those who are vulnerable, into believing 

that that will help them in their senior years. 

 

Seniors deserve a good, fair retirement that meets their needs, 

not to live excessively but to have one where they know that 

they can pay their rent, they know they’ll be able to buy food, 

and they know they’ll be able to buy their prescriptions as 

needed and to have some small amount so that they can enjoy 

the things that we all enjoy in life, and whether that be going to 

the movies, going out for the odd meal, or buying gifts for 

grandchildren or grandnieces or nephews, being part of a 

family. These are all the things that we expect in our senior 

years. But for too many, for too many that’s a difficult, difficult 

choice. And we see that right across Canada. 

 

And I would like to talk at length a bit about this because I 

think we have a real opportunity here in Saskatchewan where 

we have had pioneering initiatives around the kind of work that 

we’ve done with seniors. 

 

And I would think at this point I just want to recognize the fact 

that, as seniors, you know, there are many resources they can 

draw on, whether it’s Canadian pension plan if they were 

working; the old age security, a basic retirement fund; a 

Guaranteed Income Supplement that we see right across 

Canada; and here in Saskatchewan we have the Saskatchewan 

Income Plan that Allan Blakeney put into place in the ’70s. 

 

And you know, we’ve had a lot of talk about the Saskatchewan 

Income Plan and I would like to say, and I have said in this 

House, that while this government has done a good thing in 

terms of the increases to senior income plan, I do have concerns 

about that because the work that they’ve done may be undone 

by the fact that it’s not managed very well. It’s not managed 

very well at all. In fact, when we ask questions in estimates, it’s 

hard to get a straight answer from the Minister of Social 

Services because apparently there’s two people overlooking this 

pool of some 20-plus million dollars. They are not sure who in 

Saskatchewan is receiving it. And we know the impact it has 

every year where many actually fall off the senior income plan 

because of the way many seniors feel that they may not have to 

file for income tax and therefore they lose out on benefits. 

 

They get back on. Some get back on, but the fact’s that it’s an 

interruption that doesn’t need to happen. And we know that 

there’s many folks out there, and my office often receives calls 

from seniors about making sure they have all the resources they 

are eligible for and they deserve — and they do deserve — and 

so we get a call and we say, well you know, it’s actually quite 

simple to get on the plan because what you do is phone GIS, the 

Guaranteed Income Supplement, and therefore you will, if 

you’re eligible, get on the Saskatchewan Income Plan. But it’s 

not advertised. People aren’t aware of that. And it’s only by a 



March 3, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6391 

fluke that you do find the information out. And that is 

unfortunate because people should know that, should know that. 

 

And the other really unfortunate thing about this is that, while 

people . . . And it really is a bit of a tragic thing. People do set 

aside money and they do save, and that’s a good thing. That’s a 

good thing that we should all, when we’re looking at our . . . 

through our working lives that we budget our money and we are 

not going into debt. In fact it’s kind of nice if you can put some 

money aside for savings, whether that’s for retirement or for 

travel or for some special project. It’s a wonderful thing if you 

can discipline yourself for savings. But the unfortunate fact that 

what happens when people turn 65 and they don’t have a lot of 

money put aside? 

 

In fact the number that we often hear is around $50,000, that if 

you haven’t saved more than 50,000 or 100,000, you should 

really talk to an adviser because you may be putting yourself in 

place of getting money clawed back that you would normally 

get through Guaranteed Income Supplement and other sources 

because you have just a little bit that throws you over the 

number that allows you to qualify. And in fact we have people 

who phone my office and say, you know, my GIS has gone 

down by 35 bucks or 50 bucks. And I say, do you have a small 

RRSP? Do you have about $30,000 in savings? And they say, 

yes. Well that’s why you’ve lost about 30 to $50 on your GIS 

because they’ve taken that into account now, and your savings 

that’s giving you a little bit of an allowance is also causing you 

lose out on your GIS. 

 

[15:00] 

 

So it’s something that we should really be sure that we make 

sure our seniors are well advised about the implications of their 

savings, and that includes the Saskatchewan Income Plan, and 

it’s one that while the minister . . . And I’ll talk about his 

numbers in a few minutes. But we know that these are people 

who are putting a little bit aside and will have a little bit of 

retirement. But what are the implications for them for the 

Guaranteed Income Supplement, and will they be sheltered 

from that? Is there a way to say, hey, we recognize that you did 

the right thing? You were a good saver and now you have some 

resources, and you won’t be penalized for doing that. 

 

Unfortunately a lot of people don’t realize that they will be. 

They won’t be able to take full advantage of other federal 

programs and provincial programs because they’ve saved 

25,000 or $50,000, and it just isn’t that worthwhile. You really 

need to be disciplined and put it over, put it over. 

 

But you know, I look at some of the stats that we have, and this 

is from The Telegram in Victoria. I believe that’s where The 

Telegram is at. It could be Halifax as well. I’m not sure. But 

The Telegram talks about “More and more Canadians . . .” This 

is Lana Payne, and this was from last November. “More and 

more Canadians believe they will never be able to retire, giving 

whole new meaning to the phrase ‘work till you drop.’” 

 

Usually we think work till you drop happens within a 24-hour 

period. We don’t think of it literally, work till you drop. And 

this is really, this is really unfortunate. And you know, I 

remember these ads, and I think young people may not 

remember these ads, but we all remember the freedom 55 ads. 

And that we don’t see on TV anymore. We don’t see that. And 

that’s okay too, you know, because people who’ve reached 55 

actually, there’s always the option to work. And I think that . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . TV black and white and it would be 

colour, the tropical scenes. 

 

But you know, working after 55 is not a bad thing. And I think 

that many of us look forward to working many years, and it’s a 

good thing. There’s lots of good reasons to work. But it’s when 

you have to work and you have to work, and the phrase that 

you’re going to work till you drop really is something that is 

unfortunate. 

 

She writes, “For [many people] . . . Freedom 55 is someone 

else’s dream. They can’t even imagine Freedom 75.” And then 

she talks about a report that came out in the fall, the Conference 

Board of Canada’s survey on non-retirees and retirees in 

Canada, and it talks about how people don’t feel in Canada very 

secure about their retirement income. It would be really 

interesting, and maybe the government’s done this, and if they 

haven’t, it would be interesting to see the results of a survey 

here in Saskatchewan. How do Saskatchewan citizens feel 

about their retirement income? 

 

She goes on to talk about: 

 

. . . a full 60 per cent do not believe they have saved 

enough to retire in comfort. Not surprisingly, women and 

lower-income earners were even less likely to have saved 

enough. 

 

Shockingly, one in five Canadians reported that they will 

never retire. 

 

That’s 20 per cent of Canadians feel that they will never retire, 

that they will work until they pass. “In addition [she writes], 

nearly one-third of those surveyed said they didn’t know when 

they’d be able to retire. Stagnant wages are coming home to 

roost.” So this is really, this is really, really something else 

when you’re getting these kinds of results. 

 

The survey also found that over 40 per cent of employers 

surveyed said that their employees are overly optimistic 

with respect to their assessment of when they will be able 

to retire. 

 

So that’s even more surprising. The bosses are saying, almost 

half of them are saying, you know, I think my employees are 

overly optimistic about their ability to retire, and that’s 

something. So this really underlines what we really have to do 

here in Canada and in Saskatchewan. 

 

So we have this bill before us, 158, and I know the 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan has been something that the 

Finance minister has raised many times at the federal level and 

in the federal arena as an option to address some of these 

concerns that we’ve been hearing about for many years, but 

clearly it’s not enough. It really isn’t. It’s one, as I said, maybe 

a bit of a tool, but considering the size of the problem and in 

considering the size of the nut or the bolt that we’re trying to 

work with, this just isn’t going to be enough. 

 

We know that in many ways, seniors who are the very bottom 



6392 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2015 

of the income scales have been a priority for many governments 

now, and we know, as I said, in terms of whether it’s the 

Canadian pension plan, the old age security, the Guaranteed 

Income Supplement, or the Saskatchewan Income Plan, and in 

fact Sask Housing. 

 

And we know Sask Housing itself has nearly 11,000 seniors 

who are tenants and really actually appreciate the ability to have 

a landlord like Sask Housing, even though we see with The 

Residential Tenancies Act some of the language is changing 

around social housing, affordable housing. We’re hearing more 

and more from seniors who are becoming alarmed about what is 

the change that maybe coming next from this government. Sask 

Housing used to be something that you could really count on in 

terms of stability and predictability, in terms of rent, and 

particularly seniors, some 11,000 seniors who are in the very 

low end, low end of income. 

 

So all of these resources are in place, but they’re being 

challenged. They’re being challenged, and we have some real 

issues. We have something that we really have to deal with, and 

we have to make sure we do the right thing. When you hear the 

numbers that one in five really will plan not to retire but in fact 

will work for the rest of their lives, that’s something else, and 

so we need to make sure we do the right thing. 

 

Now many of us . . . I don’t know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but we 

did all receive, I assume we all received the CARP [Canadian 

Association of Retired Persons] magazine, the Canadian 

Association of Retired Persons Advocacy Annual Report. I was 

reading through it yesterday. Now we all just got back 

yesterday, so I might have got it the week before. But it was 

very interesting because it gives a national perspective, and it 

really focuses on what Ontario is doing because of lack of 

action at the federal level around a Canadian approach to this. 

And Ontario and Quebec seem to be striking out on this. 

 

But I thought it was very interesting to read because this is a 

non-partisan, this is a pretty level-headed organization who’ve 

really talked about . . . Now they’ve identified their top 10 

issues that they advocate for seniors. 

 

CARP takes the long view in advocating for social, 

financial, and health transformation in Canada . . .  

 

As Canadians live longer and the population ages, 

governments will have to lengthen their time horizon in 

addressing the challenges and opportunities that lie ahead. 

Here are CARP’s top 10 advocacy issues that will require 

real political commitment and long term investments from 

governments. 

 

(1) Support for caregivers. (2) Retirement income security. 

 

And that’s really what we’re talking about here, for those who 

have not put money aside or enough money aside or have felt 

like they have, but really when it comes to . . . And this report, 

this gets back to the employer’s . . . [inaudible] . . . who say, 

you know, 40 per cent of employers are people in the know 

about what their employees might be, feel that their employees 

are overly optimistic. 

 

And this is what I worry about the Saskatchewan Pension Plan, 

that in fact people are overly optimistic. It has a nice ring to it, 

but really I don’t know if it meets the test. And this is 

something that we really need to talk about. We have to have a 

frank conversation, and we will when the bill comes. 

 

Just for interest’s sake, I’d like to go over some of the other 

issues: “(3) National dementia care strategy,” “(4) Patient 

centred health care,” “(5) Homecare,” and “(6) Older workers,” 

and on it goes. But we are here talking about retirement income 

security, and that’s a major, major issue. 

 

And you know, it was interesting that as we read through this, 

they feel what happened in Ontario a big win, but more work 

ahead. And this is what I would say in Saskatchewan is we have 

more work to do here and, you know, with plans that have been 

innovative in the past, like the Saskatchewan Income Plan.  

 

But we need to really take a look at those folks who are at the 

low end who are the working poor. Those people who are 

making around minimum wage in a full-time. We know the 

average age for people making minimum wage is some 35 

years, 35 years old. Those people who are making some 25,000, 

30,000 up to maybe 50 or $60,000, this is something that we 

really need to focus on, and so we have to take this challenge 

quite serious. 

 

So you know, this what they talked about, and I just want to 

read a few things from this magazine that we all received, the 

annual report of CARP. And CARP, I will quote: 

 

. . . has been advocating for pension reform since 2008, 

starting with a call for a national pension summit, a 

Universal Pension Plan [we call it a UPP] and a modest 

increase to the Canada Pension Plan as a first step to 

address the growing concern about retirement income 

security. This year, our efforts bore fruit with the first 

change to the public pension landscape in a generation. 

 

Now they are referring to the Ontario retirement pension plans, 

so they are not really thinking about what happened, you know, 

with the Saskatchewan Pension Plan out here in Saskatchewan 

as a significant change. And in fact I think they would feel that 

it’s a little too . . . not enough and it’s too late, and I would 

agree with them. It talks about: 

 

Six years ago, CARP’s biggest advocacy challenge was 

getting governments to recognize the growing problem of 

retirement insecurity and to get them to do something 

about it. 

 

And we see much the same here, that we need this province, we 

need this Finance minister recognize that retirement security is 

a major, major issue. And as I said, particularly for those, the 

working poor to the low, average income, those who are from 

the 20,000 to the 50,000, 60,000 income bracket who may not 

have put enough aside, who probably don’t work in a workplace 

that has a pension plan, who are doing in many ways the right 

thing because they are putting some money aside but it clearly 

won’t be enough and in fact actually be harmful to them 

because they will see much of it clawed back by the federal 

government because essentially they will be paying their own 

benefits through a GIS. 

 



March 3, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6393 

So this is a problem here. And so we need to do something 

about this. And they go on to talk about: 

 

Six years ago, [their] . . . biggest advocacy challenge was 

getting governments to recognize the growing problem of 

retirement insecurity and to get them to do something 

about it. 

 

By June 2010, finance ministers finally acknowledged that 

Canadians were not saving enough for their own 

retirement and that governments had a role to play. The 

federal government introduced the Pooled Registered 

Pension Plans as a solution to the savings gap and finance 

ministers committed to considering a “modest” CPP 

enhancement. It is now widely accepted by experts and 

governments that Canadians are not and cannot save 

adequately for their own retirement. 

 

But recognition can be fleeting and government action can 

be slow to come. Keeping consistent attention on and 

driving pension reform for more than half a decade has 

been a challenge that paid off in 2014. 

 

And what I’m really . . . What they’re referring to of course is 

the action that happened in Ontario, and we wait to see what 

happens in Quebec. But we know, we know, and coupled with a 

universal pension plan if we want to go down that road, but we 

know that as well the CPP [Canada Pension Plan] has been a 

very effective tool. But again we need to take a look at if it’s 

time to have a modest, reasonable increase to make sure that 

there is enough money aside for everyone. 

 

There’s many benefits of a Canadian pension plan that has 

enhanced benefits. It’s one that we all pay into, no matter where 

you are in Canada, and it’s one that at the end of the day we’ll 

all remember that we’re part of. Now the Minister of Finance 

will say, well the Saskatchewan Pension Plan is portable. You 

can draw on it or contribute to it anywhere in Canada, and fair 

enough. Now I have to understand for sure. There’s a residency 

requirement at some point, but you know, if you’re . . . My 

colleague here from Regina . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — Regina Lakeview. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Mr. Forbes: — No, from Regina, talked about yesterday about 

how he has been a contributor way back in the ’80s, and that’s 

fair enough. That’s good. Good thing that he remembers, but if 

you don’t remember, that may be lost income. And I don’t 

know. I don’t know whether or not people . . . It’s funny, when 

you make a contribution of a couple of hundred dollars when 

you’re young, whether you will remember that. Hopefully most 

people do. 

 

Interesting here, a little factoid in terms . . . I see the Minister of 

Education’s not here. One thing that was in the teachers’ 

contract that was interesting is those teachers who started 

working and, you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you were a 

school board chairman I believe at one point or on school 

board. Sometimes the situation arises where teachers start and 

they don’t stay. Their very beginning career and they don’t stay 

a month. They don’t stay 20 days. But they’ve contributed to 

their pension plan during that 15 days or 14 days or something 

like that. So fair enough. They were 21 or 22 when that 

happened and they decided, this is not for me. I have to find a 

different career, and it’s better for everyone involved if we call 

it a day right now. And they do, and they move on and find a 

different career. And they live and they have a reasonable life, 

and they have forgotten that they actually contributed to the 

STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation] retirement plan. 

 

So the situation is this. Under the old Act, a teacher who taught 

less than 20 days could not withdraw that money. Their estate 

could. After they passed away, you could get it. You could get 

it. But if you were alive and retired, you couldn’t get it. So this 

was brought to my attention by one of my constituents, and so 

for the last couple of years I’ve been writing letters and have 

been raising this. I wrote a written question about this. 

 

Now would you imagine how many teachers, former teachers 

are in this situation? Fourteen hundred and ninety-two people. 

There are 1,492 contributors to the teachers’ pension plan that 

taught less than 20 days and cannot access that money. Their 

estate can. Now the crazy thing is that unless you put it in your 

will to make sure you go after the pension plan for your couple 

of hundred bucks, most people will have forgotten. Most people 

will have forgotten that they actually contributed to the STF 

plan. 

 

But that’s changed now, and I’m glad to see that actually . . . I 

don’t know all the particulars but it was one correction. Because 

that’s not fair. That’s simply not fair. If you’ve retired, you 

should be able to draw on all the resources that you have in 

savings. But now you can. So one little battle for the little guy, 

you know. And it’s kind of nice when that happens. But I do 

have to pass that on to the constituent because she’s still with 

us, and she was thinking that that would never, that she’d never 

see her, and I think it’s like 3, maybe $400. Because at that time 

it wasn’t a lot of money. 

 

But it’s one of these things sort of, you know, when we think 

back and we were 20 or 21, we’ll think about all the places we 

remember. Well we know the stats of how many forgotten bank 

accounts there are in this country, people who’ve put money 

aside. They’ve worked in a small town. They started up a credit 

union account. They’ve taken most of their money out, but 

there’s maybe 50 bucks, 100 bucks left in and they’ve gone and 

moved on, you know. And they think they’ve closed everything 

up, you know, but they haven’t. 

 

So there are some challenges here with portability. And this is 

one of the things we will never . . . Most of us, I hope, will 

never miss getting their CPP benefits. I hope that whoever 

works and whoever . . . that’s one of the first things you do. 

Make sure you get your CPP. But it is understandable if, as I’ve 

said, almost 1,500 members of the STF when they’ve taught 

less than 20 days, 20 days some 35 years ago . . . That’s, you 

know, that would be they would have taught in the 1970s. And 

so do they remember? I mean, and it probably wasn’t a positive 

experience either, you know. It’s one they will . . . that 

September of 1978, I would just rather forget about. But at any 

rate, it’s all something in the past, and I think that we have to 

make sure we make it as easy as possible. So having said that 

though, you know, as I said, portability is really important. 

 



6394 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2015 

I want to take a minute to talk about the labour’s plan for 

retirement security, and they have worked tirelessly. You know, 

you have CARP working on it. You have the CLC [Canadian 

Labour Congress] working on it, because this is something that 

they see and they advocate for working people. And they say, 

you know, a modest increase in contributions to CPP can go a 

long way, can really help in terms of making sure people do get 

a retirement that is something that you kind of look forward to, 

and you don’t have to be the one in five who say that they’ll 

work until they die. And that’s just not the way we should be. In 

Canada, of all places, we should not be having that kind of 

thing. 

 

I want to take a minute to refer to the minister’s comments, and 

he talks about the CPP. This is back in November 17th, and that 

it’s a unique . . . 

 

SPP [Saskatchewan Pension Plan] . . . [is] a unique 

retirement savings vehicle for individuals with little or no 

access to occupational pensions . . . or other retirement 

savings arrangements. It is the only plan in Canada of its 

kind offering members professional investment 

management at institutional costs. 

 

And of course, you know that would be interesting to make 

sure. We’ve heard horror stories from the States about their 

401s, and what are the costs? But again, here we have a 

situation with little or no access to occupational pensions or 

retirement savings, and are they going to be penalized with a 

GIS or the Saskatchewan Income Plan because they’ve 

contributed not enough to make it really worthwhile. 

 

So that’s about 33,000 members with over 400 million in 

trusteeship. I’m not sure what that works out to, what each plan 

has, and what their expectations can be when they retire. That 

would be interesting. 

 

And you know, he talks about three or four key aspects. Simple. 

You know, well that may be the fact that it’s easy to join and 

understand. Paperwork is kept to a minimum. But you know, I 

think people expect more than just making sure it’s simple. 

People want something that’s durable, that’s stable and 

predictable, and will make sure it’s sustainable. Simple 

probably isn’t the one thing that they’re thinking about, but 

maybe it is simple. 

 

Consistent talks about being cautious over the long term in 

terms of investment and making sure that . . . And we know that 

it’s a difficult thing, up and down, in terms of investments, but 

fair enough. Consistent is fair. Flexible. You can make a 

contribution at any time during the year. Again, fair enough. 

But are people making contributions? It would be interesting to 

know. Have they done a study? Have people been consistent in 

terms of making contributions? Have they been there to make 

sure that they’ve been making contributions? That’s really 

important. And portable — it’s always your plan regardless of 

where you live, what you do. 

 

So this is the question I would have is, so is there any, you 

know, what are the benefits? What are the contributions? Are 

there any contributions or any liabilities from the province of 

Saskatchewan for this? I know at one time there was, but I don’t 

think there is anymore. But it would be interesting to know that. 

And so can anybody in Canada subscribe or do they have to 

have had at some point some residency here in Saskatchewan? 

Clearly you should be able to withdraw wherever you live, but 

I’d be interested to know more about the contributions. 

 

So this is something that’s hugely interesting and compelling, 

because it’s something that is on people’s minds. We know the 

Ontario election, in many ways the outcome was determined in 

significant ways because of Premier Wynne’s promise to create 

a universal pension plan in Ontario, to go it alone. And we 

know in Quebec there is a lot of interest in it, and they also 

made a plan, a promise to make a plan. 

 

So we are really . . . I think that people are thinking about, do I 

have enough resources to retire and not be overly optimistic like 

many employers think that their employees are? We want to 

make sure that people can make contributions. That in fact they 

won’t see them clawed back when they’re 65 or 66 and wonder, 

why did I put this money into a plan that really doesn’t really 

protect me? I mean it may be one thing to say I have 

professional advisers while I’m working, but what happens 

when you have to withdraw? What happens then? And what 

happens with the implications with the other plans? 

 

So we have a lot of questions about this, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 

is one that is on the radar, as I’ve said, for citizens. It’s one on 

the radar right across Canada, right across the world. We see 

governments that are having to step up, and people are 

expecting them to make sure that people can retire, that this stat, 

that where we say one in five will continue to work . . . I mean 

it’s one thing to say I have a choice to work when I’m older, but 

it’s another to say I have to work. I have to work. And quite 

often we know those are people who are in low-income jobs. 

 

So while this may target one kind of niche in terms of those 

who may not be working . . . And it’d be interesting to know, 

since the 80s when it was introduced, how much that market 

has shrunk. We know families now, it’s very common to have 

both spouses working. In the 80s it wasn’t as common, but now 

it is very much the situation. And so what has it done to bring 

this forward? 

 

So there will be many, many questions with that, and I think 

this is one that many folks will want to talk about at length. It is 

one that we have in all our constituencies, seniors who are 

wanting to make sure they have money set aside. There’s a 

segment that will do well — those who have pension plans or 

those who’ve done well through their work, whether through 

business — but there unfortunately will be those who will be 

struggling. And I think we owe it . . . This is who we are as 

Canadians, to make sure every senior is looked after in their 

senior years, that they can have a home, that they can afford 

groceries, and they can afford their medications and their health 

care and they can have a little bit of joy as well. That’s a huge 

thing. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move adjournment of 

Bill No. 158, An Act to amend The Saskatchewan Pension Plan 

Act and to repeal The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment 

Act, 2013. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 158, The 



March 3, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6395 

Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 161 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Moe that Bill No. 161 — The Wildlife 

Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1998 

sur la faune be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To join in 

on Bill 161, The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2014. Before I make 

some comments on it — I know they’re proposing some 

amendments here — I would just like to have an opportunity 

and just talk about I guess individuals that choose to go out and 

hunt. And many, and I think the member from Rosemont, you 

know, he talks about his passion of hunting with his dad, his 

family. He talks about that. 

 

But you know, having said that, listening to some of the hunting 

stories that he talks about as young kids’ stuff, it reminded me 

back when he was referring to the bill about the story he talked 

about, and no different than with my own father back in the 

day, with my family. And you have an opportunity; you want to 

go out. It does build relationships and give you an opportunity 

to spend time with individuals that you choose to go out and 

hunt. And I did that with my father, my brothers, and it was an 

opportunity. You had a lot of laughs and you had some good 

times doing it. 

 

Of course learning from my father about how to handle and 

make sure you were following the laws that are, you know, put 

out there to make sure people are safe, make sure that you 

comply with the regulations that are put in place to protect, you 

know, our community members. Because sometimes we’re 

talking about people going hunting in areas where you have a 

lot of I guess families, whether it’s farm families. And I think 

about that. 

 

[15:30] 

 

You know, you had properties that had signs that . . . do not 

hunt, and you had to respect that and hunt with permission only. 

So there’s been a lot of opportunities that you would go to those 

farms and you would ask if you could go out and, you know, 

hunt on their land with permission, and it was granted. And they 

asked you certain things to do. And that was good. I have to 

admit I had a lot of fun times and some good talks and, you 

know, just enjoyed it, you know. And at the end of it, you had 

some opportunity to have some good meat. That’s good for all 

of us, you know. 

 

You think about wild meat and some people really, that’s part 

of their diet, whether you’re talking about hunters who go 

moose, deer, many of them. But also now I think about the First 

Nations and Métis who harvest and it’s part of their, you know, 

their diet, and it’s important to them and the culture and how 

they utilize the animals that, you know, they harvest when 

they’re hunting. 

 

And I know when I get into some of the changes, I’m going to 

talk about the proposed changes and making sure who was 

consulted, talked to, and who will be impacted. And I know 

sometimes we’ll say some individuals will not be impacted — 

First Nations, Métis — when it comes to their traditional right 

to harvest for sustenance for their own use and, you know, 

make sure their elders have the wild meat because they’re used 

to that and some of the elders cannot go. And I’ve seen that 

where they’ll make sure they share their harvest with the elders 

and the ones that are used to that in their supplement. And when 

I think about that, we now have blended families and I’m going 

to get into this. 

 

But it’s interesting. I had a gentleman approach me. And I don’t 

know, maybe in committee, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we’ll 

have an opportunity to ask some of these questions because I 

know there’s been some changes and we’re going to find out. 

And these amendments may not impact, but I think in 

committee there’s going to be opportunities, you know, to 

consult, for myself I know talking with individuals back home. 

 

But there’s been some changes, and if you’re a non-Aboriginal, 

there are now ways — and that’s what I’m hearing, you know 

— a different way that you can go hunting, harvesting with, 

whether your wife and your children are First Nations or Métis, 

and they do go out hunting together. 

 

There’s the rules. There’s been some changes. So I know we’re 

going to ask for some clarification and find out why and what’s 

the reason. And maybe there’s reasons why, but I think we need 

to make sure. And I know I will communicate it back to this 

individual when we get this information in committee. He’s 

asking and we’ll look at it and why the changes. 

 

And I think sometimes it’s frustration from some of the 

individuals that I’ve heard where they’re saying, this is a part of 

my opportunity to go out hunting, but now it’s changing and I 

don’t know exactly what the regulations are. And we’re going 

to ask some questions and get some clarification. I told the 

individual I would do that. 

 

But having said that, I know there’s many people who do go out 

and hunt and they follow the rules, regulations. And I realize 

there are some that obviously, you know, don’t follow the rules 

and regulations. Obviously we have law enforcement. We have 

conservation officers who, you know, I guess make sure and do 

all they can do with catching poachers, turning in poachers, 

people that are breaking the rules, the regulations. I understand 

that they’re there for a reason. 

 

Let’s make sure that those rules and regulations, if individuals 

have concerns, that they can come forward to the government 

and they can come forward to the MLAs [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly], whether it’s in opposition or part of the 

government, to share their concerns and ask for clarification. 

 

When I think about that, you know, I know there is Turn in 

Poachers. We see a lot of that going on right now, whether TV 

ads, whether you see the big billboards. It encourages 



6396 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2015 

individuals, if you know someone who’s poaching or 

committing an offence that’s within the hunting, they encourage 

those individuals to call the 1-800 number and turn in poachers. 

I don’t know how successful that program has been, and that’s 

some of the questions we can ask. I know the critic from 

Saskatoon Nutana, the member will, as a critic, will ask some of 

those questions when we get this bill into committee. 

 

But I know they’re talking about some of the amendments, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, scientists studying game that they have to get a 

licence. Now I don’t know what the reason is and I, you know, 

there must be some reason why government’s pursuing this. I’m 

hoping they’ve talked with the scientists, they’ve consulted 

widely. I’m hoping that’s happened, and that’s why it’s coming 

forward. 

 

I know in committee we’ll ask some of those questions and find 

out, like what was the reason, and why are you asking them 

now to be licensed if they’re going to study? And you know, 

not knowing and having any of the information when the 

government and the ministries make their recommendation and 

their changes and are asking us to look at these bills and make 

amendments, there must be a reason why. And we’ll work 

through the committee and we’ll get that. Having said that, you 

know, we can do that. 

 

The other thing, a part of it reflects, you know, licensing. When 

we talk about . . . It’s almost concerning to me, and again we’ll 

get into committee and finding out. We’re hearing a lot of 

whether those that are looking after the licensing and issuing 

are from out of province, out of Canada. And that’s really 

concerning. And I know there’s been problems with that 

process. And you know you’ve had some areas where we’ve 

seen that happen before, and those individuals using that service 

have not been happy as Saskatchewan residents, and are not 

pleased with the way the process is going. And I don’t know 

with this one, and if that’s the route they’re going, and, you 

know, and how happy individuals are and how successful it has 

been. Again that will have to be worked out in committee and 

hopefully we can find out, you know, what’s the reasoning. 

Why? 

 

And why we keep outsourcing opportunities for people in our 

province for jobs. They’re here, you know. We can’t find 

somebody in our province to do that? So that’s one of the 

changes that we see listed there, and we’re concerned. And I 

know we’ll ask those questions in committee and we can get 

more detail. And hopefully the minister and his officials can 

provide us and the people of this good province with some 

answers. And the critic. 

 

The other area, you know, this is the area where they talk about 

getting . . . Right now currently if someone is, from my 

understanding, someone is charged with an offence when it’s 

hunting, they can actually . . . The conservation officer will lay 

the charge, I guess, and they can wait to whether the 

government wants to proceed, or the Crown for whatever 

reason, whoever will make the final decision whether they’re 

going to go ahead and, you know, stay the charges; whether 

they’re going to move forward with them or they’re going to 

drop them. They have up to a year, from my understanding, and 

they’re now moving it to three years. 

 

I’ve had, you know, individuals come forward who say, you 

know, Doyle, I was . . . I’m Métis. I was out hunting. My 

frustration is if I’m going to be taken and game taken from me, 

and for whatever reason verifying that they’re Métis, there 

might be reasons why the conservation officer charges the 

individual. At the end of the day, the individual after one year is 

going to be either told, here’s your gun back, or your vehicle, if 

it’s, you know, if it’s seized, whatever. Here’s the game. Here’s 

your rifle. We’re not proceeding with charges, so here’s your 

. . . At the end of a year, one year of them taking the game. And 

I know in committee we’re going to ask some of the questions. 

We’ll get some of the answers to this. Is that game that they 

seize, is it given back later or is it, you know, is the meat gone 

to waste or is it given to a food bank? I don’t know what they 

do with it. 

 

If someone has not been charged and later on, like I said, the 

charges are dropped and they’re not going to go ahead with the 

charge after one year, then I assume . . . And you know, I guess 

I’m assuming, and we’ll ask these questions. And we need to 

ask these questions, get some clarification so that if someone 

asks me about, does that game go back to the hunter that had 

been previously charged, but now those charges aren’t . . . So 

there’s issues with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we’re going 

to want to find out about this. And does this implicate First 

Nations, Métis with this bill, changing it from one year to three, 

and will they be a part of that process? Because from my 

understanding, and some have asked back and forth, and we’re 

wondering if First Nations, like I said, traditional Métis, will 

have to adhere to the policy, or this bill, this amendment will 

affect them in any way without consulting. I want to make sure 

they have been consulted, and rightfully they should be if it is 

going to affect their traditional right to harvest game of any 

sort. 

 

So I’m wondering about that and, you know, in that area, where 

that will go. And I know we’re going to have to get some 

clarification, and we will. Again it’s like everything else. 

Sometimes it takes a while to ask the questions, the right way to 

answer the questions. Sometimes you don’t always get the 

answers, so you’ve got to come a different way, and I 

understand that. For whatever reason, that’s part of that process. 

But I know the individuals that have raised it with me and have 

the concern, they are individuals that harvest and use that for 

their traditional, within their culture and their treaty right to 

harvest game, and hunt and gather for sustenance, like I said 

before. 

 

So you don’t want to see regulations that are impacting them 

without consulting because I’ve had individuals come forward 

who have said, whether it’s trappers . . . And all they’re saying, 

and you know, they’ll work. They’re not saying that they don’t 

want to have regulations and rules forward. What they would 

like to make sure is that they are consulted. Whether it’s 

trappers, fishermen, whether it’s First Nations, Métis, rural 

Saskatchewan residents, whether they live in the rural area, the 

urban, the South, they want to be consulted when issues 

government are bringing in that are affecting them. They want 

to do it. And I know in some of the minister’s comments he 

talked about he’s talked with the Wildlife Federation, different 

groups where he has said he has engaged a conversation with 

them if I’m correct on that, and we will look into that. And I 

know there’s going to be individuals that we can approach and 



March 3, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6397 

see. 

 

And sometimes amendments are simple things, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that need to be done, and we call them housecleaning. 

Sometimes they’re major. Sometimes we don’t know exactly 

how this will affect certain groups — hunters, whoever. So you 

want to make sure you ask the questions in committee and work 

it out. 

 

And then sometimes at the end of the day, powers are given to 

the minister and the ministry to come up with the regulations 

and how they’re going to follow out. You can make 

amendments here but if it gives certain powers and there’s 

concern, you want to make sure that those individuals that are 

being impacted are consulted, their view. 

 

And they have some good ideas and we see many times our 

front-line workers, whether it’s people out in the, you know, 

whether they’re trappers, they’re fishermen, those individuals 

who, you know, have the camps for hunting big game or bear 

hunting. You can go out to those camps. They have expertise 

that they can share with government when government’s 

making these changes. And I think sometimes they want to feel 

like they’re being heard. 

 

And you know, sometimes government doesn’t hear the people 

and, you know, obviously we’ve seen that yesterday. You’re 

not hearing rural Saskatchewan. And they came to this 

legislature to voice their concern and to show this government. 

So that’s the time where people will say, if you’re not going to 

hear us when we have an opportunity for our representatives to 

bring them to the House, to ask questions in committee, or to 

write you as the ministry or government and not get a response, 

then they come to this House and they show the government. 

And they say a strong message and they carry a strong message 

saying, we want to be heard, we have a right to be heard, and 

that. So that happens as well and it’s good that that happened 

yesterday. 

 

So again I know there are many issues that individuals have, 

and on some of these we’ll get clarification in committee. And 

we can ask the minister and his officials to clarify who was 

consulted and why are some of these changes coming forward. 

This just gives us an opportunity to initially just share some of 

the views that we’re hearing and some of the concerns as some 

of us are looking at the bill in itself and moving forward. 

 

I know there will be opportunity for us to ask a lot of questions. 

And like I said, looking at the South and the North and like I 

said before, we have an opportunity to make sure government 

hears individuals in our province. It is a right that individuals 

have, and I want to make sure and I hope the government has 

done the due diligence it’s supposed to do. And we as 

representatives in this Legislative Assembly are supposed to 

make sure we govern all the province and we make sure we’re 

hearing the concerns of Saskatchewan residents. And 

unfortunately we haven’t seen some of that from this current 

government right now; there have been many challenges where 

the government is just not hearing the people. But having said 

that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at this time I’m prepared to adjourn 

debate on this bill. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 

moved to adjourn debate on Bill 161, The Wildlife Amendment 

Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 162 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 162 — The 

Enforcement of Money Judgments Amendment Act, 2014 be 

now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to weigh in to Bill No. 162, The Enforcement of Money 

Judgments Act. And I’ve read through the comments of the 

minister at first reading. Certainly some of those comments 

seem to be reasonable and well placed, but we need to make 

sure we do our due diligence on this front and make sure we 

also understand all of the, I guess, pressures and what sort of 

forces, public or otherwise, have come to the minister to appeal 

for these changes. Certainly you want an efficient system on 

this front but, most importantly, you want to make sure you 

have a fair system. And we want to make sure that the 

consideration of making this an efficient system hasn’t 

compromised its ability to be fair. 

 

[15:45] 

 

And you know, I think some of the measures that are brought 

forward seem to, as I say, be reasonable, but that’s without 

some of the important consultation that we’ll need to do with 

stakeholders on this front, those that are directly impacted by 

this legislation, and looking at certain examples as well because 

certainly it’s an important environment to get right, in making 

sure that you’re balancing off fairness, rights, and 

responsibilities. And if you think of this Act and how it relates 

to some of our constituents potentially who may find 

themselves in an environment where they may be rather 

vulnerable because of a predatory environment with a payday 

loan or a potential credit card structure or with sometimes a 

scheme that may come with some sort of product, Mr. Speaker, 

we need to make sure that we recognize that not every 

commercial entity is operating necessarily in good faith with 

some of our constituents as well. 

 

And when I think of some of the predatory lending that goes on 

to, in many cases, many of the most vulnerable, Mr. Speaker, 

it’s a real challenge, and I believe it’s one that needs to certainly 

have the attention of the provincial government and also of the 

federal government to make sure that we’re protecting citizens 

from across Saskatchewan. And when we look at this 

legislation, we then want to make sure that this allows fair 

mechanisms for those that may be caught up in some of those 

schemes and some of those predatory environments to make 

sure that they have rights and that they’re treated with a lens of 

common sense and fairness, because otherwise we may, if 

government’s not careful, government may be forfeiting some 



6398 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2015 

of the fairness that certainly they deserve. 

 

So in general there’s various measures that have been brought 

forward. As I say, they seem to be reasonable. I would also 

want to understand from the government what lens has he come 

at this from. What has he listened to on the consumer end of the 

equation, and particularly those who may be in a vulnerable 

position to some of the sort of predatory structures that I’ve 

spoken of? But certainly we need to have a fair system. That’s 

critically important and it’s important for it to be effective as 

well. And if some of these measures bring forward practical 

improvements for the enforcement of money judgments, then 

that may be quite reasonable. 

 

We know far too often though with this government that they 

really don’t do their due diligence when they create legislation. 

I guess maybe in part that’s evidenced by the fact that we see 

changes introduced again with this bill to a bill that had just 

recently been overhauled by government. So obviously when 

they introduced that bill, they recognized some gaps, or others 

in the public or private interests may have identified gaps. 

These are the kinds of questions that we want to put to the 

minister. 

 

We’re all for making improvements to legislation, but we need 

to make sure that all potential stakeholders and affected parties 

have been appropriately considered and that they’ve been 

engaged because the result of this government . . . We’ve seen it 

far too often. We’ve seen it waste millions of dollars. We’ve 

seen it put people’s rights at risk. When they move forward 

with ramming forward their own ideological agenda without 

appropriate consultation, it’s just a recipe for problems, Mr. 

Speaker. So there seems to be reasonable measures. 

 

I’d be interested in hearing directly from the minister as to 

who’s identifying the gaps that weren’t addressed in this 

government’s legislation two years prior. Who’s coming to him 

with specific concerns? Which private interests? What public 

interests? And what’s caused these specific changes and what 

sort of consideration has the minister and this government given 

to, as I say, individuals and families who may be subject or 

vulnerable to predatory structures, whether that be through 

payday loans or potential operations of certain credit cards or 

certain schemes with certain products. We need to make sure as 

well that we’re balancing off a structure that makes sure we 

protect our constituents, the families across Saskatchewan, to 

make sure they are afforded a fair process. 

 

So that’s the kind of approach we’ll take with this legislation. 

Certainly we’ll be looking for more clarity from the minister. If 

in fact as we go through this process, these are deemed as 

specific improvements, then that’s something certainly we 

wouldn’t be standing in the way of. But certainly we need more 

clarity on that at this point in time. 

 

So with that being said, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to speak 

briefly here today and look forward to further work on our 

behalf with stakeholders and through processes of this 

legislature. But at this point in time I adjourn debate for Bill 

No. 162, The Enforcement of Money Judgments Amendment 

Act, 2014. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Rosemont 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 162. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 163 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 163 — The 

Education Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi 

de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 

pleasure to rise to speak to Bill No. 163, An Act to amend The 

Education Act, 1995. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s always interesting to see what types of issues 

arise that require amendments to The Education Act. And when 

I was looking through the four sort of main reasons for the 

amendment to the Act, it struck me that two of them have direct 

political implications and that they needed to be fixed if the 

Premier’s whimsical comments or his comments different 

places were going to be put in place. And I’m going to start 

with those ones and then go and look at some of the other things 

that have been added into the Act that could have been done 

now or they could have been done some other time. 

 

But I think the most immediate issue that’s addressed in this 

amendment to The Education Act relates to the sort of bolt out 

of the blue that the Premier brought in the last election 

campaign when he said that school was always going to start 

after Labour Day. And I don’t think anybody had asked the 

people in the Ministry of Education. They hadn’t asked the 

school boards, hadn’t asked the teachers. And I guess so the 

Premier just kind of came up with this one, and all of a sudden 

they were scrambling to figure out the rationale for it. And it 

was pointed out that this was not necessarily going to be a 

problem in 2012 or in 2013 or 2014, but when it got to this 

year, 2015, there were going to be some issues around the 

amendment that was there. 

 

And so what we have is a fix. I think the Minister of Education 

described it not as a broken promise, a broken promise by the 

Premier, but it was fine-tuning the legislation. In other words, 

whoops, we made a mistake. We didn’t talk to the people 

involved, and so we have to do something to fix this before 

September of 2015. And so I think that was the real trigger for 

this legislation coming forward when it does now. 

 

And so what is the legislation actually doing? Well basically the 

Act goes into this whole question of the start of the school year 

and sets out some rationale on how this might be adjusted. And 

so what we have in the new legislation is a definition that says, 

for any school year . . . and I’ll quote this directly: 

 

For any school year in which Labour Day occurs on or 

after September 5, the minister may, by order, set a date in 

September that is earlier than Labour Day as the first 



March 3, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6399 

instructional day for the school year. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, this issue which was raised when the 

Premier’s whims were out in the public in 2011 is now being or 

it looks like being addressed at this point. But I think the more, 

you know, fundamental question here was the intervention by 

the Premier into an area which had traditionally been the 

decision of school boards around when the instructional year 

should start and what kinds of adjustments should be made. 

 

And so we have a sort of a stumble in the fall in setting up the 

original legislation. Now there’s what the Minister of Education 

calls is not a broken promise but a fine tuning that allows us to, 

at least this year, set a different date than what the present law 

would dictate. 

 

And so what we know is this legislation will have to pass and 

then, according to the legislation, the minister may by order set 

a date in September that is earlier than Labour Day as the first 

instructional date for the school year. 

 

Now this gives the discretion to the minister. I suppose there is 

a possibility that those who like school to start after Labour Day 

can still argue that there should be no change to the present 

policy or the policy that was the whim of the Premier. And we 

may end up seeing that we’ll have the legislation in place, but 

we’ll have to see whether a decision is made that will change 

this. 

 

Now the press release from the government says that this is 

what they plan to do, and we’ll see whether that is there. So that 

I think was the triggering sort of change, the fixing of a 

mistake, the fine-tuning of an error, as the Minister of 

Education calls it, that brought this legislation forward. 

 

But there’s a second area which also has political consequences 

where the legislation is changed, and it relates to section 9 of 

the legislation, and I’ll get to the section here. And effectively 

what the legislation talks about in section 9 is a long-standing 

rule in Saskatchewan that school boards can’t borrow money 

without actually getting a clear idea of how much it’s going to 

cost to borrow that money before they make a motion in their 

school board meeting to borrow the money. And, Mr. Speaker, 

this is a more difficult change to accept, perhaps, than some of 

the other changes that are here. Because what it does is it 

basically says that a school board can just borrow money 

without knowing how much it costs for them to actually, to 

borrow that money. And so what we end up having is situations 

where the whole school board is in a situation where they can 

do a blanket borrowing statement. And so the old legislation 

said something like this, and this was section 323. It says: 

 

A resolution setting forth the intent to borrow pursuant to 

section 321 must be passed by a board of education or the 

conseil scolaire at a meeting that is called for that purpose, 

showing in detail: 

 

(a) the amount proposed to be borrowed; 

 

(b) the purposes for which the expenditure is to be 

made; 

 

(c) the term of the promissory note or other form of 

security to be issued; 

 

(d) the rate of interest payable; and 

 

(e) the method of repayment. 

 

After such a resolution is passed: 

 

. . . the board of education or conseil scolaire shall 

immediately cause to be published in at least one issue of a 

newspaper that has general circulation in the school 

division or division scolaire francophone, as the case may 

be: 

 

(a) a copy of the resolution; and 

 

(b) a notice of its intention to apply to the minister 

pursuant to section 325 for authorization to borrow the 

proposed amount. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Now what we have in this legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

that this whole provision is being repealed and basically it’s 

going to allow a board of education to make a resolution 

outlining its intent to borrow money before acquiring quotes 

from financial institutions. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is in an area where traditionally we 

have provided the public, the people who are involved with 

education, to have details about the approximate cost of the 

borrowing before the resolution is passed in the school board. 

And then if the resolution is passed, it has to be public. 

 

So let me read the new section 323, which is called, 

“Resolution setting forth intent to borrow [and it says]: 

 

If a board of education or the conseil scolaire intends to 

borrow money pursuant to section 321, the board of 

education or conseil scolaire shall pass a resolution 

showing in detail: 

 

(a) the amount proposed to be borrowed; and 

 

(b) the purposes for which the expenditure is to be 

made”. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have a situation where now money can be 

borrowed with just the information on how much is to be 

borrowed and what it’s going to be used for rather than 

providing the public with the full details of the amounts 

borrowed, why it’s going to be expended, how much it’s going 

to cost, and the rate of interest and how it’s going to be repaid. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, why, why is this change being made now? 

Well I think this directly relates to the Minister of Finance and 

the Premier and the Minister of Education being . . . making 

their announcement about borrowing money for public-private 

partnerships for building schools in Saskatchewan. 

 

And I think this particular change to this legislation is a direct 

attempt to hide from the public the true cost of the borrowing 

for building schools in Saskatchewan. And I think this is wrong. 



6400 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2015 

I think that the government needs to be called on this because 

what they’re doing is changing the rules that we’ve had for a 

long time, which allows for the public to know how much it 

costs to build the new schools. 

 

We know that the P3 [public-private partnership] school 

proposals have, hidden within them, interest costs that are very 

difficult to discern. We know in British Columbia the auditor 

went into a number of the P3 school proposals and pointed out 

that they probably cost 3.5 per cent a year more in interest than 

it would cost for the government to borrow the money directly 

or for the school board to borrow the money with the assistance 

of the province. 

 

We know that there have been similar reviews done in Alberta 

that point out the same question, the same issue. And, Mr. 

Speaker, to not have the information in an appropriate form 

when it relates to borrowing for schools I think is wrong. 

 

Now our member from Regina Rosemont has proposed a bill 

around the true cost of borrowing when you’re using a P3 

method. And, Mr. Speaker, if we had a bill like that on the 

books, then maybe this kind of a change would be acceptable 

because we’d have another place where the true costs are going 

to be laid out for the public. But what we have here, Mr. 

Speaker, is a way of hiding how much the government is 

borrowing to build schools. We know now that when children 

enter kindergarten that they’re looking at the fact that probably 

they’ll still be paying for that school when they hit 35 years of 

age. And, Mr. Speaker, this is a very strange way for 

Saskatchewan people, who have been used to paying for things 

as they go along, to finance schools. 

 

But I think the biggest issue is that the information is being 

hidden, and in this legislation, kind of hidden away is this 

change of saying, well schools don’t have to tell anymore how 

much it’s going to cost them to borrow. They can just say, we 

want to borrow the money and we don’t have to tell the public 

how much money is being borrowed. This change has within it 

a number of difficult questions around how the cost of 

rebuilding schools is going to take place in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we heard today in question period that the 

Minister of Education doesn’t even know how many schools 

need to be replaced. He doesn’t know how many schools are 

safe or unsafe for children. And we are going to continue to ask 

questions about that because it goes once again to the 

fundamental question under The Education Act. The Education 

Act is set up in a way that the public will know that it’s a 

provincial responsibility to do this and to do it in a clear and 

transparent fashion. 

 

Every time legislation is changed to hide costs somewhere, I 

assume maybe in the Minister of Finance’s world, then I think 

that’s wrong. And when this particular legislation was 

introduced, it I think was triggered or the public sort of face, the 

government press release about this, was about Labour Day and 

about changing that. But hidden in there was this actual change 

to a clause about transparency in borrowing for education. And 

I think that’s wrong. 

 

Now there are a couple of other changes that the legislation 

makes which are I think sort of reasonable housekeeping things 

that might have waited for another year but they’re going to do 

it now. 

 

One of them was to change some of the French terminology 

that’s used in the Act, and that’s reasonable. Another one was to 

set up an Education Scholarship Fund so that the Prince of 

Wales Scholarship Fund, which is in the Act, that fund of 

money plus other funds related to scholarships can all be held in 

one generic fund. That’s not unreasonable. 

 

But once again, that follows the Premier’s announcement that 

sort of came out of the blue, thought up without actually 

thinking through what the consequences are of this. 

 

But practically this legislation, on the face of it, the government 

says it’s related to Labour Day. I think the real heart of what the 

government’s trying to hide is the true cost of repairing schools. 

It would be better for all the people in the province if the 

Minister of Education and the Premier were upfront about the 

actual cost, 1.5 billion, 1.6 billion. We don’t know how much 

money is needed to fix our schools. 

 

But if we’re going to borrow the money to fix some schools, tell 

us exactly how much it’s going to cost to do that. Don’t hide it 

in a P3 type proposal. Let’s just do that. Because I think the 

public is willing to borrow money or to spend money or to have 

whatever way to get funds to fix schools. Because, Mr. Speaker, 

I hear members opposite sort of talking about, oh the cabinet 

should know about this but nobody else. Well there’s too much 

of that going on now and these people are forgetting that the 

public are very interested in how things are funded and how 

things are done. And in this particular area, I think the 

legislation should probably be more aptly described as an Act to 

amend The Education Act to hide the true cost of borrowing to 

fix the problems in our schools across the province. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this type of legislation, this type of 

change, is unfortunately what we’ve come to expect from this 

government. I think they’re forgetting that the public really 

does want to know. They want to have clear, discernible 

legislation. They want to know how much it costs when things 

are being fixed. They want to know how much the long-term 

costs are. And every time we see something that hides the 

information, then we know that there is something wrong. 

 

Now it’s I think a difficult day for the school boards of 

Saskatchewan that here they are being asked to be part of 

something which they haven’t done probably in the whole 

history of the province, which is borrow money without telling 

people how much it’s actually costing to borrow the money. 

And I think that’s wrong. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are some real difficulties with 

this legislation, but I think the difficulty of having the Premier 

and the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Education hide 

the cost of borrowing for schools, I think that’s wrong. But I 

know that some of my colleagues will have some comments to 

make on this and at this point I will ask to adjourn the debate. 

Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 

has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 163, The Education 

Amendment Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 



March 3, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6401 

adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 164 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 164 — The 

Health Information Protection Amendment Act, 2014 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Glad to join debate this afternoon on Bill No. 164, An Act to 

amend The Health Information Protection Act. 

 

The bill does a number of things but what it will hopefully 

accomplish when all is said and done, Mr. Speaker, is to 

provide the protection to health information that is richly 

deserved by the people of Saskatchewan. We know from a 

number of fronts, Mr. Speaker, that the situation around the 

security and the protection of health information is not 

anywhere near where it should be in the province of 

Saskatchewan, and it’s been like that for a number of years 

now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

So while on the one hand we’re glad to see measures coming 

forward that will hopefully remedy that situation, it certainly 

underlines the fact that when it comes to the long, slow walk 

that this government likes to take when it comes to health 

information protection, it’s unfortunate to say the least. 

 

In terms of the actual bill itself, it relies in part on the good 

work of the health records protection working group and the 11 

recommendations that they made the past spring, Mr. Speaker, 

spring 2014, I would believe. And hopefully it is informed as 

well by the Information and Privacy Commissioner’s work that 

over years now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, has been condemning, to 

say the least, of the inaction and the record of this government 

as it comes to the protection of health information. 

 

Again this is a file on which we’ve seen this government do 

some bizarre things. We’ve seen them not do some things in 

terms of the inaction that has been there. And we’ve seen a 

stubborn penchant for ignoring the recommendations of the 

Information and Privacy Commissioner. So you know it’s . . . 

I’m an optimist, Mr. Speaker. Spring is coming. Perhaps this 

legislation will improve the situation. But the situation again 

over years has been notable for its poor quality, and they’ve got 

a lot of work to do. 

 

[16:15] 

 

In terms of the legislation itself, particular items, the replacing 

of the Saskatchewan Health Information Network with eHealth, 

again a cosmetic change, Mr. Speaker, keeping up with the 

name game that goes on with government in the rebranding of 

different things from time to time, and certainly this 

government likes to play that branding game more than most. 

Section 6 allows the minister to appoint someone to take control 

of records that have been abandoned, and that is an important 

provision, Mr. Speaker, in terms of that appropriate transfer 

from the care of a health professional and the individuals that 

are . . . [inaudible] . . . those records, and making certain that 

they’ve got the safekeeping and security that they’re due. And 

should they be found abandoned, Mr. Speaker, what would 

happen then? So again who that individual is, and the 

responsibilities that that individual will be shouldering, are 

significant to say the least. 

 

In section 8, it makes abandoning health records a strict liability 

offence, making it easier to convict someone of the offence of 

abandoning records. We’re glad to see that, Mr. Speaker. We’ll 

be interested to see whether or not the penalties that are meted 

out in accordance with that are equal to the offences at hand. 

But certainly in the very recent history of this province, we’ve 

seen some incredibly egregious offences in that regard. 

 

Section 8 makes “snooping” an offence to protect people from 

having their privacy breached by unnecessary searches into 

their personal information. Again, Mr. Speaker, it’s not just . . . 

It’s good to see that something like that is being included in this 

legislation because we know just from different instances again 

in the not-too-distant past of this province that there are some 

people that are very familiar with the whole question of 

snooping into other people’s private information where they 

should not be entering, Mr. Speaker; moreover, where there are 

positions of trust that are being abused in the course of that 

snooping or that offence against an individual’s right to privacy. 

So we’ll be interested to see what use is made of that. 

 

Again though on the whole, Mr. Speaker, we look to see how 

this stacks up, whether or not this will bring Saskatchewan’s 

protection of personal information, at least as regards health 

information, into the 21st century. We are hopeful of that and 

certainly will be looking to see how this moves forward. We’ll 

also be interested to see how different recommendations that 

have been made in the process of this long and winding road 

which has led to this legislation, we’ll be interested to see how 

this Act does or does not satisfy the concerns of the folks from 

the National Association for Information Destruction. Again 

this is a group that comes together, making sure that what 

happens with health information once it has been gathered, or 

other sensitive information once it has been gathered, what are 

the disposal policies for that information and what is the 

oversight for the people such as the trustee or the individual in 

charge of, taking charge of abandoned records that I’d 

referenced earlier, how those responsibilities are discharged or 

not. 

 

And again, Mr. Speaker, it’s a brave new world where paper 

records which this province, or this provincial government, has 

demonstrated a lack of capacity to deal with as it is, let alone 

the whole question of electronic databases and how those might 

be protected, or not, appropriately. There are many again causes 

for concern that have arisen over the last while. And again 

whether or not this legislation does the job in terms of securing 

that protection that should be expected by the citizens of this 

province, we’ll see whether or not this legislation in fact 

measures up. 

 

I know that other of my colleagues have participated in this 



6402 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2015 

debate already, Mr. Speaker. I know that others are interested to 

participate as well. So in regards to that, I would move to 

adjourn debate on Bill No. 164, The Health Information 

Protection Amendment Act, 2014. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of Bill 

No. 164, The Health Information Protection Amendment Act, 

2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 165 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 165 — The 

Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2014 

(No. 2)/Loi n° 2 de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la 

réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hazard 
be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 

to enter into discussion as it relates to Bill No. 165, The Alcohol 

and Gaming Regulation Act here today, Mr. Speaker, and to 

speak to some of the changes that have been brought forward 

and introduced by government. Certainly as reflected by the 

comments of the minister, this is a result of some bilateral work, 

some work with our jurisdictional partners across Canada, and 

some specific work with British Columbia on this front, Mr. 

Speaker. And certainly we think that this work here and this 

legislation that’s come forward seems to be something very 

reasonable. 

 

And when I look at the legislation itself, certainly we’ll, you 

know, do some analysis to make sure we’re understanding full 

consequences. But certainly the benefits that seem to be in place 

allow for purchase of product from another jurisdiction and 

allows SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] 

itself to engage with jurisdictions, other jurisdictions, other 

provinces, on product. And if you think of the incredible 

wineries of course of British Columbia, that’s a really great 

market to be able to work with. And certainly as it relates to 

SLGA, it’s nice to make sure that government is supporting 

SLGA to continue to expand product offering in line with 

consumer needs, consumer wants. And so this is a positive step. 

I believe it also allows for potential direct purchase of product 

and shipment back to consumers, and that seems very 

reasonable. Certainly the important structures of making sure 

that it’s regulated and managed is going to be important pieces 

that will be put together by the government. You know, I’m 

supportive of building these sorts of partnerships and making 

sure that that product from other provinces can be available in a 

way that consumers desire here in Saskatchewan. 

 

We need to make sure though that as we get into this 

discussion, that we’re putting a lens to making sure that we’re 

supporting the brewers and the distillers and the wineries here 

in Saskatchewan as well, that we make sure that they have full 

opportunity to grow their operations and to grow their market 

shares in our own province. And that, you know . . . I’m 

someone who’s, you know, I have a lot of pride in our local 

businesses, a lot of pride in our local brewers, distillers, and 

wineries, and I’m proud to buy local. 

 

So it’s important I think that we, as we see our government 

moving forward with building this sort of a relationship with a 

province like British Columbia, while we can be supportive of 

that, I think that this government needs to do a better job of 

recognizing some of the barriers and some of the pressures 

within the local distilling, brewing, and winery industry here in 

Saskatchewan. Because this is in many ways when I think of 

these operations, and whether it’s the craft brewers or whether 

it’s the distillers, they also, they’re not only providing a very 

good product, high-quality product, they’re doing so with 

Saskatchewan product. And they’re in many ways points of 

pride for communities for which they’re situated, and I’d like to 

think points of pride for our province as a whole as well. 

 

They’re good for economic development, of course. When we 

see a distillery fire up in Lumsden, as we’ve had, Mr. Speaker, 

in the case of Last Mountain, Mr. Speaker, putting together 

some fantastic array of product and creating local jobs and, you 

know, I think that this is something that we want to support. I 

know that the Schmidts out there have done a fantastic job with 

their operation. And certainly their product has been something 

that’s become well recognized as quality but also as something 

that’s in demand. And I think of their Dill Pickle Vodka that has 

become recognized by many, and it’s a good product, Mr. 

Speaker. It makes an exceptional Caesar on a hot summer 

afternoon, Mr. Speaker, and it’s something that’s nice to see 

being distilled right in Lumsden, in Saskatchewan, in the 

Qu’Appelle Valley. And this is good economic activity that we 

should certainly be supportive of. 

 

So while, as I say, we want to make sure that we’re embracing 

other markets and connecting better to the products of British 

Columbia and the great wineries out there, this government 

really needs to do a better job of looking at the current 

structures that are direct impediments for fostering a real 

vibrant local brewing industry, distilling industry, and wineries 

across the province. 

 

And I think of the ones that have recently invested across 

Saskatchewan. They certainly are great operations that are 

making great product and, like I say, making communities sort 

of proud along the way as well. You know, certainly we’ve seen 

some craft brewers and brewers in Saskatchewan for many 

years. We can think of Great Western on a larger brewer scale 

that, you know, certainly have an incredible story to tell and 

have provided good economic benefits and good employment. 

And then we can think of some of the craft brewers that have 

really brought about sort of a new experience for the type of 

product that Saskatchewan people can access, and I think of 

Paddock Wood in Saskatoon. I think of Bushwakker’s here in 

Regina, and certainly there are others as well. 

 

And I think of the many craft ale enthusiasts across 

Saskatchewan who have been award winning for years, Mr. 

Speaker, so we definitely have a wealth of talent of craft 

brewers in this province. We have some experience at this, Mr. 

Speaker, and we’ve seen other provinces, other jurisdictions, 

other parts of North America better support the growth of those 

industries, those local businesses. And I think that that needs to 



March 3, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6403 

be a focus of this government. 

 

I know that, you know, in recent time we’ve seen operations 

like Prairie Sun up in Saskatoon or the Nokomis Craft Ale 

brewers out of Nokomis, Saskatchewan, with a pitch of great 

water and great barley and experience of bringing that product 

around. I know Jeff Allport there has a lot of pride in what 

they’ve put together there, and I know the community itself 

appreciates that operation as well and the story it tells to the rest 

of the province, sharing the story of Nokomis to many others, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I think of Regina. We’ve recently seen a new brewery by 

the way of Müs Knuckle over the past few years. We’ve seen 

Rebellion brewers, Mr. Speaker, open their doors as craft 

brewers, and these guys really embody in many ways the craft 

ale enthusiast side of the equation. They’re very proud of telling 

that story of the honey that they’re sourcing from Tisdale or the 

malts that they’re sourcing in different parts of the province, the 

barleys, the fruits from the Qu’Appelle Valley and in Lumsden. 

And this is a good story that they tell, but it’s also good 

economic development and good vibrancy on the main streets 

of our province. 

 

So I think these are really the kinds of operations that we need 

to be supporting. I think about into the southwest corner of the 

province in Swift Current where you’ve got Black Bridge 

Brewery and Bin Brewing that have fired up and that have 

created jobs and are creating a great product and sharing that 

with many others in this province. And certainly all of these 

companies, these small businesses are also providing a product 

that’s high quality, that many across North America and many 

across Canada will look forward to enjoying. And it’s important 

for this government to be directly listening and working with 

these entrepreneurs, these local brewers, distillers, and wineries, 

to make sure that the regulatory environment is one that allows 

them to grow and continue to be able to add to the 

Saskatchewan economy. 

 

In many ways I think we’re hopefully just at the start of a very 

robust period of growth within these markets because there is a 

nice vibrancy that comes with this, and I know it falls as well 

into, you know, recognizing the importance of supporting local. 

 

And I know we put forward legislation to recognize a buy-local 

movement. I think this is something that Saskatchewan people 

appreciate and certainly the entrepreneurs across Saskatchewan 

who have skin in the game, who have pride in their product, 

who are toiling to share something with Saskatchewan and with 

the world, they deserve nothing less than for us to be supporting 

and recognizing that quality here. I think that we should have 

pride in Saskatchewan, as we do and we should buy in 

Saskatchewan and, when possible, in recognizing just the 

exceptional products that are available to us across 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I know we’ve had a growth in the winery sector in 

Saskatchewan. And certainly I’m not speaking of a full 

inventory of all of the operators here today, but I mean, Cypress 

Hills has done a fine job. I know that Living Sky out of Perdue 

has built a very successful operation with great product, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

And I think it’s past time that this government paid some 

attention to this industry and it’s time that they start listening 

down with these operators. Whether it’s Mark Heise and the 

crew over at Rebellion or whether it’s the Schmidts out at Last 

Mountain in Lumsden, or whether it’s Jeff Allport and some of 

the folks out of Nokomis, or whether it’s the Craft Ale 

enthusiasts in this province, there’s a lot of important 

discussions to be had with this sector, and to make sure that we 

set an environment that works well for the development of these 

companies and this industry. 

 

[16:30] 

 

I know that there’s an important discussion to be had and 

improvements to be made around making sure that we’re 

having a tax or markup structure that works for these 

operations. I’ve certainly heard the case made very solidly that 

the current structure allows, you know, basically keeps 

operations very small, and if they get to a certain threshold 

they’re then taxed in really, to simplify it, in an absolute way 

that prevents many operations from being able to grow their 

businesses and their operations beyond that threshold without 

having a very difficult penalty, a cost that comes with it. 

 

And I think that it should be in all of our interests here in this 

province to be supporting those local entrepreneurs, to be 

supporting those craft brewers and distillers and wineries that 

are using local product and telling that story with pride through 

their product, and that are creating employment here in 

Saskatchewan. We should be putting an effort forward, 

government should be putting an effort forward to make sure 

that their needs are heard, because it doesn’t make sense to have 

a policy in place that limits the growth potential and keeps these 

operations as very small operations. We should have one that 

allows their progressive development as their business cases 

support, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So there’s a better environment around that, I know there’s 

considerations about how we, you know, we could better 

support SLGA to connect with these craft brewers. I know 

there’s different considerations about needs around 

refrigeration, and a whole host of other concerns that have been 

brought forward that I think we should be listening to, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

So with this piece of legislation here today, I think the changes 

are certainly reasonable. I know that many will appreciate 

access to product within other provinces. I know that in the case 

of British Columbia, they have some absolutely fantastic 

wineries, world-class wines that we can certainly allow 

Saskatchewan people, Saskatchewan consumers to connect 

with. So those are all pieces that are certainly reasonable and for 

which we’re supportive of, but what I’d really like to see is for 

Saskatchewan and this government to start to take a better focus 

to the local entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan and the operations 

here in Saskatchewan that are putting fine product out there for 

the people of the province. 

 

And like I’ve said, you know, whether starting out in the 

southwest down at Cypress Hills Winery or Bin Brewing in 

Swift Current or Black Bridge brewing, Mr. Speaker, if you’re 

looking at the host of folks in through Regina that have either 

been brewing for years or some of those new folks to the 



6404 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2015 

market — Mr. Speaker, the folks up through Saskatoon and in 

Nokomis — we have some really great operations within this 

province. And it’s past time that this government started to 

recognize the importance of those operations, their creativity, 

the investment that they’ve made and support them to be as 

successful as they can be within a reasonable, fair, regulatory 

environment that benefits all Saskatchewan people. 

 

But I’m a big believer that Saskatchewan people are proud to 

support local, and I know that there’s benefits that come with it. 

As I say, when you fire up a new brewery, comes with it the 

investment, the capital. From that you have the jobs and the 

taxes that flow from the income taxes from those that are 

working there, Mr. Speaker. You have products that are sourced 

from across the province — whether that be the barley, the 

malt, the fruit, the honey, Mr. Speaker — and these are products 

for which we as a province are world class in when you think of 

our agricultural products, and something that we should be 

very, very proud of, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So I’m pleased to add some comments to the bill, and I’m 

pleased to add some urging to this government to stop 

neglecting the local brewers, distillers, and wineries in 

Saskatchewan and start to recognize their importance in our 

local economy and in our culture as a province and to start to 

make sure they improve a regulatory environment that respects 

those meaningful operations in this province. But at this point in 

time, I adjourn debate for Bill No. 165, The Alcohol and 

Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2014. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate of Bill No. 165, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 

Act, 2014 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 166 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 166 — The Local 

Government Election Act, 2014 be now read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise 

this afternoon to enter into the debate on Bill No. 166, An Act 

respecting Elections in Municipalities and School Divisions and 

making consequential amendments to other Acts. And it’s 

always interesting when we take a look at the very structure, the 

very heart of our democracy — the ability to vote, the ability to 

vote. And that’s a huge responsibility, and it’s important that 

we get this right. It’s quite a thorough piece of legislation, and 

we just look at the table of contents and 194 parts. And I’d like 

to draw attention to a few of those parts; we won’t go through 

all 194 this afternoon. But I do want to make sure we have 

some time to think about some of these. 

 

I find it very interesting, for example, Mr. Speaker, that today 

of all days we receive our Canadian Parliamentary Review, and 

what’s one of the issues that we’ve talked about is the Internet 

and Internet voting. And they’re taking a look at it in BC 

[British Columbia], and so we’re trying to keep up with the 

times. We’re always looking over the horizon to what might be 

the innovations that we’re thinking will make voting more 

accessible and that we get more people to participate in 

democracy. 

 

We see that it’s just unfortunate that we’ve had a circumstance 

where voter turnout is going down. And we see that and 

ironically, you know, we talk about the fact that at the three 

levels of government, that we talk about the federal level, the 

provincial level, and the municipal level, that actually voter 

turnout . . . Now I’m not as sure about the rural municipalities, 

but I know urban municipalities voter turnout is something like 

in the 30’s or 40’s per cent. In provincial we talk about 60, 70 

per cent. On a good day it’s in the 70’s, and federally it’s 

higher. 

 

But ironically the thing is that we feel more removed from 

federal politics, less removed from provincial politics. We drive 

on the highways, our kids go to the schools, we use provincial 

hospitals so we feel like we have something to say about that. 

But even more so, we are closer to municipalities where I know 

people . . . When we talk about the city councils or the RM 

councils, the town council where people will attend and be very 

active, and yet voter turnout is low.  

 

And so this is something that we have to think about in terms 

of, are we creating or what are the barriers that we have in place 

to stop people from voting? We want to reduce those barriers. 

We want to get rid of barriers and in fact encourage people to 

be part of the democratic process, you know, because we often 

talk about taxes but what you want to do is make sure you 

participate. I mean it’s the old saying: if you don’t vote, then 

you don’t have a right to complain. And so often that is true. 

But you know, at the municipality level, it is amazing that we 

have such low, low turnout. Now I don’t know about the RM 

[rural municipality] level and that’s something I’d like to know 

more about. 

 

Interestingly I understand, you know, we’ve talked about and 

I’ve had an opportunity to talk to people about Aboriginal 

voting in urban settings, and we often are deeply concerned 

about the fact that First Nations folks don’t vote much in federal 

politics or provincial politics when they live in the cities. But on 

reserves, there’s a huge turnout and they say because there are 

huge stakes. And I think we have to remind people that that 

holds true, that holds very true at the provincial and federal 

level, that it is people’s responsibilities to participate in the 

democratic process, and that’s the elections. 

 

Now we see here a very thorough list of items, as I said, some 

194 parts. We think about this in terms of we’ve just changed 

our provincial election. And I want to talk about some of those 

commonalities and some of the differences that I see before us. 

 

But I want to take a minute to refer to the minister’s comments. 

And he had introduced this in December 1st, 2014, and he talks 

about how, that he has introduced . . . You know, this is second 

reading of Bill 166, The Local Government Election Act, 2014, 

and it is the new Act. It’s not been amended. It’s not an 

amendment Act. It’s a completely new Act. And so it talks 

about some background, that this new Act is a replacement for 



March 3, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6405 

the old rural municipality Act and The Urban Municipality Act, 

and: 

 

At that time the provisions governing rural elections 

needed a new home and were tacked on to the end of The 

Local Government Election Act without any attempt of 

integration with those provisions governing urban 

elections. 

 

So that created a lot of problems. So the new Act, completely a 

rewrite, language updated and simplified, and the pieces of 

legislation that are common between rural and urban are housed 

in the same sections, so that you have commonalities when they 

seem to make sense but you also recognize the difference 

between rural and urban if that makes sense. And I think that’s 

obviously the case. 

 

Some of the changes are relatively . . . It’s straightforward. It 

introduces the idea that residence exceptions for students and 

members of Canadian Armed Forces, because students and 

members in the Armed Forces are likely to temporarily live in a 

place other than your usual place of residence. They may vote 

in a municipality in which they reside regardless of how long 

they have lived there. And so this is an important feature. And 

of course we recognize the whole provincial aspect for Armed 

Forces members when we amended The Election Act that will 

guide the provincial election that’s coming up. 

 

And so I think this is interesting. It talks about the 

“Consultation on this bill started with a follow-up survey after 

the 2012 municipal elections, canvassing municipalities for any 

issues they may have encountered and . . . areas for clarification 

and possible amendments.” So that was all taken into account. 

And they heard from SARM [Saskatchewan Association of 

Rural Municipalities] and SUMA and the Saskatchewan 

Association of City Clerks. New North and school board 

associations were also consulted, but apparently they did not 

request any amendments. So again though, this is interesting 

that while they did these consultations with very important 

stakeholders, there may be an oversight to, why were there, why 

is it that there’s a low voter turnout, and what is the 

implication? 

 

[16:45] 

 

So it would have been interesting to do, and we’ll ask about it 

when he talks about the survey. They surveyed municipalities, 

but did they survey actual voters and about how they perceive 

voting in Saskatchewan? That would be an interesting survey to 

do. What are the challenges? What are the barriers? Why don’t 

people vote, particularly at that level when so many of the 

issues they face are so close to home? 

 

You know, I think about in Saskatoon, you know, the number 

one issue, conditions of streets and snow removal, that type of 

thing. People should get out and vote about those issues but 

they choose not to, but choose to make a lot of noise after the 

fact. I think the time to make the noise is during the campaign 

and participate in the election. And this is something that is so 

unfortunate that we see time and again, that people prefer to not 

participate but then to raise concerns after the fact. So I would 

have liked to have seen, and we’ll ask this question in 

committee to the minister, what is it, what were the results of 

the survey and why they chose not to do an overall survey that 

would be reflective of Saskatchewan population in 

municipalities, but how they perceive their election. 

 

I just want to take a moment and talk about some of the parts in 

the bill that I think are interesting and I think that make a lot of 

sense. Part III about polling places, it talks about agreement 

with the Chief Electoral Officer. I’m very happy to see that 

we’re coordinating between the federal, provincial, and 

municipal levels for elections. Prior to this, they were really 

separated out. The feds did whatever they want to do. We’re 

seeing a little problem in the fall, when there’s an overlap of 

fixed election dates. If we can get around that, that would be 

nice. But we will deal with that as it comes. But it is good to see 

that there is some coordination between the Chief Electoral 

Officer and those at the municipal levels, if they choose to use 

some of the services, and in fact actually have some service 

agreements in place. I think that’s really important. 

 

As well, I found that interestingly in part VI, the voters list, the 

contents of the voters list, and I would have to follow up a bit 

more on this. We’ve raised this issue. You know, we’ve come a 

long way in terms of human rights and the right to know, and 

what you need to know and what you’d like to know, and the 

privacy issues. And one of the issues is the information that’s 

on a voters list. And it seems to me that maybe this bill has got 

it right because it just says you just need to know the name and 

the address of the voter, and you leave it at that. You don’t need 

to know other parts of information that may not be applicable. 

And I’m thinking about gender markers here. That’s not going 

to be part of the requirements for municipalities. Now that will 

be interesting to know if that’s the case. 

 

We will double-check what the implication is. I know that when 

we were looking at our own election bill, that was something 

we raised as concerns. But they felt that they needed to have 

that. The Ministry of Justice felt it was critical to have that, and 

as likewise, the Chief Electoral Officer. 

 

And so that’s that part as well. I’ve talked a little bit about 

polling and voting and the idea around voting machines and 

whether we will ever evolve to the idea of Internet voting. 

 

It appears that in BC, the panel on Internet voting has come 

back with limited enthusiasm, that it’s not quite arrived yet. It’s 

not quite as cost effective. The proof that it will increase voter 

turnout isn’t quite there, but we want to see that for sure. 

 

The one that I think that will continue to be a bit of an issue, 

and actually a significant issue, is around the evidence of 

identity, division 4, “Procedures While Poll is Open.” And 

we’ve seen this now and it’s a concern that many have around 

voter suppression and the idea that voters need to have identity 

and whether it’s one piece of picture ID [identification] or two 

other pieces, whether or not that has an impact on suppressing 

people, particularly low-income people, people who may not 

have picture ID. If you don’t have a reason for having picture 

ID, it can be expensive and it’s an expense that it’s maybe a 

barrier to voting. 

 

So we have questions about that. How will this be enforced? 

We know at the provincial level and federal level we’ve seen 

people turned away. And it continues to be an issue particularly 



6406 Saskatchewan Hansard March 3, 2015 

in low-income neighbourhoods or communities that, again as I 

say, have been used to not having the same level of ID requests. 

And whether it’s people who are low-income or whether it’s 

seniors or people who’ve just not felt the need to go out and get 

a picture ID, who’ve always gone down to the town hall, 

who’ve always been able to vote, I think that clearly this is an 

issue, and it’s one that we need to make sure that we’re not 

creating barriers. 

 

I mean it’s interesting. On one hand, you have the Internet 

which allows us to do innovative, creative things to make sure 

people in the new age can access the right to vote, and access 

and use their franchise which is hugely important to a 

democracy like Canada. But on the other hand, we have taken a 

step back decades by introducing barriers where people must 

bring ID, and when we’re talking about small communities 

where everybody knows everybody. And this becomes a 

problem in a place where that same visual recognition doesn’t 

exist, what are we going to do about that? So it’s a real, real 

challenge. So I think this is one area that we’re really going to 

be asking a lot about and saying, so why is it that they must 

produce photo ID or some other ID, especially in small 

communities where people may actually know who they are? 

 

And so, Mr. Speaker, I know that my colleagues will have a lot 

to say about many of these aspects of this bill. As I say, it’s a 

very significant one. Whether you live in an urban community 

or a rural community, a northern community, we all want to 

make sure we have the right to vote and when we show up on 

polling day that we’re not turned away by some regulation that 

we thought, where did that come from? It doesn’t make any 

sense. But we want to make sure the voting is fair and 

reasonable. 

 

So with Bill No. 166, I would like to now adjourn debate on 

that. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 166, The Local Government Election Act, 

2014. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Bill No. 167 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Reiter that Bill No. 167 — The Local 

Government Election Consequential Amendments Act, 

2014/Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi 

intitulée The Local Government Election Act, 2014 be now 

read a second time.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise on the companion piece, Bill No. 167, the local 

government consequential amendments Act, 2014. I won’t 

attempt the French title. But this is an important bill. It is. 

Sometimes when we think about these consequential 

amendment things that we don’t pay enough attention to them. 

And it’s important as we realize that we are a bilingual country, 

and it’s important that the rules and the legislation, particularly 

when it comes to local government elections and particularly 

when we have francophone communities in the province, that 

this legislation be in both languages. 

 

So when the minister got up and introduced this at the same 

time, he says: 

 

This Act makes an amendment to one bilingual Act, The 

Education Act, 1995, because that Act refers to The Local 

Government Election Act and the provisions dealing with 

the election of school board members. The Local 

Government Election Act governs all municipal elections 

throughout the province as well as school board elections. 

 

No changes [apparently, according to the minister] are 

being made to how school board elections are run. The 

amendments only change the name of the Act and the 

section number being referred to so that the references 

remain accurate. 

 

So accordingly he moved this forward, and I would think that 

. . . Obviously we don’t want to get ahead of the game by 

moving this one to committee. It should follow afterwards. But 

I think it’s important that as we look at these pieces of 

legislation, again as I said, that it is an important part on the 

floor of this House that we do all that we can to make sure we 

get people out to vote. You know, as I said, it seems rather 

paradoxical that people will vote federally — hugely important, 

hugely important that they feel that responsibility — but things 

seem farther away, but huge, still very critical. But then when it 

comes to municipal elections, they don’t quite seem to be quite 

as driven to get out on polling day to make an X on the ballot. 

 

And I think this is something that when we think about these 

two pieces of legislation, they work together in tandem, but it’s 

an important piece of our work. And as the minister talked 

about, he consulted with SARM and SUMA and the school 

boards and New North about making sure that the barriers were 

diminished as much as possible. But still, we think we need to 

have those conversations in committee. I’d be curious to know 

why. Why not take the opportunity to consult with the public to 

say, why is it you choose not to come out and vote in municipal 

elections but you come out for federal? I know that federal folks 

are concerned about their turnout, particularly when it comes to 

young people. And I don’t know what the turnout is in a 

municipal election for young people, but clearly it’s an 

important issue that we take a look at. 

 

And we raise, on this side of the House — we know that it’s a 

phenomena right across North America — the impact of picture 

ID, photo ID, or other ID requirements, particularly in 

communities where people are known, how relevant that is. We 

have a lot of questions about whether that’s needed. It could be 

an important tool, but is it one that . . . You know, it’s a pretty 

big hammer to be solving some other issues. And so what can 

we do to make sure people feel connected, that when their name 

is on the voters list, they do have a responsibility? 

 

It’s the time to step up and make a difference, and really that’s 

what our democracy is all about. You know, we look at other 

parts of the world, whether it’s Ukraine, other communities, 

other countries where they are fighting for democracy, and we 



March 3, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 6407 

have things so well in hand here in Saskatchewan that we do 

have, we do have an onerous responsibility to participate. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure other people have a lot to say 

about this particular bill, because it is relatively straightforward. 

But as I said, we don’t want to put the donkey before the cart 

and put this small bill into committee. We’ll hold this back and 

we’ll allow other people to have comments. 

 

So I would like to at this time move adjournment of Bill No. 

167, The Local Government Election Consequential 

Amendments Act. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 

debate on Bill No. 167, The Local Government Election 

Consequential Amendments Act, 2014. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. It now being near the hour of 5 

o’clock this House stands recessed to 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6377 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6377 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6377 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6377 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6377 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Aboriginal Storytelling Month 

  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6378 

 Strong Performance of Saskatchewan Curlers at Canada Winter Games 

  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6378 

 Athletes Represent Saskatchewan at Canada Winter Games 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6378 

 Saskatchewan an Attractive Jurisdiction for Mining Investment 

  Weekes ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6378 

 Rural Women’s Month 

  Eagles ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6379 

 Canadian Challenge International Sled Dog Race 

  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6379 

 Grand Opening of Ability in Me 

  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 6379 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Essential Travel 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6379 

  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 6380 

 Travel and the Lean Initiative 

  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6380 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6380 

 Costs and Benefits of the Lean Initiative 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6381 

  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6382 

 Maintenance of Educational Facilities 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6382 

  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 6382 

 Trip Taken by Creative Saskatchewan Executive Officer 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6383 

  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6383 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

SECOND READINGS 

 Bill No. 152 — The Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 portant  

 modification corrélative à la loi intitulée The Victims of Domestic Violence Consequential Amendment Act, 2014 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6384 

  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 6384 

 Bill No. 150 — The Residential Tenancies Amendment Act, 2014 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6385 

  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 6386 

 Bill No. 155 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers Act, 2014 

 Loi de 2014 sur les directives et les subrogés en matière de soins de santé 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6386 

  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 6386 

 Bill No. 156 — The Health Care Directives and Substitute Health Care Decision Makers 

 Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6386 

  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 6386 

 Bill No. 159 — The Family Farm Credit Repeal Act 

  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6387 

  Cheveldayoff (referral to committee) .................................................................................................................................... 6388 

 Bill No. 149 — The Health Administration Amendment Act, 2014 

  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 6388 



 

 Bill No. 158 — The Saskatchewan Pension Plan Amendment Act, 2014 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6390 

 Bill No. 161 — The Wildlife Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la faune 

  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 6395 

 Bill No. 162 — The Enforcement of Money Judgments Amendment Act, 2014 

  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6397 

 Bill No. 163 — The Education Amendment Act, 2014/Loi de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 6398 

 Bill No. 164 — The Health Information Protection Amendment Act, 2014 

  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 6401 

 Bill No. 165 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2014 (No. 2) 

 Loi n° 2 de 2014 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur la réglementation des boissons alcoolisées et des jeux de hazard 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 6402 

 Bill No. 166 — The Local Government Election Act, 2014 

  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6404 

 Bill No. 167 — The Local Government Election Consequential Amendments Act, 2014 

 Loi de 2014 portant modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Local Government Election Act, 2014 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 6406 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


