
























































Hansard: April 27, 2015


 

FOURTH SESSION - TWENTY-SEVENTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Dan D’Autremont 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 57 NO. 54A  MONDAY, APRIL 27, 2015, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
 
 
Speaker — Hon. Dan D’Autremont 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 
Leader of the Opposition — Cam Broten 
 

Name of Member Political Affiliation Constituency 

   
Belanger, Buckley NDP Athabasca 
Bjornerud, Bob SP Melville-Saltcoats 
Boyd, Hon. Bill SP Kindersley 
Bradshaw, Fred SP Carrot River Valley 
Brkich, Greg SP Arm River-Watrous 
Broten, Cam NDP Saskatoon Massey Place 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer SP Saskatoon Fairview 
Chartier, Danielle NDP Saskatoon Riversdale 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken SP Saskatoon Silver Springs 
Cox, Herb SP The Battlefords 
D’Autremont, Hon. Dan SP Cannington 
Docherty, Hon. Mark SP Regina Coronation Park 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin SP Regina Northeast 
Doke, Larry SP Cut Knife-Turtleford 
Draude, June SP Kelvington-Wadena 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin SP Weyburn-Big Muddy 
Eagles, Doreen SP Estevan 
Elhard, Wayne SP Cypress Hills 
Forbes, David NDP Saskatoon Centre 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna SP Humboldt 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy SP Meadow Lake 
Hart, Glen SP Last Mountain-Touchwood 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy SP Martensville 
Hutchinson, Bill SP Regina South 
Huyghebaert, D.F. (Yogi) SP Wood River 
Jurgens, Victoria SP Prince Albert Northcote 
Kirsch, Delbert SP Batoche 
Krawetz, Hon. Ken SP Canora-Pelly 
Lawrence, Greg SP Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Makowsky, Gene SP Regina Dewdney 
Marchuk, Russ SP Regina Douglas Park 
McCall, Warren NDP Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
McMorris, Hon. Don SP Indian Head-Milestone 
Merriman, Paul SP Saskatoon Sutherland 
Michelson, Warren SP Moose Jaw North 
Moe, Hon. Scott SP Rosthern-Shellbrook 
Morgan, Hon. Don SP Saskatoon Southeast 
Nilson, John NDP Regina Lakeview 
Norris, Rob SP Saskatoon Greystone 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg SP Yorkton 
Parent, Roger SP Saskatoon Meewasin 
Phillips, Kevin SP Melfort 
Reiter, Hon. Jim SP Rosetown-Elrose 
Ross, Laura SP Regina Qu’Appelle Valley 
Sproule, Cathy NDP Saskatoon Nutana 
Steinley, Warren SP Regina Walsh Acres 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle SP Thunder Creek 
Tell, Hon. Christine SP Regina Wascana Plains 
Tochor, Corey SP Saskatoon Eastview 
Toth, Don SP Moosomin 
Vermette, Doyle NDP Cumberland 
Wall, Hon. Brad SP Swift Current 
Weekes, Randy SP Biggar 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine SP Saskatchewan Rivers 
Wotherspoon, Trent NDP Regina Rosemont 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon SP Saskatoon Northwest 
Young, Colleen SP Lloydminster 
Vacant  Prince Albert Carlton 
 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7015 
 April 27, 2015 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure, to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, to introduce some special guests in your gallery 
today. I had the privilege to meet a lot of these individuals, all 
of these individuals earlier today in proclaiming Nurse 
Practitioner Awareness Day and raising a flag in front of the 
Assembly. A more formal event we’ll have this evening at 
Government House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But introducing these members in the House, or these citizens 
and nurses in the House today, Mr. Speaker, are representatives 
of the SRNA, the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 
Association. I’ll ask them to give us a little wave when I say 
their names: Signey Klebeck, Linda Wasko, Shirley McKay, 
Shelley Svedahl, Cheryl Hamilton, Terri Belcourt, and Donna 
Cooke. And representing Nurse Practitioners of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker: Lia Boxall, Angela Robinson, Heather Keith, Lisa 
Plank, Karen Loveridge, Kari Greenwood, Kelly Hughes, 
Deanna Barlow, and Debbie Bathgate. I ask all members to 
welcome these individuals to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the minister in welcoming the guests to the legislature today. 
And I want to say thank you to you on behalf of all of the 
people of Saskatchewan for the good work that you do in 
organizing nurses across the province because that’s an 
important part as well as actually doing the work. So thank you 
very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to introduce to you and through you, 42 grade 10 
students here from Winston Knoll. Wave, you guys. They’re in 
the west gallery. But we have a very special student that’s also 
part of this group. His name is Nigel. Nigel, you’ll maybe want 
to give us a wave; oh boy. Nigel’s mom works in the building. 
She works, in fact, for the Minister of Finance. And we’re 
going to have the opportunity to go and visit with Nigel and his 
classmates. 
 
But, you know, we have . . . The teacher that is accompanying 
them today is Michelle McKillop. Michelle brings a class, I 
think, every year, or every session in fact. So I really do 
appreciate that. And another teacher accompanying them is 
Michael Silvius. So thank you very much to the Winston Knoll 
teachers for bringing your students here to be able to experience 
the Legislative Assembly. So thank you. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all the members of the Assembly, I have the 
honour of introducing a very important guest who has joined us 
today in the west gallery. Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce 
the executive director of the North East Outreach and Support 
Services, Louise Schweitzer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, May 7th marks the third annual Walk a Mile in 
Her Shoes event in Melfort, Saskatchewan. This year I’m very 
happy to say that for the first time there will also be a Walk a 
Mile in Her Shoes event in Humboldt on June 10th. 
 
The Melfort walk will raise money for the North East Outreach 
and Support Services in Melfort, a community-based 
organization that our government has been very proud to 
support with funding. Many members will also recall that this is 
the same facility that experienced a fire last winter in the 
domestic violence shelter which was being built. And I’m 
happy to say that the shelter is back on track, and we’ll be 
looking forward to celebrating a sod turning for that shelter this 
same Walk a Mile event on May 7th. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the male members of this Assembly will be 
extremely happy to hear that Ms. Schweitzer has brought with 
her several pairs of red shoes, high-heeled shoes, so that they 
may join her in a photo opportunity following session today in 
an effort to help raise awareness of this very worthy event. 
 
I would like to congratulate everyone involved in the North 
East Outreach and Support Services for their hard work in 
putting this event together and their efforts on behalf of the 
victims of violence in our province. Mr. Speaker, I ask all 
members to join me in welcoming Ms. Schweitzer to her 
Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join the minister in welcoming Ms. Schweitzer to her legislature 
and all the good work that they do up in the northeast. And we 
always find it interesting, this Walk a Mile, and we just think it 
goes really well. I appreciate that so many folks have done it. I 
know the member from Melfort is a real strong supporter of 
that, and we think it’s a great cause. 
 
At the same time, I would like to welcome Gunnar Passmore, a 
really strong trade union activist. He works for the Building 
Trades folks, and he’s a regular attender here at the legislature 
because of course the issues that we talk about are so important 
to the working men and women of this province. So I’d ask all 
members to welcome Gunnar to his legislature. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition calling for support for better schools 
here in Saskatchewan. We know that far too many of our 



7016 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2015 

classrooms are overcrowded and under-resourced, and that the 
Sask Party government has eliminated hundreds of educational 
assistant positions, and that students often don’t get the 
one-on-one attention that they truly need. And none of this is 
acceptable, given the record revenues that this government has 
had over the last eight years. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on this 
government to immediately stop ignoring schools and start 
prioritizing students by capping classroom sizes, increasing 
support for students, and developing a transparent plan to 
build and repair our schools. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I do so present. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rosemont. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise once 
again to present petitions on behalf of concerned residents as it 
relates to the unsafe conditions created on Dewdney Avenue by 
that government, their failure to recognize the unsafe conditions 
with the heavy-haul truck traffic that they directed on to 
Dewdney, and their failure to ensure a safe, appropriate route. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on the provincial 
government to immediately take action as it relates to the 
unacceptable danger, disturbance, and infrastructure 
damage caused by the heavy-haul traffic on Dewdney 
Avenue west of the city centre, to ensure the safety and 
well-being of communities, families, residents, and users; 
and that those actions and plans should include rerouting 
the heavy-haul truck traffic, receive provincial funding, 
and be developed through consultation with the city of 
Regina, communities, and residents. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions today are signed once again by residents of 
Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition. Homelessness is a major problem in La Ronge and 
other parts of the North, and it’s getting worse. Shelter is a 
basic need for everyone. But under this government, it’s getting 
harder and harder for people to find adequate housing, 
especially families, seniors, women and children who face 
abusive situations. The problem is getting worse because of the 
rising level of poverty and skyrocketed home ownership costs. 
The prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Saskatchewan government to 
build a homeless shelter in the Lac la Ronge area to meet 
the needs of addressing homelessness in the Lac la Ronge 
area. 

 

It’s signed by many good people of northern Saskatchewan. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition in support of safe staffing levels in long-term 
care. In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan take the following action: to cause the 
government to commit to the creation of safe staffing 
levels for all valued members of the health care team, and 
to re-introduce actual numbers of staff to match the level of 
care needs and the number of residents under their care in 
long-term care facilities. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these two petitions are signed by individuals from 
Swift Current. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition in 
support of retaining Yarrow Youth Farm. The government has 
closed Yarrow Youth Farm to create an open-custody wing in 
Kilburn Hall. We know that Kilburn Hall is a secure-custody 
unit for youth considered a greater risk to their communities. 
 
The provincial Advocate for Children and Youth has declared 
he can’t endorse such a rationalization, as low-risk teens could 
be influenced and pressured by close proximity to high-risk 
youth who may be involved in serious crimes or gangs. And we 
know that Kilburn Hall is a more institutional environment that 
could intimidate and alienate teens that have committed minor 
offences. And so I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the government to keep Yarrow 
Youth Farm open, to ensure a caring home environment for 
youth who have committed minor offences, and to provide 
support to help these young people redirect their lives by 
setting more positive goals. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition reads: 
 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Signed by individuals from Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
River Valley. 
 

Nurse Practitioner Awareness Day 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
formally recognize today, April 27th, as Nurse Practitioner 
Awareness Day. To mark this day we raised a flag alongside a 



April 27, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7017 

number of nurse practitioners who joined us in front of the 
Legislative Building this morning. 
 
Nurse practitioners are highly skilled, dedicated professionals 
who play a vital role in bringing about the transformation we’re 
seeing in our health care system. Nurse practitioners are 
registered nurses with advanced education, and their expertise 
allows them to perform physical assessments, diagnostic tests, 
diagnose and treat common medical conditions, prescribe 
medications, and perform minor surgical procedures. 
 
We have great nurse practitioners in this province and we 
would like more of them, especially in rural areas. That’s why 
we introduced a recruitment strategy for nurse practitioners last 
year. In 2011 we also promised to increase nurse practitioner 
seats by 20 and we are on target to keep that promise. Mr. 
Speaker, we are improving primary health care services for 
Saskatchewan people so they receive the everyday care they 
need regardless of where they live. 
 
Nurse practitioners are important members of the health care 
team, and I ask all members to join with me in thanking the 
many nurse practitioners throughout our province as well as 
those who made it into our gallery today. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Women of Distinction Awards 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, along with the 
member from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, on Thursday evening 
had the pleasure to attend the 34th annual Regina YWCA 
[Young Women’s Christian Association] Women of Distinction 
Awards Gala. And right off the top I want to congratulate 
everyone at the YWCA and its supporters for another excellent 
evening of inspiration and celebration. Well done. 
 
There were 46 different women nominated, leaders in business, 
arts, science, education, health care, and community. I’m sure 
that the committee tasked with selecting the winner in each 
category had an incredibly tough job to perform, given the 
outstanding field of nominees. 
 
The award for community leadership and enhancement was 
given to Doreen Lloyd, a social worker and community 
champion with Carmichael Outreach. Lucia Garcia was 
recognized for her work promoting the Spanish language and 
Salvadorean culture with the Cultural Heritage Award. Stacey 
Ermel won the Rural Community Award for years of 
community service in Bethune. Dr. Fatima Pirbhai-Illich was 
recognized for her contributions to literacy and education. Anne 
Chase, one of the founders of the Saskatchewan Ovarian Cancer 
Survivors, won the Wellness, Recreation, and Healthy Living 
Award. Sheila Pelletier was recognized for entrepreneurship 
and innovation. 
 
Seventeen-year-old Audrey Simon received the Young Woman 
of Promise Award for her excellence in athletics and academics. 
Alanna Koch, deputy minister of Agriculture, received the 
Leadership and Management Award. And the Next Chapters 
Book Club won the Circle of Friends Award for their work in 
bringing people together around literacy. 

I ask all members to join me in congratulating and thanking 
these 2015 YWCA Women of Distinction. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
[13:45] 
 

Pre-Construction Begins on Battlefords Facility 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is a long-awaited 
day for The Battlefords, and I’m excited to announce that 
pre-construction work has begun on the new Saskatchewan 
Hospital North Battleford integrated correctional facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier and I toured this hospital some time 
ago, and since then our government has been completely 
committed to replacing this hospital. So I’m very pleased to see 
that pre-construction is now under way. Heavy equipment has 
been arriving on site and will continue throughout the week. 
The new complex will be built to a leadership in energy and 
environmental design silver certification standard, which is 
recognized as the international mark of excellence for green 
buildings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, mental health services are a priority for this 
government, which is why this new facility will address some 
of the recommendations from the mental health and addictions 
plan. It will also include a 96-room correctional facility which 
will be designed to provide support for offenders living with 
mental health issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, unlike when the members opposite were in 
government and said they were going to fund this project with 
no real money committed, our government has committed $129 
million in the 2015-16 budget to begin site preparation and 
construction. We know that the Saskatchewan Hospital North 
Battleford integrated correctional facility is a big step forward 
in addressing mental health in our province. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Saskatchewan Book Awards 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 23rd annual 
Saskatchewan Book Awards took place this Saturday at the 
Conexus Arts Centre here in Regina, and I was pleased to be 
able to attend, along with my colleague from Regina Lakeview. 
Writers and publishers from all across our province were 
recognized for their contributions to Saskatchewan’s vibrant 
literary scene. 
 
Suzanne North took home the University of Regina Book of the 
Year Award for her novel, Flying Time. Ernie Loutitt, a 
long-time member of the Saskatoon Police Service, was 
recognized with the Rasmussen Rasmussen & Charowsky 
Aboriginal Peoples’ Writing Award for his memoir, Indian 
Ernie: Perspectives on Policing and Leadership. 
 
One book that was nominated in multiple categories was 7: 
Professional Native Artists Inc., which told for the first time the 



7018 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2015 

significant story of how a group of seven amazing Aboriginal 
artists fought for recognition in the art world. This book, 
published through the MacKenzie Art Gallery, won all three 
publishing awards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another book that was up for an award was 
co-authored by Keith Goulet, a former member of this 
Assembly. Although his book, Teaching Each Other: Nehinuw 
Concepts and Indigenous Pedagogies, wasn’t chosen as a 
winner at this year’s awards, I’m certain that it will play a 
significant role in improving educational outcomes for First 
Nations and Métis students. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating the award 
winners and the nominees and to thank them for telling our 
Saskatchewan story so well. I’d also ask all members to thank 
Daniel Parr, the Chair of the book awards, and all of the 
volunteers and staff who make this event a success every year. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 

Saskatchewan Country Music Association Awards 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, this past Saturday I 
brought greetings on behalf of the Premier to the Saskatchewan 
Country Music Association’s President’s Banquet, and Sunday 
I was honoured to present the Video of the Year Award at the 
SCMA [Saskatchewan Country Music Association] awards in 
Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that Saskatchewan is home to many 
talented artists of all kinds, but nights like this really put a 
spotlight on these achievements. With over 30 awards given 
out, the night was full of remarkable talent with some really 
great performances by MC [master of ceremonies] Deric 
Ruttan, Wyatt, and the Trudels among others. 
 
Special notable local winners were Danny Ismond from GX94, 
Yorkton; Murray Yung for Country Music Person of the Year; 
Codie Prevost who won Male Vocalist of the Year; and Jess 
Moskaluke who brought home five awards, including Video of 
the Year. She has also gained a lot of national recognition along 
with Codie Prevost. Also mentioned would be Ron Waddell 
who was awarded Legend and Legacy Award, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As someone who has seen a lot of these young musicians grow 
up and enter their trade, it is always exciting to share in their 
successes. Although the awards night topped off the weekend, 
the SCMA hosted many showcases and seminars for new 
artists, and songwriters café on the Sunday afternoon. 
 
Saskatchewan truly is the place to be, and it is inspiring to see 
how strong the country music community is throughout our 
province. Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to thank SaskTel for being 
a major sponsor and televising this event. Also many artists 
expressed their thanks to Creative Saskatchewan, SaskMusic, 
Sask Lotteries for their support. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in congratulating all the 
nominees and winners from this weekend as well as the SCMA 
for putting on such an awesome event in Yorkton. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Eastview. 
 
Saskatoon Brewing Company Celebrates 25th Anniversary 

 
Mr. Tochor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
year marks Great Western Brewing Company’s 25th 
anniversary. The Great Western Brewing Company is an 
historic landmark in Saskatoon, an iconic Saskatchewan 
company. The story of Great Western is well known by beer 
drinkers across the Prairies. It’s a story that embodies the 
Saskatchewan spirit. 
 
When many worried about the closure of Saskatoon’s only 
brewery in 1989, there was a group of adventurous employees 
that saw an opportunity. Mr. Speaker, those employees invested 
their personal life savings to buy the brewery and demonstrate 
that they had the know-how to brew great beer. 
 
Year after year, Great Western beer products win awards the 
world over. People know when they buy Great Western, they’re 
buying a product made by employees who truly care about the 
quality, Mr. Speaker. The original 60 employees, owners of 
Great Western, have laid the foundation for Saskatoon’s 
original brewery, a commitment to community, and giving back 
wherever possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan we all know what it means 
to grab some G Dub. We’re proud that G Dub is our beer, a 
beer made in Saskatchewan by Saskatchewan people using 
Saskatchewan-grown barley. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all members to join me in 
congratulating Great Western Brewery on its 25th anniversary 
and thank them for the commitment to community and for great 
beer. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

$25 million Investment in Carrot River Saw Mill 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s not every day 
that we see major investments, but they seem to be more and 
more frequent in Saskatchewan. Earlier this April, the Premier, 
the Minister for the Economy, and I attended an announcement 
that C & C Resources would be making a $25 million 
investment into Edgewood Forest Products Carrot River saw 
mill. Mr. Speaker, this $25 million investment was made 
possible because of our new processing tax incentive. 
 
This investment will include a major capital upgrade, including 
a new production line that will replace the existing primary 
breakdown sawline at the mill. A new kiln will also be bought. 
The production line machinery is coming from a German-based 
company called Linck. And, Mr. Speaker, on top of a 
developing new relationship with a world-class manufacturing 
company in Germany, this new machinery will give the 
Edgewood saw mill some of the lowest log processing costs in 
the industry. With the mills restarting as early as November, 
this means the creation of 100 to 150 full-time jobs for the 



April 27, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7019 

Carrot River area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is ensuring that we are continuing 
to support a diversified economy and giving industries the best 
possible environment to operate and invest in. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this is a stark contrast to the dark days of the NDP 
[New Democratic Party]. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Release of Information Concerning Worker 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, to have the Premier of the 
province of Saskatchewan order a leak of confidential 
information about a private citizen is unprecedented, and 
Saskatchewan people deserve answers because right now it 
looks like this Premier thinks that his office is above the law. 
When it comes to releasing private information, the courts have 
clearly required a thorough analysis and a proper weighing of 
the interests. But we know, Mr. Speaker, the Premier said that 
he learned of the suspension early last week, so it must be 
Monday morning, and we know that his chief of 
communications and operations leaked the information to the 
media on Monday morning. So clearly, Mr. Speaker, there was 
a very quick turnaround. 
 
My question to the Premier: did he consult with the Minister of 
Justice before he personally directed this leak of confidential 
information about a private citizen? Yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, last week I think the member 
indicated that there may be a request for the Privacy 
Commissioner to look into the matter. We should allow the 
commissioner to do whatever work he deems necessary in this 
regard, Mr. Speaker. That’s what we’re prepared to do on this 
side of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to be very clear. What we’ve said all along, 
including on the day that Mr. Bowden came with his concerns 
about care at Oliver Lodge, I gave I think on three occasions 
undertakings to make sure that health care workers knew that it 
was completely right and meet for them to come forward with 
any concerns that they would have about the health care system 
without any fear of any sort of implications from that or results 
that would flow from that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, right after question period, I simply directed the 
officials to make sure that because we had given this serious 
undertaking, this promise in the House, to make sure that if 
there was to be a change in this gentleman’s status, we needed 
to know about it to make sure that a promise was kept, not just 
in the interests of the gentleman but also of health care workers 
around the province, Mr. Speaker. That process happened. And 
Mr. Speaker, the government undertook its steps to make sure 
people did know that whatever was happening with respect to 
Mr. Bowden in the workplace had nothing to do with him 
coming forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve had countless inquiries to government. 

We’ve had letters to the editor, people who will sign letters, 
health care workers who have raised concerns. Over eight years, 
there’s never ever been a workplace implication. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition doesn’t believe us . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . He doesn’t believe the health region in this 
regard. Well he just said no, so he thinks that the government is 
lying in this case and that the health region is lying that there 
are other concerns that have been brought to bear with respect 
to this gentleman. And, Mr. Speaker, he said that from his chair. 
I’d ask him to please stand up and state the position. What does 
he believe, Mr. Speaker? Does he believe that the only reason 
this gentleman might be facing any workplace issues at all is 
because he came forward to the legislature that day? Is that his 
position? And if it is, why has he come to that conclusion? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier can try to put lipstick 
on this pig all he wants, but Saskatchewan people know, Mr. 
Speaker, that the actions that they have seen are troubling and 
concerning. And now, Mr. Speaker, the Premier talks about the 
Privacy Commissioner and due process. Well he only cares 
about due process, Mr. Speaker, now that it’s in his interest, as 
opposed to Saskatchewan workers and the Saskatchewan 
public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I asked a very straightforward question to the 
Premier, but no clear answer, Mr. Speaker. So perhaps the 
Justice minister can shine some light on this for us. My question 
to the Justice minister: did the Premier or anyone in the 
Premier’s office consult him or his officials before the Premier 
ordered the release of private, confidential information? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — It’s very interesting in the member’s 
preamble that he invokes the cause of workers in the province, 
of health care workers in the province. Let me assure, Mr. 
Speaker, him and every member of the House that the welfare 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the former minister of 
Health is chirping from his seat, Mr. Speaker, the former 
member of Health who’s got some knowledge about protecting 
workers in the workplace, Mr. Speaker. I would share that with 
the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the number one priority for members on this side 
of the House is to ensure the welfare and the well-being of 
co-workers and patients, Mr. Speaker. In this case I ask the 
Leader of the Opposition again. He said in a tweet out last 
Thursday — they took it down right away — but he said in a 
tweet, his party said that it appears Bowden is suspended 
specifically for speaking out at seniors’ care crisis. That’s what 
he said in a tweet. His party officials did. That’s what he has 
said subsequently. 
 
This is very important. Is that his position? Is it his position that 
the only reason Mr. Bowden is facing what he is facing in terms 
of his workplace in Saskatoon because he came forward with 
concerns in the legislature? And if that is his position, he needs 
to explain how he has come to it and why, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 



7020 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2015 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, it was a very clear question to the 
Justice minister following a response, not from the Premier, Mr. 
Speaker, about whether or not there was consultation with the 
Minister of Justice before the Premier personally decided to 
leak this information. This is a serious matter, Mr. Speaker, one 
that deserves much better answers than what we’re hearing 
from the Premier. There needs to be, there needs to be thorough 
analysis and a proper weighing of the interests before, before 
private information is released. It is not acceptable, Mr. 
Speaker, for the Premier to rush ahead with leaking information 
simply because it’s politically expedient for him. 
 
So if there’s no answer about whether or not the Premier 
consulted with the Justice minister, perhaps the Premier 
consulted with the Minister of Labour. My question is to the 
Minister of Labour: did the Premier or anyone in the Premier’s 
office consult with him or his officials before the Premier of the 
province of Saskatchewan ordered the leak of confidential 
employment information about a care aid? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there was no leak. We need to 
state that for the record again . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Well his considered response to that is, as if. Mr. Speaker, there 
was no leak. We have already indicated exactly how this 
information was sent on background to the media with one 
particular media outlet deciding to take the step from 
background to inclusion in the story. We’ve already canvassed 
that issue in the House and in the scrum. 
 
Moreover, Mr. Speaker, the Act is clear. I invite the member 
again, has he read this Act, I would ask him? Has he read this 
particular Act? In it is not a prescription for a particular head of 
an area of government consulting with any other heads of 
government. If it’s in their area and a decision’s been made in 
the public interest, as was the case in this regard, the decision 
can be made, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I hear the member from Athabasca saying, this is bad. This is 
bad and here’s why. Here’s why. The Leader of the Opposition 
. . . Here’s why it’s bad. The Leader of the Opposition has said 
publicly last week, both in scrums and in a tweet, that the only 
reason Mr. Bowden is facing any workplace issues at all is that 
he came forward in the legislature. I don’t know how he knows 
this, Mr. Speaker, because I know that the health region and 
Oliver Lodge — I know this — they’re acting on concerns and 
complaints that have been expressed by co-workers. 
 
[14:00] 
 
This is a serious matter, Mr. Speaker, one which you’d think the 
NDP would be a little bit more concerned about. They have 
acted . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well so he doesn’t believe 
it. He’s still heckling from his seat. Does he or does he not 
believe that the Saskatoon Health Region has acted in 
accordance as it should with policies, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 
this particular individual? Is it still his position that the only 
reason he’s facing those consequences is that he came forward 
with concerns in the health care system? Yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier, the Deputy Premier, 
the whole front bench can go on the offensive if they want, but 
a leak is the intentional disclosure of secret information. And 
that is exactly what this Premier admitted to directing himself, 
Mr. Speaker. That is very clear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, due process should be followed. A care worker 
should not have their name sullied and dragged through the 
mud, Mr. Speaker, by the person who has the highest office in 
this province. What the Premier has done, Mr. Speaker, is 
hugely concerning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this care aid was the only health care worker to 
come to the Legislature to speak out publicly without, without 
having his identity protected. So it sure is strange now, Mr. 
Speaker, to have the CEO [chief executive officer] of the 
Saskatoon Health Region monitoring the employment of only 
this care aid, and then for that CEO, for the health region to 
give a heads-up to the Premier. Mr. Speaker, this care aid is 
entitled to proper due process, and this Premier now has 
jeopardized all that and cast a pall over the eventual outcome 
because now it looks politically motivated. 
 
My question to the Premier: how many other front-line health 
care workers are being tracked by the CEO, and how many 
other reports does the Premier’s office receive about this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, while the Leader 
of the Opposition was on his feet, his party tweeted what he was 
saying in the House. The party tweeted that Bowden is the only 
currently employed health care worker who has spoken out on 
seniors’ care crisis. Mr. Speaker, we know the facts. We know 
the facts as even reported by the head of the Saskatoon Health 
Region. And here is his quote from a Leader-Post interview: 
 

There are many examples in the past where our employees 
have written letters to the editor, signed the letters to the 
editor, [he’s saying] issued complaints, been on talk 
shows, have been very vocal about the experiences that 
they’ve had [this is a quote], and they have never been 
sanctioned for doing such [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
And neither will they, Mr. Speaker. Neither will people coming 
forward be sanctioned for expressing concerns in the 
workplace. 
 
Well, again, the NDP are heckling. They have decided this case. 
They have completely decided the case. They said so in a tweet 
last week. He said so in scrums, the Leader of the Opposition 
whose track record with the facts has not been that good this 
particular spring session. He is saying unequivocally that the 
only reason Mr. Bowden is facing what he’s facing in the 
workplace, suspended with pay by Oliver Lodge, the only 
reason that he is facing this is because he came forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he should state that clearly for the record because 
all of the information at one point or another is going to come 
forward, and I think when it does people are going to find out 
that the health region and Oliver Lodge are acting in the 
interests of co-workers and patients, and that’s how it should be 
in Saskatchewan. 



April 27, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7021 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, when this Premier intentionally 
leaked the information of this individual to the media, that 
Premier acted as judge and jury, Mr. Speaker, and tainted this 
whole process. That is very clear, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There needs to be due process. Due process is not being notified 
on Monday morning, Mr. Speaker, that someone’s been 
suspended and then that same morning having an email going 
out to media, Mr. Speaker, through back channels. That is not 
due process, and Saskatchewan people deserve much better than 
what they have seen from this Premier, Mr. Speaker. This 
Premier has a very skewed sense of what is in the public 
interest. 
 
The member, Mr. Speaker, from is it Moose Jaw is heckling 
about this because that’s how seriously they take privacy of 
Saskatchewan health care workers, Mr. Speaker. It’s the 
sentiment that we see from all of the members on that side, Mr. 
Speaker, and it is worrisome, absolutely. 
 
The Premier has a very skewed sense about what is in the 
public interest. Remember this is the same Premier that refuses 
to release any information about the $1.5 billion of school needs 
here in Saskatchewan. He claims that, Mr. Speaker, is a cabinet 
secret that the public shouldn’t know about that. Meanwhile he 
personally directs and approves and wants the release of private 
information about an individual. What a contrast, Mr. Speaker. 
 
How can the Premier justify leaking information about a private 
individual while at the same time, Mr. Speaker, he is refusing to 
release information about the true state of our kids’ schools? 
How does that make any sense? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in the member’s very excited 
preamble, he makes a reference to judge and jury. I’m going to 
remind him because it was a while ago, it was last Thursday, 
I’m going to remind him of what he was saying in this House 
and what his staff were tweeting out. In terms of the question of 
judge and jury, here’s what the NDP said on this case and I 
quote, “. . . NDP has seen file & is satisfied it appears Bowden 
is suspended specifically for speaking out about seniors’ care 
crisis.” 
 
There’s your judge and jury, Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding the 
fact that the health region has said it has nothing to do with the 
suspension, notwithstanding the fact that Oliver Lodge took 
action not to do at all with his coming forward to the House, 
and frankly, Mr. Speaker, notwithstanding the word that I have 
given and the word that the Minister of Health has given that 
there is no connection between what’s happened to Mr. Bowden 
in the workplace and him coming forward from the Assembly. 
 
So once again I encourage the member, if he’s going to make 
accusations about people jumping to conclusions, he ought to 
reconsider what he’s saying and what’s he’s tweeting. And for 
the record, he might want to stand in his place and let the 
members know that he still believes what he believed on 
Thursday, which is Mr. Bowden has been suspended because he 
raised seniors’ care concerns in the legislature. Is that his 

position? Because we’ll find out one day soon — I expect, I 
hope — we’ll find out one day if it’s true or not. So my 
question to him is, is that what he believes? Yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve been clear all along. This 
stinks. The Premier’s actions have been appalling, Mr. Speaker, 
and there has been no due process for this care aid, Mr. 
Speaker, who has come forward. That has been crystal clear, 
Mr. Speaker. And the responses we have from the Premier 
today are appalling to our democracy and appalling to the 
individuals, Mr. Speaker, who are coming forward and wanting 
the truth, Mr. Speaker, and who deserve due process. 
 
This government, Mr. Speaker, only shares, they only share 
information when it is politically expedient. The Premier 
refuses to release any information about the $1.5 billion of 
school repairs needed here in the province. That’s a big secret; 
won’t share any information about that. 
 
In just the last year, Mr. Speaker, this government has broken 
the law 23 times, 23 times, Mr. Speaker, by refusing to release 
information from the Ministry of Health as required by 
legislation. This government, Mr. Speaker, has refused to 
answer almost 70 per cent . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And 
the member from Arm River-Watrous, Mr. Speaker, is worked 
up. He should tell his government, Mr. Speaker, that they 
should follow the law when it comes to freedom of information. 
That’s what he should be doing. Mr. Speaker, they haven’t 
responded to about 70 per cent of the written questions, Mr. 
Speaker. They have no interest in releasing information when it 
can be politically damaging to them. It’s a big joke, and we see 
it in their laughs on the front bench. 
 
But in this case, the Premier rushed — he couldn’t do it fast 
enough, Mr. Speaker — to release private information about an 
individual. And according to the Premier, Mr. Speaker, by his 
own words, it was to get him out of a conundrum and to save 
his own reputation. My question to the Premier: will he stand in 
the Assembly today and simply admit that it was a mistake, it 
was a mistake to direct the release, to leak this confidential, 
private information about a health employee here in 
Saskatchewan? Will he do that today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s an interesting 
question that the member opposite places. He says that we’ve 
broken the law 23 times. I’d like to know the instance where 
we’re alleged to have broken the law. Mr. Speaker, when it 
comes to FOIP [freedom of information and protection of 
privacy], when it comes to freedom of information requests, we 
granted access 94 per cent of the time. Ninety-five per cent of 
the requests received are responded to within a 60-day period, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s on par with any other jurisdiction in 
Western Canada. But I ask the question again: I’d like to know 
what incidents he’s referring to, Mr. Speaker, in terms of 
breaking the law. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Mr. Speaker, they have not been following the 



7022 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2015 

legislation when it comes to freedom of information requests, 
Mr. Speaker, and the cases are well documented. 
 
But I’m pleased, Mr. Speaker, that the Justice minister is now 
on his feet. My question to the Justice minister, Mr. Speaker: on 
Monday when the Premier found out that this individual had 
been suspended, did the Premier speak with the Justice minister 
or any of his officials and get an opinion about whether or not it 
was appropriate and legal to leak the confidential employment 
information of an individual? Did the Premier consult with 
him? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
should consult with his Justice critic. He knows, he knows that 
any advice that’s provided by the Ministry of Justice to any 
member of executive government is covered by solicitor-client 
privilege, Mr. Speaker. We stand on that. 
 
As far as the investigation is concerned, Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier has indicated, Mr. Speaker, that to the extent that 
there’s been a complaint made to the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner, that we let that process follow its normal course, 
Mr. Speaker. We’ve always indicated that we will support the 
independent review by the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner, Mr. Speaker, and we await the results of that 
investigation and any recommendations that come from it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 

Workplace Fatalities 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Workers’ Compensation Board reported 39 workplace fatalities 
last year, and the leading cause of death for workers was 
traumatic injury. This is devastating, and it needs to stop. To the 
Labour minister: what specific changes will this government 
make as a result of these 39 deaths? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 
opposite for his question. Even one injury in the workplace is 
one too many. Tomorrow we will be reading out the names of 
the workers that were killed in our province, and it’s something 
that this government, and I’m sure all members, take seriously. 
On behalf of the government, I’d like to offer our sincere 
condolences to all of the families that are affected by that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can say this: that the work that the ministry is 
doing by way of targeted interventions is showing signs of 
significant progress. At 2.41 per cent, the workplace time-loss 
injury rate is actually a substantial drop of about 51 per cent 
lower than it was from 2002. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are making progress. Not fast enough, but we 
are making progress and we are making changes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, we learned in March that this 

government has slashed the number of occupational health and 
safety inspections by nearly 70 per cent since 2012. In 2012 
there were 385 OHS [occupational health and safety] 
inspections every month. But this government cut that to 120 
inspections per month and 39 workers died last year. That’s one 
workplace death every one and a half weeks, and the leading 
cause of death is traumatic injury. 
 
This government needs to significantly ramp up its inspections 
and enforcement. Does the Labour minister recognize that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we reached an injury rate 
high of 4.95 per cent under the NDP in the year 2002. The rate 
has continued to drop since then and is dropping now at a faster 
rate than it has before. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 86 per cent of the businesses in our province, 86 
per cent of the workplaces have reached the Mission: Zero 
target. Unfortunately there are approximately 14 per cent of 
them who have not yet done that. Mr. Speaker, I have a quote 
from a College of Law event dated March 2, 2013: 
 

I agree totally with the minister in terms of occupational 
health and safety. It’s one thing that we just should really 
do as much as we can. It is one that, as a government, we 
too struggled with and we hoped we could do much more. 
So I believe we should talk about it, and specifically it’s 
really something we can get behind. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s a quote from the member opposite. We want 
to continue to target the workplaces that have the highest injury 
rate. We want to work with those workplaces to try and drive 
the injury rate down. One is one too many, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Sale of Forest Centre 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Can the ministry, the 
Minister of Social Services tell us why the Sask Party 
government is selling the forest centre in Prince Albert? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — I think that the member opposite has 
the wrong minister because I don’t believe Social Services has 
that centre. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Central Services. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Campeau: — I don’t have the information on hand 
for that, but I can take notice and definitely get the information 
to you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, maybe this will ring a bell. The 



April 27, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7023 

forest centre cost the government $12.7 million 10 years ago, 
and that’s almost $15.1 million with inflation. But this 
government is selling it for just $12 million. 
 
The real estate ad for the forest centre says, this is a great 
investment opportunity because the building is “like new” and 
because it provides “cash flow security, 97 per cent leased to a 
diverse mix of high-quality covenant tenants.” So again to the 
minister: why is the Sask Party government selling off the 
forest centre? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Sorry, Mr. Speaker, it took me a 
minute, it actually took me two minutes to get to my feet. There 
was two other ministers answering for a file that is under CIC 
[Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan]. That 
building is under Crown Investments Corp, Mr. Speaker. And it 
was decided by this government and through CIC that we 
would put that facility on the market because really, Mr. 
Speaker, it was built a number of years ago as a forest centre for 
research and all of that. 
 
That building certainly has not been utilized for that. It is a 
building that really houses a number of different businesses, 
Mr. Speaker, from law firms to some government ministries, 
but certainly never the intent of that building . . . never has 
followed through with what the intent of that building was 
under the NDP, Mr. Speaker. That’s why this building has been 
put up for sale in Prince Albert through an RFP [request for 
proposal], Mr. Speaker, through real estate. And we’ll certainly 
see what comes of that sale. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, almost 60 per cent of the forest 
centre is currently occupied by government. To the minister: 
how much will the government be paying in rent after it sells 
off this valuable asset? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I remember being in the 
House and the discussion around when that facility was being 
built, and it was all sold to the general public. And through this 
House, absolutely I remember being in opposition through those 
days that it was going to be a centre of research, a centre of 
excellence for the forest industry, Mr. Speaker, for northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We certainly questioned that at the time, whether that was really 
the issue, Mr. Speaker. Or was there more around the politics of 
the time, Mr. Speaker, with the two former members from 
Prince Albert putting this facility forward because they were 
trying to sell it as a centre for forest research, Mr. Speaker, 
when we really knew it would never be used for that. That is 
very evident since the inception of that building. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, we know that under the NDP, as far as their forest 
research went, what it was was mill after mill after mill closing 

in this province. That was the NDP’s forest research. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that building is not utilized for the 
intentional purposes. It is simply an office building that houses 
a number of different businesses throughout the province and 
throughout the North, Mr. Speaker. That’s why through SOCO 
[Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation] and CIC, we’ve 
decided to put that on the auction mart . . . [inaudible]. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Intergovernmental 
Relations. 
 

Government Donation to Disaster Relief for Nepal 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
people across the province and around the world are familiar 
with the devastating effects of the earthquake that struck the 
people in the nation of Nepal this past Saturday. The reports 
coming out of Kathmandu are chilling, with more than 3,000 
confirmed dead and many more injured. The true extent of this 
tragedy will likely not be known for many days yet, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The earthquake was the worst to hit the nation in more than 80 
years. It was strong enough to be felt across parts of India, 
Bangladesh, Tibet, and Pakistan. There have been nearly 100 
earthquakes and aftershocks, which is making rescue work 
difficult. Thousands of homes and businesses have been 
demolished, and survivors are desperate for food, water, and 
shelter. Many small, isolated communities, in addition to the 
destruction in larger centres, have been destroyed. In some 
villages over 70 per cent of the homes have been levelled and 
some 100,000 people are currently homeless. Some of these 
remote areas are a three days walk from the main disaster centre 
located in Gorkha which emphasizes the urgency of any rescue 
effort. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, we announced that the Government of 
Saskatchewan will donate $250,000 to the disaster relief effort 
in Nepal. The money will go to the Red Cross, an organization 
that provides invaluable service and help when natural disasters 
strike. Currently aid is coming from more than 16 countries and 
many charities, but Nepal’s chief secretary and rescue 
coordinator says the people of Nepal need more. We’re also 
pleased to hear that the Canadian government is sending a 
disaster aid team and contributing $5 million to relief efforts. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan realize how important it is to lend 
a helping hand when people are in need, and that’s why the 
province has contributed more than $1 million in disaster aid 
relief to the Red Cross around the world since 2010. Today, Mr. 
Speaker, I would ask all members of the House to join me in 
conveying our prayers and support to the people of Nepal. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Broten: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the minister in expressing the sadness and condolences from the 
official opposition on this very sad news. And, Mr. Speaker, as 
we watch on TV the devastating scenes of rubble and people 



7024 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2015 

being trapped and injured and sadly, Mr. Speaker, many deaths, 
our hearts and our prayers certainly go out to the people of 
Nepal and the region as there’s so much calamity and sadness 
and devastation right now, Mr. Speaker. And whatever we can 
do as Saskatchewan people to play a role in working with the 
federal government and international partners to lend a helping 
hand and to provide some resources, Mr. Speaker, is certainly a 
good thing to do and we’re supportive of that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to give special words and 
thoughts to those in Saskatchewan with ties to the region, with 
loved ones who they may not know about their current safety 
and well-being, Mr. Speaker. We are thinking of them as well 
and want them to know that they have the support of the 
Saskatchewan people. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would thank 
the minister for his remarks. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Krawetz that Bill No. 178 — The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2015 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 
Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise to speak to Bill No. 178, An Act to amend The Income Tax 
Act, 2000 and to make a consequential amendment to The 
Graduate Retention Program Act. Mr. Speaker, this piece of 
legislation relates to a phrase that the Finance minister used in 
his budget speech where he said that certain programs “are 
being changed to ensure their ongoing sustainability.” Mr. 
Speaker, I think that’s euphemistic language for telling certain 
groups who have been expecting certain programs to be 
beneficial for them, it’s telling them that we’re going to cut 
them; we’re going to end or we’re going to change them in a 
way that makes it difficult. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, this bill is dealing with the active families 
benefit, the graduate retention program, seniors’ drug plans, 
Saskatchewan employment supplement, and the research and 
development tax credit program. Now not all of them need very 
specific information in this bill, but clearly the graduate 
retention changes, graduate retention program changes do need 
some very specific language. And so, Mr. Speaker, when this 
government came into power, they changed the previous system 
that was set up and that people had been making plans around 
to use financial assistance that would come each year as they 
were part of their education to a system that gave them funds 
after they had graduated, and hence the name the graduate 
retention program. And the retention part is the incentive to stay 
and be a taxpayer in Saskatchewan. And that’s, you know, clear 
what that intention was. 
 
But now what we have is a change such that the amount of 
money which students were going to receive has been set into a 

program that only goes to those people who are going to be able 
to set it off against the tax that they receive. Now that’s not 
necessarily a bad program provided that you reviewed how it 
affects the students of the province in general. And one of 
difficulties for many young people is that they will graduate 
from university and then try to sort out which kind of 
professional program they’re going to look at, which kind of 
graduate program they’re going to look at, and what other kinds 
of things they might do. 
 
And this particular program was set up in a way that those 
people who have now figured out how it works over the last 
two or three years are able to get a cash injection of $2,000. 
They got that in 2012. They got that in 2013. They’ll get it 
based in 2014 on their tax returns. So people will get it now this 
spring. And that amount of money came whether they had a 
very high-paying job or whether they were studying in grad 
school and not having any income at all. 
 
What will happen next spring is that when people are preparing 
their tax returns, they will only be able to have some of this 
money returned to them if they have sufficient income that they 
are paying Saskatchewan tax. And that ends up then being quite 
a challenge for many young workers or especially people who 
are continuing their studies. Now to deal with that, the 
legislation that we have in front of us today actually extends the 
time in which these tax credits can be claimed for a longer 
period of time. But I think that what it really does is it defers a 
lot of the payments, and the people who have paid for their 
university may not see the funds for quite a number of years. 
Some of them may never actually be able to recoup that because 
they won’t be in a position to have sufficient taxable income 
within 10 years of their graduation date. 
 
And so that change has some problems to it, and I think that 
there is actually time for the Ministry of Finance to fine-tune 
this before next year’s tax returns are filed, and maybe we will 
see some suggestion in the fall that provides further work on 
this particular part of the bill. 
 
Now this bill also includes a number of requests from the 
federal government to change our legislation in Saskatchewan 
to comply with the relatively standard format used by Canada 
Revenue Agency to collect taxes on behalf of nine provinces 
and three territories. As we know, I think Quebec has their own 
revenue collection system. And some of the changes are I think 
fairly straightforward, although they are clearly meant to make 
it easier to collect amounts owing. 
 
One of the changes that is a bit interesting, and I’m not totally 
certain when I read this whether we completely understand 
what is happening, and that would be, in the bill it would be 
changes to section 1, which are in section 4 of the bill. And that 
relates to charitable and other gifts credits. And basically what’s 
happening here is that it’s kind of a technical change, but it 
effectively makes sure that the qualified donees are under the 
list that is set by the federal government, and it includes the 
rules of conduct for all charitable organizations. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Now anybody who’s followed federal politics knows that this is 
an area where there have been some very difficult discussions 



April 27, 2015 Saskatchewan Hansard 7025 

on a federal level, and it’s not clear from this legislation 
whether we’re being pulled into that debate or whether it’s a 
fairly simple kind of an issue. And I don’t know, from looking 
at the legislation itself, whether there are some problems here 
that we need to worry about. So I think that this is probably an 
area where, when the matter is in committee, we’ll want to have 
a fuller explanation from the Finance officials exactly what is 
intended here because some of the difficulties that have arisen 
on the federal level have some I think major concerns for all of 
us in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now other changes that are in the legislation do relate to some 
fairly straightforward things, although anybody who looks at 
legislation will be surprised, maybe amused, by sections like 
section 13 which is a new section 63.3. And it deals with the 
whole concept of non-refundable research and development tax 
credits, and then goes through and sets out in great detail all 
kinds of acronyms that are I think maybe the joy of certain tax 
accountants or tax drafters but from a legislative purpose they 
set up quite complicated formulas. 
 
So in section 63.3(4), it sets out in detail that: 
 

The research and development tax credit of a corporation 
for a taxation year is the positive amount, RDTC, if any, 
calculated in accordance with the following formula: 

 
RDTC = (RD + RDPY + OA + OAPY + RB) [the total 
of that] - PD 

 
And then it goes through and defines all of these terms and then 
it spends a couple of pages trying to explain exactly what this is 
going to do for this research tax credit. 
 
What we know from the public is that the research and 
development tax credit is being reduced from 15 per cent to 10 
per cent. 
 
Now what we know on a national level and on a provincial 
level that the research, the amounts of money that have been 
allocated for research, have been substantially reduced and that 
this is another area where it seemed to be prudent to cut back on 
a tax expenditure in an area where research is concerned. And 
we think it’s the kind of thing that we should watch very 
carefully because it does affect the long-term health of our 
economy when we don’t have the research work being done. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the other areas that this bill deals with are I 
think fairly straightforward, but they do reflect a budget speech 
where there’s cuts been made and the choices of these particular 
areas to make cuts still need full explanation. But, Mr. Speaker, 
I know some of my other colleagues will want to speak about 
this bill as well and at this point I will move that we adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 178, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2015. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. To facilitate the work of committees both this 
afternoon and this evening, I move that this House do now 
adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 
that the House do now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned to 1:30 
p.m. tomorrow, except for the member for Carrot River Valley 
who wants to stay. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:34.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7015 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7015 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7015 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7015 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7015 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7015 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 7016 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7016 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7016 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7016 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Nurse Practitioner Awareness Day 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7016 
 Women of Distinction Awards 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7017 
 Pre-Construction Begins on Battlefords Facility 
  Cox ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 7017 
 Saskatchewan Book Awards 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7017 
 Saskatchewan Country Music Association Awards 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 7018 
 Saskatoon Brewing Company Celebrates 25th Anniversary 
  Tochor ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7018 
 $25 million Investment in Carrot River Saw Mill 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7018 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Release of Information Concerning Worker 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7019 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 7019 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7021 
 Workplace Fatalities 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7022 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7022 
 Sale of Forest Centre 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 7022 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7022 
  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 7022 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 7023 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Government Donation to Disaster Relief for Nepal 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7023 
  Broten ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 7023 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 178 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2015 
  Nilson ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 7024 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Advanced Education 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Ken Krawetz 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


