






















































Hansard: June 30, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 26A  THURSDAY, JUNE 30, 2016, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Hon. Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Hon. Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Merriman, Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 51; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Maurice Riou http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 717 
 June 30, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you I would like to welcome to this Assembly my brother, Staff 
Sergeant Brad Kaeding, and his wife, Janna Van Kessel, seated 
in the west gallery . . . east gallery? They are currently residents 
of Whitehorse, Yukon, where Brad is the RCMP [Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police] staff sergeant responsible for all 
detachments outside of Whitehorse in the Yukon Territory. 
Janna is instructor coordinator of adult basic ed at the Yukon 
College, and she also contributes to writing a lot of reference 
guides for various Saskatchewan government agencies, 
including the grade 1 to 11 science curriculum. 
 
As with a lot of RCMP officers, he has been posted to eight 
provinces and territories and has had 13 moves in 27 years, but 
still very much considers Saskatchewan home and tries to 
enshrine the Riders at every location that he’s been at. But I 
would also like to just publicly state how proud we are of his 
dedication and service to his country, and also to Janna’s 
sacrifices to support those efforts. And I’d like to ask all 
members to welcome them to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — To you and through you, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s an honour to introduce a few very important guests in the 
Assembly here today. Someone who’s no stranger to this 
Assembly, it’s an honour to welcome Andy Iwanchuk, along 
with Ann Iwanchuk and grandson Drake — nine years old, 
going into grade 5 next year — to their Assembly. Of course, 
Andy served honourably in this Assembly as an MLA. I count 
him as a good friend. He’s an all around good guy and great 
fisher. They’re both highly involved in their community as 
community leaders. Ann, of course, serves as a city councillor 
as well. They’re active in the movement for workers’ rights, 
and just give so much back to our community. So it’s my 
pleasure to welcome Andy and Ann Iwanchuk as well as Drake 
to their Assembly here today. 
 
While on my feet, to you and through you, it’s also my pleasure 
to welcome a good friend to the Assembly: Darcy Bendig, 
someone who served with distinction with an entire career with 
SaskTel, somebody who is an all-around good guy also. 
Someone who knows how to handle himself with some wind 
and water — an incredible athlete, in fact, on the water. And 
I’m looking forward to hopefully connecting with him 
sometime, hopefully fairly soon, on Last Mountain Lake. And 
somebody who’s also the uncle to a very incredible person who 
works in our caucus office, Mel Bendig. It’s my pleasure to 
welcome my friend Darcy Bendig to his Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want to 
join my leader in welcoming the guests in here, Andy and Ann 
Iwanchuk. Andy Iwanchuk here has fought so hard for labour 
rights, and it’s so ironic that he’s back here after the good fight 
he fought for Bill 5 and 6 and the right to strike, and here he is. 
And I just want to congratulate him for his good work and 
welcome him to his legislature. Thank you, Andy. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my great honour 
today to be able to introduce three very important guests to this 
Legislative Assembly, sitting in the east gallery. These are my 
three children, Hannah, Maya, and Nolan. And this is their first 
day off school and they chose to spend at least some of their 
time here today. And as all members will know, families play a 
very important role in all of us getting to this Legislative 
Assembly, and it’s not without sacrifice. So I want to just thank 
them for their patience and just being all around pretty good 
kids. Welcome. I invite all members to welcome them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
And while I’m still on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would also like 
to welcome, seated in the west gallery, Ms. Pam Guest and her 
sons Liam and Wyatt. Pam has been noted before as a tireless 
advocate and really a force of nature, so I welcome her here 
today and I invite all members to do the same. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the 
member opposite in welcoming Pam Guest and her children to 
the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. Pam and I for some 
time grew up in the same town in Halbrite, Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s been some years since we’ve seen each other and I 
know Pam is advocating on a very important issue for children 
in this province and so I’d also want to join with the member 
opposite and ask all members to help welcome Pam and her 
sons to the Legislative Assembly. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Today I’ll be tabling a special report on the 
Global Transportation Hub Authority and the Ministry of 
Health and Infrastructure in accordance with provisions of  
section 14(1). 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
proud to stand in my place today to present a petition around 
housing and the home ownership opportunity for the people of 
northern Saskatchewan. And this particular petition, Mr. 
Speaker, it relates to the Air Ronge, La Ronge, Creighton, and 
Denare Beach area as well as many other northern communities. 
And I’ll read the petition prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 



718 Saskatchewan Hansard June 30, 2016 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Saskatchewan 
Party government to restore the RPO rent-to-own option 
for responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan including 
La Ronge, Air Ronge, Creighton, and Denare Beach 
allowing them the dignity of owning their own homes and 
building communities in our province’s beautiful North. 

 
And the people that have signed this petition are from all 
throughout the land, Mr. Speaker, and on this particular page 
they have signed from Wadin Bay and Air Ronge, and I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my privilege to 
rise and present a petition to the Government of Saskatchewan. 
The individuals want to bring to our attention the following: 
wetlands serve a very vital function in our ecosystem; they are 
home to wildlife, including waterfowl; and in worst cases, such 
as some areas on the prairies, as much as 90 per cent of our 
wetlands have disappeared. As they continue to disappear, so 
too do the many benefits they provide. I’d like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Government of Saskatchewan to: 
 
Increase funding to do the proper inventory work, putting 
Saskatchewan in a better position to manage the water 
resource. 
 
Speed up the evaluation of high-risk watersheds where 
there is significant damage annually from flooding. This 
evaluation must include a recognition of drainage works 
that could be closed or restored that will alleviate some of 
the issues downstream with respect to flooding and nutrient 
loading. And, 
 
Create a sound and transparent mitigation process that 
adequately addresses sustainable development. 
 
The sequence should first focus on avoiding environmental 
harm whenever possible before a secondary focus on 
minimizing the harm, with compensation being sought 
only when the development is deemed essential and the 
first two stages cannot be met. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed from individuals from Estevan 
and Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
again today to present a petition in support of funding for 
heritage languages here in Saskatchewan. And we know that 
after 25 years, the Government of Saskatchewan is 
discontinuing all support for heritage language learning in 
Saskatchewan. Since 1991 heritage language schools have 
depended on this modest funding from the Ministry of 
Education to help sustain their programs. But as a result of the 

announcement by the Ministry of Education, many of these 
non-profit heritage language schools will be faced with the 
difficult decision of whether or not they can continue to operate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to read the prayer: 

 
We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to reconsider this decision and restore funding for heritage 
language education in Saskatchewan heritage language 
schools. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from all 
across the province of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, it is an honour and a privilege to 
stand in my place today and present a petition in support of 
sexual abuse prevention curriculum in Saskatchewan. And I 
draw attention to the following: Saskatchewan has the 
second-highest rate of sexual abuse, sexual child abuse in 
Canada, and statistics show that one in three girls and one in six 
boys will be sexually abused by the age of 18. Up to 90 per cent 
of perpetrators are known to the victim, and it is estimated that 
95 per cent of these cases never get reported. 
 
Mr. Speaker, child sexual abuse has lasting impacts throughout 
a child’s lifetime. These effects include mental health impacts, 
PTSD [post-traumatic stress disorder], severe depression, 
anxiety, panic attacks, and low self-esteem. It also impacts 
school attendance and achievement and decreased productivity 
throughout the lifespan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, victims of childhood sexual abuse are more than 
four times likely to commit suicide, and currently there is no 
comprehensive elementary or secondary curriculum regarding 
prevention and reporting of sexual child abuse in Saskatchewan. 
 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

That the ministry take immediate and concrete action to 
develop and implement Erin’s Law and such legislation 
would ensure that a comprehensive health education 
program be developed and implemented which would 
require age-appropriate sexual abuse and assault awareness 
and prevention education in grades pre-K through 12, 
along with training for school staff on the prevention of 
sexual child abuse. 

 
The signators to this petition reside in Regina. Thank you. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 



June 30, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 719 

Saskatchewan Jazz Festival 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand in this 
Assembly today to announce the 30th annual SaskTel 
Saskatchewan Jazz Festival is having a resounding success this 
week. 
 
The largest ticketed festival of its kind in Western Canada, the 
Sask Jazz Festival is an amazing showcase of artists: provincial, 
national, and international musicians. With about 600 artists 
performing during the 10 festival days with a range of musical 
genres such as jazz, rhythm and blues, funk, pop, and more, 
there was excitement for everyone. 
 
The festival attracts over 85,000 people to the Saskatoon area. 
SaskTel Saskatchewan Jazz Festival has a significant cultural 
and economic impact on the province. The jazz festival’s 
economic impact in 2016 is estimated to be $10 million. 
 
This festival could not happen without the 400 volunteers that 
work hard all week long to make it run smoothly. I’d also like 
to note that the organization also offers several outreach 
programs that include a high school jazz intensive educational 
program, a provincial tour for seniors, jam sessions and 
workshops, and Six Degrees of Jazz film series. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask all members to join me in 
congratulating the Saskatchewan Jazz Festival on their 30 years 
in Saskatoon. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

High School Graduation Events in Prince Albert 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Like many other 
cities and towns in Saskatchewan, this final week of June is an 
exciting time for Prince Albert graduating students. All five 
high schools in our city are holding graduation events this 
week, and I want to acknowledge the accomplishments of our 
students and the mentoring and guidance of our teachers. Mr. 
Speaker, graduation signals the start of a new life. Students 
have completed their studies and are ready to begin a new 
phase. The students have many choices to make and many 
different career paths to choose from. It is my hope that the 
choices our students make will bring them joy and a sense of 
accomplishment and satisfaction. 
 
Westmor Community High School held its graduation on 
Monday, June 27th, and Prince Albert Collegiate Institute, 
known locally as PACI, held its graduation on Tuesday, June 
28th. Graduation for students at Carlton Comprehensive High 
School was on Wednesday, June 29th. St. Mary’s High School 
and Rivier Academy are having their celebrations today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 
congratulating the 2016 graduating students from Prince Albert 
and wishing them success in their new adventures and 
acknowledging the support they have received from their 
parents and their teachers. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
University. 

Convocation Ceremony 
 
Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday 
I had the pleasure of attending the Saskatchewan Polytechnic’s 
Regina campus convocation ceremony on behalf of the Minister 
of Advanced Education. The accomplishments of 350 graduates 
were celebrated during the ceremony. 
 
[10:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Polytechnic strives to provide 
programs that meet our province’s labour market needs and to 
provide students with training and the skills necessary to drive 
economic growth in the province. The Regina campus is doing 
an excellent job of living up to these goals, as approximately 93 
per cent of this year’s graduates have already secured 
employment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, across the province more than 3,000 of the 
students attending Saskatchewan Polytechnic self-declare as 
indigenous, more than any other post-secondary institution in 
Saskatchewan. One of these successful graduates is Sara Vail 
who has gained employment at GasBuddy Regina, thanks to her 
successful completion of the new media communications 
program. Sara received the Governor General’s Academic 
Collegiate Bronze Medal in recognition of her having earned a 
94 per cent average, the highest at the Regina campus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Tim Young, who is known to many of us over 
here, of Young’s Equipment, was also honoured with an 
honorary diploma. Young’s Equipment is a top employer and 
supporter of Saskatchewan Polytechnic students and graduates. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating all of the 
graduates and award winners who were celebrated at the 
Saskatchewan Polytechnic Regina campus convocation. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

The Right to Health 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I am proud to stand in this House 
and highlight the 70th anniversary of The Saskatchewan 
Hospitalization Act. This weekend marks a milestone for our 
province and the important work that was done to ensure that 
every person in Saskatchewan and every person in Canada has 
the right to health care. 
 
The right to health is a human right, and our province has 
shown strong leadership on this front. In 1946 then Premier 
Tommy Douglas introduced this legislation, and Saskatchewan 
became the first province offering full hospitalization coverage 
to all residents, regardless of their ability to pay. This bold 
move highlights the strong, communal, and caring values of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people before us have laid a strong foundation, 
and we need to ensure that we honour this work. Unfortunately 
we have seen some of these rights to health being stripped 
away. We see unequal rights where status First Nations people 
do not have the same access to health care that other 



720 Saskatchewan Hansard June 30, 2016 

Saskatchewan residents do, simply because of their identity. We 
need to do better to get rid of this blatant discrimination in our 
system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this anniversary this weekend is a reminder of the 
work that has been done before us but also of the work we need 
to do. We must uphold our rights to health and ensure that 
everyone in Saskatchewan has the opportunity to live the 
healthiest life possible. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join 
me in recognizing the 70th anniversary of The Saskatchewan 
Hospitalization Act. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 

Saskatchewan International Physician 
Practice Assessment 

 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Twelve new doctors 
are practising in the province thanks to the most recent results 
of the Saskatchewan international physician practice assessment 
program. SIPPA is a unique, made-in-Saskatchewan program 
that assesses international trained doctors on their medical 
education and clinical ability before allowing them to practise 
in the province. 
 
This Saskatchewan program opened doors for family doctors 
trained in countries throughout the world. Since SIPPA began 
in 2011, more than 190 new family physicians have completed 
the assessment and have fulfilled or are fulfilling their service 
commitment to the province. Mr. Speaker, access to physician 
services continue to improve for people all over Saskatchewan 
because of this program. The results of this program have been 
especially important for rural Saskatchewan where 
approximately 82 per cent of all SIPPA graduates are currently 
practising. 
 
Attracting and keeping doctors has always been a priority for 
this government. SIPPA is one of many initiatives to help us 
meet the health care needs of Saskatchewan residents. Today 
we have nearly 650 more doctors practising in the province than 
we did nine years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that my colleagues join me in welcoming 
these new physicians and their families to Saskatchewan. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Carlton. 
 

Dr. Tom Smith-Windsor House in Prince Albert 
 
Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Post-secondary 
students, educators, and health care providers will have reason 
to celebrate in Prince Albert next week when the Minister 
Responsible for Rural and Remote Health and I will join them 
for the grand opening ceremony of a new student housing 
complex on the grounds of the Victoria Hospital. The $1.9 
million structure has been completed on budget and on schedule 
using the proceeds of the sale of the old Pineview Terrace 
Lodge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Prince Albert Parkland Regional Health 
Authority board recently voted to name the building Dr. Tom 

Smith-Windsor House in recognition of the man named Family 
Physician of the Year in 1995 by the Saskatchewan College of 
Family Physicians. Dr. Smith-Windsor worked tirelessly in his 
family medicine practice, and he is also the associate dean of 
rural and northern medical education at the University of 
Saskatchewan’s school of medicine. 
 
These units will be used to support locum physicians, health 
professionals, health care students, and residents in training. It 
is located next the Victoria Hospital and will help students take 
part in their health care training in Prince Albert, while 
performing practise in a more rural setting. 
 
Please join me in celebrating the completion of another project 
that shows our government’s commitment to physician 
recruitment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 

Fort Qu’Appelle Habitat for Humanity Key Presentation 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in 
the House today and inform members about a Habitat for 
Humanity key presentation that I recently attended in Fort 
Qu’Appelle. Many hands were involved in building this new 
home. Not only did Habitat for Humanity take a lead on this 
project, but they also partnered once again with Regina Trades 
and Skills and Prairie Valley School Division to build this 
home. 
 
This project engages and trains students in a variety of 
construction trade areas and provides hands-on experience in 
building a home from start to finish. Mr. Speaker, our 
government continues to work with Habitat for Humanity and 
its partners and volunteers to make home ownership a reality 
for Saskatchewan families in greatest housing need. Through 
the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, we provided $65,000 
to see this project through. This brings the government’s 
commitment to Habitat for Humanity to a total of $7.85 million 
since March of 2009. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating Habitat for 
Humanity and its partners, the town of Fort Qu’Appelle and 
each student from the Prairie Valley School Division, for 
showing tremendous leadership and community spirit as they 
helped yet another Saskatchewan family achieve their dream of 
home ownership. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Provincial Auditor Recommendations Regarding Global 
Transportation Hub Transaction 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the auditor’s report that 
was released today displays and confirms incredible waste by 
that government with their GTH [Global Transportation Hub] 
land scandal. Terrible processes, insufficient processes are 
described. It does nothing to exonerate that government, that 
minister. In fact it leads to some incredibly serious unanswered 
questions. 
 



June 30, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 721 

Exposed in the report are some almost unbelievable facts. It 
requires answers to further investigation. The report clearly 
states that the active involvement in the GTH land scandal, the 
deal, that that minister’s involvement was a problem. 
 
Why is the Premier, in his position of trust with the people of 
Saskatchewan, why did he try to defend a deal as indefensible 
and wasteful as exposed through this investigation? Why didn’t 
he come clean a long time ago? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. First of 
all, I want to thank the Provincial Auditor for her report, for her 
work and the work of her team members in her office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty clear that there are some 
recommendations here that need to be acted on — two for the 
GTH, eight in respect of the Ministry of Highways. I also want 
to say this for the record, Mr. Speaker. We’ve said it would be 
the kind of government that admits to mistakes when they’ve 
occurred and then seek to address those mistakes. The mistakes 
that the auditor has highlighted in the report around the 
particular parcel of land that’s received most of the focus of the 
debate is a lack of focus and coordination on the part of 
government in terms of assembling the land, purchasing the 
land, which may have well led to the land . . . to the prices for 
the land being too high by the time of purchase. And for that we 
take responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the context is a massive land assembly for an 
important project at a time of historically escalating land prices, 
but that’s not an excuse. It is a unique situation. We should 
have been up to the task of meeting that very unique situation 
with respect to the land purchases. 
 
I am still confident, based on recent sales at the GTH, that 
taxpayers are going to actually still make money on the 
purchase. But we accept the recommendations of the report, Mr. 
Speaker, and we will be implementing those recommendations. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — This is no small matter. How incredibly 
weak and dismissive, Mr. Speaker. The auditor’s report finds 
that they didn’t . . . I’d urge members that are heckling to 
finally read this report to see the holes that are in it . . . 
[inaudible] . . . push for their constituents for some answers 
finally of that Premier and this minister. 
 
It didn’t have any documentation. The report finds that the GTH 
consistently pays more, way more than appraised values, and 
they didn’t keep appropriate documentation for the purchase of 
said land, pages 28 and 29, that the GTH treated landowners 
unfairly — of course that includes the nuns. There was never 
even a proper business case done for why they needed this land 
in the first place, and that the GTH and the GTH board had no 
clear direction as to how the process of buying land was 
supposed to happen. 
 
They needed direction from their board Chair. The Chair was 
the minister. He failed, and millions of hard-earned tax dollars, 
taxpayers’ dollars, were wasted. Why would the Premier, for so 

long and to such great lengths, try to defend a deal when the 
processes were obviously so weak and so suspect? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we do take the matter 
seriously. That’s why we referred the matter to the Provincial 
Auditor in the first place. That’s why there has been an 
unprecedented level of co-operation between the government 
and the auditor, including the full access to cabinet documents 
for the Provincial Auditor. And, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve already 
noted in the answer, there’s some important recommendations 
here. The auditor has highlighted what the challenges were with 
respect to escalating prices and a government’s need to have 
been better co-ordinated, have better communications between 
the ministries of Highways and the GTH, and we will be 
implementing those recommendations. 
 
And she does comment on the involvement of the minister. In 
fact the Provincial Auditor’s report says that the GTH minister 
got involved in the land purchase in the fall of 2013 because he 
had become “. . . increasingly concerned about the rapid 
escalation of land prices around Regina and the GTH’s and . . . 
[Ministry of Highways’] ability to buy the East Parcels in the 
near term.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, so yes, the minister was involved to try to mitigate 
the cost implications of escalating prices. Moreover, I will read 
this from the press release that was just issued by the office: 
 

The audit focused on the GTH’s processes to acquire land 
from the private sector. The audit did not find evidence of 
conflicts of interest, or indications of fraud or wrongdoing 
by the GTH management or the Board of Directors. 

 
The chairman of the board of the directors is the minister. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, let’s remember this is the 
Sask Party that gutted the mandate that would have actually had 
the auditor looking at those very things. And if the Premier 
wants to stand up here and try to whitewash a report of this 
situation, that’s his prerogative. But Saskatchewan people 
deserve better. 
 
What’s almost unbelievable though in this investigation, what’s 
been reported out here today, is that the appraisal from the third 
party, the third party of course with a relationship to that 
government, that flipped the land to government, the appraisal 
that was touted and used as the defence by that Premier, was 
never even reviewed before government offered to purchase the 
land. Never even reviewed. 
 
The appraisal that the Premier’s been hiding behind, the 
appraisal that that Premier’s been hiding from Saskatchewan 
people, the appraisal that that Premier has used as his 
justification to spend this exorbitant sum on this small parcel of 
land, was never even reviewed. Of course the payments went to 
the speculators with relationship to government. 
 
Why would the Premier stand behind an appraisal his 
government never even reviewed before they purchased this 



722 Saskatchewan Hansard June 30, 2016 

land and wasted dollars? It’s almost unbelievable, Mr. Speaker. 
Why would he stand behind it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would want to point out for 
the record that the Conflict of Interest Commissioner had 
already reviewed, upon the request of the minister, issues 
related to this transaction, indicating there was no conflict of 
interest. 
 
Now the Provincial Auditor has quite clearly stated that there 
was no conflict of interest, neither with respect to the 
allegations of fraud that the member continues with. They were 
not found as well with respect to her work. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition, just moments ago, told members 
on this side of the House to read the report. I invite him to do 
the same thing, especially given the absurdity of that last 
question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the appraisal, with respect to the 
appraisal, I’m going to say this. The auditor’s report states that 
the agreed-upon sale price “. . . include considerations (e.g., 
impact of market conditions at time of sale) in addition to the 
appraised value . . .” In addition to. 
 
There were other factors involved, but we know the appraised 
value that we’re talking about was higher than the price that 
was actually paid for the land. And since then, we’ve seen some 
transactions occur at even a much higher price, even when you 
add in the cost of servicing the land. And so taxpayers can 
expect to actually make money on the transaction, even though, 
as I have already said today, that original purchase could have 
happened at a lower price had the government, had we, had a 
better and more coordinated approach, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[10:30] 
 
But let’s be very clear. The recommendations with respect to 
Highways and GTH are very real and important in terms of the 
need for action. But the auditor says, and I quote again: “The 
audit did not find evidence of conflict of interest or indications 
of fraud or wrongdoing by the GTH management or the board 
of directors.” And the Chair of the board of directors is the 
minister responsible. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The Premier’s getting worked up here 
today, but he’s not answering the questions for Saskatchewan 
people. And the fact that the very appraisal that that Premier has 
hid behind — has hid behind day after day, week after week — 
was never actually reviewed by his government, is absolutely 
appalling. 
 
In the auditor’s report, it actually dismisses the validity of the 
government’s claims about that supposed appraisal. It says that 
the methodology is incredibly different and actually the 
appraisal, had government looked at it, was actually on a very, 
on a portion of that land, on a parcel of the land itself and on 
land that was valued at a higher value than the other parcel 
itself. 

You know, this is the same appraisal touted by the Premier for 
months as his defence, the one that was never even reviewed by 
the government before inking the purchase for that outrageous 
price. The auditor has stated that, had government actually 
reviewed this appraisal . . . And the Premier should read this 
report, and I urge him to. It states right in there, had he 
reviewed this report, they would have seen it for what it is and 
it would have put government in a position, a position I would 
hope that would have prevented the waste of millions of dollars. 
 
How can the Premier stand behind this appraisal as his defence? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I will read again a quote from 
the report. The report states that the agreed-upon sale price “. . . 
include considerations (e.g., impact of market conditions at time 
of sale) in addition to the appraised value . . .” Mr. Speaker. 
  
Moreover, we know that since the transaction . . . The appraised 
value was for $129,000 an acre. The actual deal was for 
$103,000 an acre. That’s what the government eventually paid, 
and since then we’ve seen transactions much, much higher than 
that. So that does not take away from the fact that we need to 
implement the recommendations of the auditor and recognize 
that the process could have been better managed by the 
government and by the cabinet. For that I take responsibility. 
 
But let’s be very clear. The appraised value, the appraisal is not 
completely irrelevant. And the market has weighed in since. 
The market has weighed in with an actual transaction that’s 
much in excess of that appraisal. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Let’s be clear here. The investigation 
did not fully investigate the relationships or flow of information 
between the minister, cabinet or government, and the land 
speculators with a relationship to government. 
 
What is known though, and what’s made clear in this report, is 
that the minister was aware of the need to act and to purchase 
the 204 acres at the very least, at the very least, months before 
the company and the land speculator that he apparently rents 
land from offered that purchase of the land. 
 
My question to the Premier: does the Premier know what 
information the minister’s apparent landlord had that caused 
him to act to purchase this land? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — I want to invite the member to say what he 
just said outside the House. If he stands by that, he ought to 
have the courage for that little bit of drive-by smearing we’ve 
seen from him and members opposite and from his predecessor. 
He ought to say it outside the House. 
 
The fact of the matter is that in the first paragraph of the 
auditor’s press release, and I’m going to read it again: 
 

The audit focused on the GTH processes to acquire land 
from the private sector. The audit did not find evidence of 



June 30, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 723 

conflicts of interest, or indications of fraud or wrongdoing 
by the GTH management . . . 

 
The board, or the minister who is the chairman of the board. 
That’s what the auditor said today. So now is your chance to 
maybe disagree with what the auditor’s findings are, if that’s 
your position. I would also say this: just a few weeks ago in 
this House, when there was a breach of privilege committed 
by the Finance critic, the Leader of the Opposition quite 
rightly asked for all members to consider that each other are 
honourable, that we are all hon. members working to do the 
work of the people. 
 
In this case we’ve had the minister say there’s no connection. 
We’ve had the Conflict of Interest Commissioner say there’s no 
conflict. We’ve had the auditor say there is no conflict as well 
for the minister, or the allegations around fraud are at least not 
founded in this particular report. 
 
Well now is the chance for him to practise what he was 
preaching, to consider good will and the . . . Well he’s not. And 
the fact that all members have honour, especially when they’ve 
clearly said there was no wrongdoing, and it’s been supported 
by independent officers of this Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The Premier can try to threaten me and 
try to threaten us all he wants . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The Assembly come to order. I 
recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The Premier can point fingers from his 
chair and make whatever threats he wants. But we’re here to do 
our work and to put him on notice, because the people of 
Saskatchewan deserve much better answers than they’ve 
received right here. And I think it should be noted as well . . . 
and of course here he is on hot defence of that minister here 
today when we actually see in this report that there’s massive 
holes and dollars that are wasted and questions that haven’t 
been answered. 
 
And of course this is a government that hasn’t been accountable 
from the get-go. And when taken to committee and the chance 
to actually give a full mandate to the auditor, that Sask Party, 
that government that voted down that mandate, which read as 
follows . . . This was the amendment that would have been 
added. It would have included that they: 
 

. . . perform a special assignment to fully examine the land 
purchase, including whether the Premier, Minister 
Responsible for the Global Transportation Hub, or any 
other cabinet minister or government official misused 
public resources, violated appropriate policies and 
procedures, or failed to negotiate in the best interests of 
taxpayers in regard to the land acquisition detailed in order 
in council 44/2014, which was signed by the Premier on 
February 27, 2014; and further, 
 
if this investigation is too complex to complete before the 

election, the Public Accounts Committee requests that the 
Provincial Auditor provide an interim report . . . 

 
And it goes on. And the Premier says there’s no such thing. 
They could have amended it, but they gutted it. They gutted that 
mandate. They gutted the investigation and the review of those 
relationships and the very serious questions that still exist here 
today. 
 
I guess my question to the Premier: why did his members, why 
did the Sask Party vote against that mandate? Or why did we 
not find a workable mandate that’d give full investigation, and 
why would he hide from an investigation of the relationships 
and potential flow of information? The question to the Premier: 
what’s he hiding? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — It’s an incredible question. At the time of 
the NDP’s [New Democratic Party] proposal for an interim 
audit, I think it was the Provincial Auditor herself or her offices 
that said, that really doesn’t exist. And moreover, it was this 
government that referred the matter to the auditor. He said, just 
before he sits down, he says, what is the government hiding? 
The government referred the matter to the auditor. 
 
The government, in an unprecedented way, said there’ll be open 
access to everything including cabinet minutes, cabinet 
documents, interviews with officials, and all of that was 
provided. And now the auditor has reported that there were 
challenges, and has made recommendations that we need to 
respect and honour and implement, and we will. 
 
But she has also said the audit . . . in the press release from the 
office today:  
 

The audit focused on the GTH’s processes to acquire land 
from the private sector. The audit did not find evidence of 
conflicts of interest, or indications of fraud or wrongdoing 
by the GTH management or Board of Directors. 

 
Or the minister. And so what happened earlier was not a threat. 
It was just simply this: the member has engaged in some 
drive-by smears. Prior to this day and again on this day he has 
made some very serious allegations in his questions. There’s no 
threat in simply saying to him, if he has the courage of his 
convictions to say it outside the House where he does not have 
the immunity and the protection of the House, he should do 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The question’s pretty straightforward 
again. This is a Premier and a government that gutted the scope 
of the mandate that should have been given to the auditor. Why 
did they hide from an investigation of the relationships and 
potential flow of information? What is he hiding? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, page 3 of the report. I would 
direct my honourable friend to page 3 of the report: “The 
Provincial Auditor Act gives the Provincial Auditor the power 



724 Saskatchewan Hansard June 30, 2016 

to decide what work needs to be done . . .” The auditor has the 
power to decide what work needs to be done. “. . . how it is to 
be carried . . .” 
 
These are the words of the auditor in the report that he was just 
. . . [inaudible] . . . members to read. I encourage him to do the 
same thing. It’ll answer his last two questions. 
 

. . . gives the Provincial Auditor the power to decide what 
work needs to be done, how it is to be carried out, and 
when. This power to decide extends to special assignments 
requested of the Office. 

 
In other words, a request that the government made. There is no 
limitation placed on what the auditor would look at through this 
report. The report has been made. The recommendations have 
been made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government admits mistakes were made in the 
acquisition of the land in an environment of escalating prices, 
and we will accept the recommendations of the report. We also 
accept the commentary from both now the Provincial Auditor 
and the Conflict of Interest Commissioner. With respect to the 
minister, with respect to the fact that there was no conflict of 
interest on the part of the minister, we’ll also accept that, and 
we hope members on the other side will join us in that regard. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, when the public reads the 
report, and certainly if the government does as well, they’ll 
recognize it exonerates no one. And the very appraisal that that 
Premier has been hiding behind, the one he’s been hiding from 
the public, was never even reviewed, never even reviewed by 
that government before they . . . Apparently that was their 
justification for spending this exorbitant sum on this land. They 
never even reviewed it. And the auditor says if they had 
reviewed it, it would have put them in a position, a much better 
position, and I would hope that would mean they could have 
stopped a bunch of the waste of millions of dollars. 
 
The reality is, way too much money has been wasted here. Too 
many unanswered questions exist. Too many potential conflicts. 
Too many questions about who had information and why. Too 
many questions regarding the relationship of the minister, 
cabinet, and government, and land speculators. 
 
The public deserves answers and will demand answers. If the 
government has nothing to hide, they should have no trouble 
with a full investigation. Will the Premier finally come clean, 
ensure we get to the bottom of this, and support a judicial 
inquiry? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Let’s be very clear. The member now wants 
a . . . The auditor’s reported. Here’s what the auditor says on 
page 3 of the report. The Provincial Auditor has the authority to 
do any kind of investigation she feels is necessary. In her report, 
it goes on to state, “The Provincial Auditor Act gives the 
Provincial Auditor the power to decide what work needs to be 
done, how it is to be carried out, and when.” That’s page 3. That 
last part was a quotation from the Provincial Auditor’s report 

that we’re debating. There was no limit to the investigation that 
happened. The government co-operated fully. 
 
Now the member wants another review. I think the members 
opposite have made criminal . . . allegations of criminal 
wrongdoing, and have taken that to the authorities I believe. 
And so I guess we’ll see where that goes. That process is under 
way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just say to members that the report deals 
pretty clearly with the question of wrongdoings, the allegations 
of fraud or wrongdoing. In fact, it’s in the press release the 
auditor has just released. I would invite the member to read it. 
And there was not a conflict according to the auditor’s report, 
Mr. Speaker, and I think this is a very important point to make. 
 
Also I think it’s important to say that there have been no losses 
to taxpayers because . . . well, until the land sells. And we’ve 
seen land selling at GTH for much higher than the government 
paid. So it is true. And we readily admit that too much might 
have been paid, even at $103,000 an acre, but since then, land 
similar has been selling for $260,000 an acre. So we have every 
expectation that the taxpayers will not lose money, even though 
we readily agree and recognize that there were problems in the 
process, and we are going to rectify those problems, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Just to explain some basic finances to 
the Premier, if you are paying way too much for land, then you 
should be . . . those are dollars wasted . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask the member to direct the question 
through the Chair, please. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — If the Premier and his government are 
wasting dollars on spending way more than they should on land, 
those are dollars that are wasted that are Saskatchewan people’s 
hard-earned tax dollars. Ludicrous to suggest otherwise. Makes 
light of a serious situation that’s wasted dollars, and has more 
unanswered questions at this point than before. 
 
What we have here is a scandal-plagued minister. We have 
waste on project after project after project from smart meters, 
from carbon captures, information that hasn’t been shared with 
Saskatchewan people. And this deal, this deal smells to no end 
in wasted millions. 
 
[10:45] 
 
But this is no longer, this is no longer about just that minister. 
This is about this Premier and this cabinet and the culture that 
they’re presiding over, the waste that they’re accepting, that 
they’re presiding over. Why has this minister not been canned a 
long time ago? What’s really going on here? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, a couple of comments I guess. 
This has been debated, this issue has been debated, and the 
other issues that the member refers to were subject to debate 
and very well known to the public prior to the election and very 



June 30, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 725 

well known to the people of Kindersley constituency, that 
returned the member with 70 per cent of the vote, I would point 
out to the members of the House. And the Finance critic wants 
to chirp from her seat, Mr. Speaker, and again mischaracterizing 
the nature of my remarks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me just say this. As Minister of Energy and 
Resources in the economy over the last eight years, this minister 
has led the government’s efforts to implement a growth plan 
that has at least contributed to, has at least been helpful to create 
a period of growth like we have never seen in the province’s 
history, to create 67,000 jobs since the day we were elected, to 
add population like we have not seen since the days of Walter 
Scott. 
 
Part of that’s been the efforts of government to get the energy 
policy right, to get royalty policy right, and to deliver on our 
growth plan. These have been the responsibilities, in part 
certainly, of the minister. This is why frankly he has the support 
of members on this side of the House. He has the support of the 
people of Kindersley. And dare I say, as representative of the 
government’s growth plan and economic agenda, he has the 
support of the people of the province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, rather stunning here today. 
A Premier who pretended to enter into question period being 
contrite about a scathing report that displays waste of millions 
of dollars, of the hard-earned dollars of Saskatchewan 
taxpayers. A report that highlights that through the election that 
he speaks of, the fact that he hid behind a supposed appraisal 
that was now never actually reviewed by him and his 
government — and if he had, the auditor cites that, well it 
would’ve put government in a much better position — and 
continues to defend a scandal-plagued minister that’s wasted 
millions of dollars. Quite the culture of a government he’s 
leading. 
 
I guess my question to the Premier is, how can the Premier of 
Saskatchewan cut meaningful programs, break his funding 
promise to classrooms, while defending and hiding the facts 
from Saskatchewan people about this deal that’s wasted 
millions of their dollars? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, with respect to 
tone, and with respect to accountability to taxpayers, I do take 
that very seriously and members on this side of the House take 
it very seriously. And that’s why there has been recognition and 
an admission that we should’ve been better coordinated. 
Notwithstanding escalating land prices, notwithstanding the 
scale of the project, it’s the responsibility of the cabinet to 
deliver in terms of an effective land assembly. And so in this 
regard, Mr. Speaker, we made a mistake, and we accept full 
responsibility for the mistake. 
 
But I’ll also make this comment with respect to tone. If a 
member of this House, if the Leader of the Opposition of this 
House is going to continue to engage in drive-by smears, is 
going to continue to allege criminal wrongdoing, 
notwithstanding the fact that the minister has said there were no 

ties to any of the people involved, notwithstanding the fact that 
the Conflict of Interest Commissioner said there’s not a conflict 
of interest, notwithstanding the fact that the Provincial Auditor 
today has said the same thing, there are no findings of such, and 
if that member’s just going to continue on throwing mud and 
smearing hon. members of this House at the same time that he 
asks for us to treat with respect his colleagues when there’s for 
example a breach of privilege, if he’s going to continue to do 
that, the tone might change. 
 
With respect to the issues he raised in his summation about 
school funding and the rest of it in the budget, I would point 
this out again to the member. We campaigned on a platform. 
We’re going to keep the promises in the platform. And then we 
brought down a budget, subsequent to which there has been a 
province-wide poll. And in that poll, the support for the 
Saskatchewan Party, with all of this known, has actually 
increased. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to continue to earn that support. We 
will take nothing for granted. We will work hard to earn the 
support of Saskatchewan people, to deliver effective 
government, transparent government, a government that 
recognizes when mistakes are made, and a government that will 
continue to have a vision for growth, for leadership for this 
province, Mr. Speaker. That’s the kind of approach I think that 
did help earn support on the 4th of April, and that’s what people 
can expect going forward. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

The Speaker: — It is my duty to inform the Assembly that in 
accordance with the sessional order adopted on May 18, 2016, 
and in accordance with the rule 33(4) for the disposal of final 
Appropriation bill, the Assembly will now resolve into 
Committee of Finance to consider financial resolutions. 
 
Clerk: — Committee of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Supply 
 
The Chair: — I’ll call the Committee of Finance to order. I 
recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. No. 1: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2016, the sum of $184,484,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 
The Chair: — The Minister of Finance has moved resolution 
no. 1: 
 



726 Saskatchewan Hansard June 30, 2016 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2016, the sum of $184,484,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the committee to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
An Hon. Member: — On division. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. No. 2: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2017, the sum of $12,888,586,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 
The Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2017, the sum of $12,880,586,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the committee to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — That’s carried, on division. I recognize the 
Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move that the 
committee rise and that the Chair report that the committee has 
agreed to certain resolutions and asks for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — The Minister of Finance has moved that the 
committee rise and has agreed to certain resolutions and asks 
for leave to sit again. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the committee to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Speaker: — Call to order. I recognize the member from 
Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, the Committee of Finance has 
agreed to certain resolutions, has instructed me to report the 
same, and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the resolutions be read the first 
time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
the resolutions be now read the first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It is the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — First and second reading of the resolutions. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this committee sit again? I 
recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — In accordance with rule no. 32(1)(d) and 
sessional orders dated May 18th, 2016, the minister shall now 
move first reading of the Appropriation Bill. I recognize the 
Minister of Finance. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 

Bill No. 38 — The Appropriation Act, 2016 (No. 1) 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 38, The Appropriation Act, 2016 (No. 1) be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill 
No. 38, The Appropriation Act, 2016 (No. 1) be introduced and 
read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Under rule 
32(1)(e), I move that the bill be now read a second and third 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that Bill No. 38, The Appropriation Act, 2016 (No. 1) be now 
read a second and third time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — Second and third reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — I’m advised that Her Honour the Lieutenant 
Governor is here for Royal Assent. All please rise. 



June 30, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 727 

ROYAL ASSENT 

[At 11:00 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following bills.] 

Her Honour: — Pray be seated. 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly in its present session has passed several bills which in 
the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour and to which 
bills I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 

Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these bills. 

Clerk: — Your Honour, the bills are as follows: 

Bill No. 18 - The Credit Union Central of Saskatchewan 
Act, 2016 

Bill No. 27 - The Vital Statistics Amendment Act, 2016/Loi 
modificative de 2016 sur les services de l’état 
civil 

Bill No. 3 - The Teachers Superannuation and Disability 
Benefits Amendment Act, 2016 

Bill No. 25 - The Wakamow Valley Authority Amendment 
Act, 2016 

Bill No. 21 - The Growth and Financial Security Repeal 
Act

Bill No. 22 - The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2016 
Bill No. 23 - The Liquor Retail Modernization Act/Loi de 

modernisation du commerce des boissons 
alcoolisées 

Bill No. 24 - The Liquor Retail Modernization 
Consequential Amendments Act, 2016 

Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these bills. 

The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour, this Legislative 
Assembly has accorded the supplies required to enable the 
government to defray the expenses of the public service. 

In the name of the Assembly I present to Your Honour: 

Bill No. 38 - The Appropriation Act, 2016 (No. 1) 

to which bill I respectfully request Your Honour’s assent. 

Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this bill. 

[Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 11:03.] 

The Speaker: — I call this Assembly to order. 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Speaker, I wish to table the answers to 
question 91. 

The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled answers to 
question no. 91. I recognize the Government House Leader. 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, I request leave to make some closing sessional 
statements. 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 

Expression of Thanks 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. As is customary in this Chamber, I’d like to make 
some session-ending comments. In keeping with the traditions 
of this legislature, I’d like to do something a little different 
though. In keeping with the way petitions were put forward, 
I’ve got more than one page of notes that I’m going to be 
speaking from. So, members, I suggest you pit in for a bit. 

No in all seriousness, thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, for 
this opportunity. And thank you to you, to begin with, for your 
guidance in this sitting. This was your first time in the Chair 
and I believe that you have done an outstanding job. I would 
ask members to join me . . . 

I would also like to extend a thank you to all involved in the 
operation of the Legislative Assembly, starting with the 
Clerks-at-the-Table: Greg and Iris and Kathy and others. Thank 
you for your advice, both formally and informally, and also 
when it’s the House Leader saying, what do I do now? So that 
happens more often than we like to admit, but thank you very 
much for helping us navigate the procedures and follow the 
rules of order as we try to do. 

From a personal note, I’d like to thank the Premier and all of 
the colleagues on this side of the House and colleagues on the 
other side of the House as well for this opportunity. It is 
certainly something that is a privilege and is a real opportunity 
to work with everyone in the legislature and to learn a great deal 
as well. 

I’d like to thank members of Executive Council, Jarret Coels, 
Reg Downs, committee Chairs, Deputy Chairs, and others who 
make the committees work and allow us to do our job in this 
Assembly as well. 

On a personal note again, I’d like to thank the Deputy House 
Leader, the Minister of Immigration, the member from Meadow 
Lake, the member from Cannington, the member from Biggar, 
the member from Saskatoon Sutherland-Silverspring — all who 
I interact with in carrying out the duties of my job, and I’d like 
to say a big thank you because I believe that it went very, very 
well. 

I’d also like to thank my hon. friend opposite, the member from 
Regina Elphinstone, the Opposition House Leader. Now he 
only called me outrageous once, and it wasn’t even actually in 
this Assembly, it was just on paper. But you know, it went 
really well. 



728 Saskatchewan Hansard June 30, 2016 

Actually we have a very professional relationship. You know, 
as all members know, question period and time in this House 
can be of a combative nature. There is a lot of to and fro, as we 
saw earlier today, but there also is a lot of co-operation that 
happens behind the scenes. And for that, I’d like to thank the 
member from Regina Elphinstone and all members of the 
opposition and certainly all members of the government as well. 
 
As we all know, and sometimes we take for granted, but we try 
to remind ourselves the many, many people that work very hard 
to ensure that this Legislative Assembly runs smoothly. I’d just 
like to mention Hansard, broadcast services, library services, 
financial services, the commissionaires and security staff, 
building staff, cafeteria staff, the Pages, the interns, and 
custodial staff. 
 
And I want to make a special mention of an individual that I’ve 
had the chance to interact with, usually on a daily basis as I 
come in the legislature, and that’s Marlene Crofts. She’s just a 
special hello and a bright smile to all members, and I want to 
thank her for her job and making our job easier. 
 
Also a special thank you to our Sergeant-at-Arms. We 
welcomed him here not too long ago, although he’s a very 
familiar face in other roles that he’s had in the Legislative 
Assembly. And I want to congratulate him on his retirement and 
to assure him that his presence will be missed in this Assembly. 
I ask the members to join me. 
 
I’d like to thank members of the media for holding the 
government and opposition to account, to ensuring that the 
message gets out to the people of Saskatchewan. I understand 
one of those members has a special day today, a birthday. I hear 
that she has been suitably recognized by the member from 
Saskatoon Southeast and the member from Rosetown. So I wish 
her well with that. 
 
We also want to say thank you very much to members of our 
families and those that do the work outside of this Legislative 
Assembly. The CAs [constituency assistant] and the special 
people that we employ in our office and do work for us and the 
volunteers as well. That’s something that goes without notice 
sometimes, and we want to say thank you. 
 
On a personal note, we want to say thank you to our families. I 
don’t have an opportunity to say thank you to my family — to 
Trish and Carter and Paige — often enough, so I’d like to do 
that at this time. 
 
I think we’ll all agree that this was a different type of session, 
not the regular sessional calendar that we are accustomed to, so 
it necessitated a lot of negotiation. I believe that that went very 
well. 
 
If we think back, we remember at the beginning of session, we 
had the unveiling of the dome and it signalled a renewal of this 
building. And I think the election campaign and the new 
members of this Legislative Assembly suggested a renewal of 
the operations inside this Assembly as well. 
 
And I know, Mr. Speaker, one of the special things . . . yes, we 
had the Speech from the Throne and the budget, but for me one 
of the special things was getting to know the new members, 

hearing their maiden speeches, and understanding a little bit 
about them, and what special qualities each of them have to 
bring them to this place. So I must say that that was a highlight 
of this Assembly as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to go on and on. I just want to say 
to all my colleagues, I wish that they have a happy Canada Day, 
a safe Saskatchewan summer. God bless and we’ll see you all in 
the fall. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the Government House Leader 
has taken the better parts of my speech, so of course it’ll be a 
very short speech. 
 
But I just want to start off the top, and I’ve referenced this 
before, but I had the privilege as a young person interested in 
politics to get to know a fellow by the name of Ed Whelan, who 
is a six-term CCF-NDP [Co-operative Commonwealth 
Federation-New Democratic Party] MLA [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] out of northwest Regina. And Ed, you 
know, was very definite in the advice that the two most 
important words in political life are thank you. 
 
And that’s what I’m here to do today, Mr. Speaker, is to say 
thank you to those outside the building, to friends and family — 
as the Government House Leader has very thoughtfully and 
nicely put it — friends, family, neighbours, the folks that keep 
us all grounded; the public servants that do the work on behalf 
of the people of Saskatchewan; the constituency assistants that 
are there to help the people who sent us here. 
 
I want to say thank you to those within the building certainly, 
and again you know, the Clerk does the best they can with the 
Opposition House Leader. They tell me, you know . . . I go 
confess at the Table; they tell me to go and sin no more, and 
then yet I’m back the next day. 
 
But certainly the Clerk’s office and everyone there, the 
tremendous work that they do and the way that that extends out 
into the Legislative Assembly Service. And again I couldn’t 
agree more with the Government House Leader around 
Marlene. She is symbolic of the cast of hundreds that make this 
work possible, that do this work with us for the people of 
Saskatchewan. So from the library services, broadcast services, 
the cafeteria folks, the security, press gallery — it’s quite a 
bunch. 
 
And I also want to say a special word of thanks and 
commendation to our retiring Sergeant-at-Arms, Maurice Riou. 
And here’s an individual . . . One of the things I always think 
about when I think about Moe, I had opportunity as a younger 
minister, my first at bat in committee to do supplementary 
estimates and, you know, it’s a nervous time, to be honest. And 
one of my officials had a medical emergency before we even 
got started into the proceedings. And of course, there were 
different people responding and, you know, members from the 
opposition, members from the government, and certainly 
officials coming to bear, to do what they could to help this 
individual through this medical emergency. 
 
And Moe was steady like the rock through that whole thing, and 



June 30, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 729 

that person went on to make a full recovery. And I always like 
to think that that had a lot to do with the great and steady work 
of Moe Riou and the work that he does for us all the time. So 
it’s with some sadness that I see his retirement coming up and, 
you know, that chapter of his life coming to a great end. But 
again, you know, thank you so much, Moe, for all that you’ve 
done on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. It’s been much 
appreciated. 
 
I want to say thank you to my leader who of course is now 
leaving. Can’t take thanks, I guess is the thing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to say thank you to my caucus colleagues and certainly 
to the caucus staff. And again, Mr. Speaker, we do the best we 
can. We’ve come through an interesting election certainly, and 
we’re again sorting out those roles that are key to the work that 
we do on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. But through all 
that, I thank my colleagues and the folks that I have the 
privilege of working with on a daily basis when the session is 
on. I thank them for their patience, and I thank them for their 
contribution. 
 
And I want to say you know, moving towards the end here, I 
want to say thank you very much to the Government House 
Leader, the member from Silverspring, the Deputy House 
Leader, the member from Meadow Lake, and everyone 
involved in the House leadership process on that side and you 
know, more broadly to all the members. 
 
The Government House Leader’s stated it correctly that there’s 
a lot of passion that is involved in this Assembly, and certainly 
sometimes that leads to some pretty, pretty contentious places 
and conflict and all of that. But I guess one thing that I 
appreciate is the co-operative and straightforward way in which 
those two individuals carry the work and trying to make sure 
that the procedural aspects are as straight ahead as possible and 
that you know, the conflict that we’ll have on matters of policy, 
matters of politics, that that doesn’t take away from the greater 
pursuit of serving the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Lastly or second lastly, I’d like to thank yourself. You know, 
it’s been an interesting session. And certainly I think, you 
know, it’s been interesting, and certainly it’s again no small 
feat. There are very few number of people in the history of 
Saskatchewan that have occupied that chair, have occupied that 
office, and I know that you bring to that a commitment to do 
that job with honour, with fairness, and with fealty to the 
parliamentary democracy that we all believe in. And I just want 
to say we wish you well and pledge our co-operation in trying 
to do that work along with you. So best of luck in the days 
ahead. 
 
And I guess lastly, I’d say thank you very much to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and you know, whether they voted for us, or 
more likely not, in the last election, Mr. Speaker. The 
Government House Leader is referencing this in terms of 
coming into the building today, and certainly coming down 
Albert Street . . . And Canada Day being tomorrow, and the 
Canadian flags flying across that Wascana bridge, the dome 
starting to shine, and at the same time, you know, darkening 
colour on the shore. It’s a tremendous job that we have to do for 
the people of Saskatchewan. It’s a tremendous privilege, and 
that is something that we always try to keep in mind as we set 

about doing this work. 
 
I’ll end it there, Mr. Speaker, but I wish everyone safe and, you 
know, enjoyable days ahead. And we certainly look forward to 
getting back into, you know, the work around committee into 
the fall session. But for that, I’d wish everyone an enjoyable 
and happy summer. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I’m going to join in with both House leaders, 
and I’ve got a few comments. A lot have been already said. It’s 
even more difficult to go third place in thanking everyone in the 
building, but I’ll give it a shot. And I’m also quite aware that 
I’m what’s standing between you guys and lunch, so we’ll make 
this as quick as possible. 
 
Just quickly I’d like to thank both House leaders. And I think 
we’ve been trying to improve the decorum. I think all members 
in this Assembly have been doing their part to improve the 
decorum in this Assembly. And I’d like to thank the House 
leaders for their roles and the individual members that we may 
have addressed things before they boiled over, and trying to 
keep the train on the tracks and making sure that we run as 
smoothly as possible, as effectively as possible as an Assembly. 
I thank all the members for their role in that. 
 
I’d like to also take the opportunity to thank everyone for all 
their hard work this session. Thank you to the members for their 
many hours of service to Saskatchewan, for the long hours and 
days away from their families. And also a special thank you for 
the families of all members. It’s their sacrifice of the members 
being away from home in the service of Saskatchewan that are 
the true people that have sacrificed lots for our ability and our 
honour to serve in this role. 
 
As new role as the Speaker, it’s been just a huge honour to be 
elected the 28th Speaker of this Assembly. It’s been a steep 
learning curve, but I’m sad to say that I’m going to miss this 
sitting. And it’s true, if you love what you do, it doesn’t seem 
like work, and it hasn’t seemed like work for the last 26 days. I 
look forward to coming back and continuing our work in the 
fall. 
 
To the new members, thank you and congratulations in first 
winning your seat and completing your first session. It’s been a 
learning experience for all new members. And to the members 
that have young families — and we’ve been trying to make this 
as family-friendly building as possible — and to also members 
that maybe are caring for their parents, is to realize that the role 
of Speaker, I will do as much as I can to make this as family 
friendly for young families and for people that are taking care 
of their parents. I think that’s important. 
 
While this Assembly will likely not sit until the fall, I know the 
work does not end and committee work will continue 
throughout the recess period. Now the work that we do in 
session is probably the most high profile, but it could be argued 
that more work is put in to when we’re out of session. This is 
the time that we hear first-hand from the true masters, the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to thank the LAS [Legislative Assembly Service] staff: 
the Clerks; the officers; the Pages; Hansard; Sergeant-at-Arms, 
incoming and outcoming; and the interns, the caucus staff, the 



730 Saskatchewan Hansard June 30, 2016 

cafeteria staff, Central Services building staff. Their hours are 
often as long or, in the case of Hansard, longer than those of the 
members. 
 
I’d also like to thank my staff — Sheila and Connie and 
Cherisse — for their support especially in dealing with the 
programs and initiatives such as SSTI [Saskatchewan Social 
Sciences Teachers’ Institute on Parliamentary Democracy] and 
the education outreach program which ran out of the Speaker’s 
office. And also because of being a new Speaker, they have 
been just fabulous in bringing me up to speed, and I thank them 
so much in their ability to make sure things run as smoothly as 
possible. 
 
So with that, I’d like just to thank the Clerks one last time 
because they have been so important in my role as the new 
Speaker in quickly getting up to speed as much as possible, and 
I do thank them. 
 
So with that, I too would wish everyone a safe summer, and 
we’ll see you shortly. 
 
I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move that this Assembly do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned until 
Wednesday, October 19th, at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 11:25.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Kaeding ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 717 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 717 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 717 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 717 
  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 717 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 717 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 717 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 718 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 718 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 718 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Jazz Festival 
  Merriman .................................................................................................................................................................................. 719 
 High School Graduation Events in Prince Albert 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 719 
 Convocation Ceremony 
  Beaudry-Mellor ......................................................................................................................................................................... 719 
 The Right to Health 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 719 
 Saskatchewan International Physician Practice Assessment 
  Phillips ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 720 
 Dr. Tom Smith-Windsor House in Prince Albert 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................... 720 
 Fort Qu’Appelle Habitat for Humanity Key Presentation 
  Bonk ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 720 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Provincial Auditor Recommendations Regarding Global Transportation Hub Transaction 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 720 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 721 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 Motions for Supply 
  Doherty ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 725 
FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF RESOLUTIONS 
  Doherty ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 726 
APPROPRIATION BILL 
 Bill No. 38 — The Appropriation Act, 2016 (No. 1) 
  Doherty ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 726 
ROYAL ASSENT ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 727 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Merriman .................................................................................................................................................................................. 727 
STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Expression of Thanks 
  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 727 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 728 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 729 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


	ROYAL ASSENT
	Her Honour: — Pray be seated.
	Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these bills.
	ROYAL ASSENT 727

