






















































Hansard: June 07, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 12B  TUESDAY, JUNE 7, 2016, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Hon. Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Hon. Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Merriman, Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 51; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Maurice Riou http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 383 
 June 7, 2016 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 7 p.m., we’ll resume special 
debate. I recognize the member from Arm River. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that the Assembly approves in 
general the budgetary policy of the government, and the 
proposed amendment to the main motion moved by Ms. 
Sproule.] 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s good to continue 
on with my budget debate. You know this budget is about 
keeping Saskatchewan strong. And, you know, we’re going to 
face some challenges. And I was on treasury board and we 
faced many challenges then. I’ll say though when I was on 
treasury board, we ran balanced budgets. 
 
But as we move forward with this there were some tough 
decisions that were made and I can understand that, you know, 
because I was there when some tough ones had to be made. 
Urban parks would have been a tough one; they would have had 
to struggle with that, you know. But I would remind the 
members opposite they’re talking about lots. The regional 
parks, they’re the same as urban parks. They’re not funded. 
They’ve never been funded by the government. The only thing 
that they funded there is capital projects. Other than that it’s 
volunteers that make it work, fundraisers that get them regional 
parks up and running. So, you know, tough decisions — urban 
park or 10 new cancer drugs. I’ll tell you what, when you go to 
Arm River, I know what they’ll pick. They’ll pick the 10 new 
cancer drugs. That’s what they’ll pick. 
 
You know as we move forward in keeping Saskatchewan 
strong, you know, and we got some challenges facing us. You 
know one of them is a weak-kneed Prime Minister in Ottawa. 
You know, he worries me. I can remember . . . He’s going to be 
a worse Prime Minister than his old man was because I can 
remember when his dad gave my dad the finger and gave other 
grain farmers the finger. When they went . . . and all they asked 
was to sell their grain, you know. And you know what he told 
them? He says, that’s not my job. And I’m scared that this kid is 
going to be the same when it comes to treating the West. He’s 
going to treat the same, the West . . . It’s not that he’s going to 
be mean. It’s just he didn’t care and Pierre didn’t care. You 
know, he was more interested in down East. 
 
And those are some of the challenges we’re going to have. 
We’re going to have to have some fights with Ottawa. One of 
them is grain transportation. You know it’s . . . We had some 
challenges years ago, you know, and the grain companies have 
stepped up a bit. But I’ll tell you what, under this government, 
the Liberal government, I’m scared they’re going to start 

reverting back to where, you know, prairie farmers are maybe 
just a little bit not a priority for them. We’re going to need to be 
working with Ottawa to make sure that that doesn’t happen. 
 
You know, I had a . . . I’ve had another elevator close in my 
constituency. I mean it happens. They’re old. It’s hard to get 
B-trains in them anymore. I mean I understand that. That’s 
progress. That’s the way it should be. But you know what CN 
[Canadian National] said? The siding, a local company wanted 
to buy it. No, we still run the siding. We’re not going to let no 
cars on it. Same as Bladworth, used to be a producer car loading 
facility. CN says we’re not letting nobody use the siding. You 
know that . . . There’s no other elevators there except a local 
farmer bought it, but a business came back to try to work with 
it. 
 
Thank God we got shortlines, same as I got from Davidson to 
Regina. You know, look what happened, look what happened in 
Aylesbury and Chamberlain now. There’s businesses setting up, 
Mobil Grain, buying because it’s shortline. And those are things 
that we’re going to have to work with the federal government 
on that. 
 
You know, when it comes to oil, I mean let’s face it. He doesn’t 
want pipelines. I don’t think he cares about the oil, and you 
know, we have the federal NDP [New Democratic Party] with 
the Leap Manifesto which I think is worse than the Regina 
Manifesto when I’ve looked at them. And I mean it. I mean 
that’s dangerous. 
 
You look what happened with Earls. You look what happened 
to A&W, you know. They won’t sell . . . For a while they 
weren’t selling Canadian beef all because they’ve been treated. 
Well I’ll tell you what. You have little kids, you treat them for 
disease so they don’t get sick, so they don’t die. You have a 
little calf, you treat it. You treat it with blackleg so it doesn’t get 
sick and die. That’s what the message is what they’re saying out 
there, that our producers have unsafe beef, and that bothers me. 
That bothers me when they talk about that in . . . You get the 
social activists talking on that movement, all six of them here in 
Saskatchewan. That ought to get them tweeting a little bit right 
now. All I got to say to that is maybe you ought to just get a 
life. 
 
You know, but they talk about agriculture in the Leap 
Manifesto. You know, we need to move back to sustainable 
agriculture. What does that mean? Mean I go back to Ipsco, see 
if my diskers are still there, that they haven’t melted them 
down? You know, that’s dangerous. We need to sell a product 
outside this province. We probably feed a billion people. We 
can’t sell it locally. We can’t bring our B-trains down to Albert 
Street and sell the lentils a cup at a time. You know, we need a 
government that’ll stand up behind us when it comes to grain 
transportation and making deals. 
 
They talk about the trans-pacific deal. They’re still reviewing 
that. I mean that should be a no-brainer. That helps farmers. 
That moves our product out. We need, our farmers need and 
Saskatchewan needs to move this product, whether it’s oil, 
whether it’s agriculture products. There’s no and, if, buts about 
it. We can’t use it here all in Saskatchewan. We can’t feed . . . 
There isn’t a billion people here or more. We need that help 



384 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2016 

from the federal government. I don’t know if we’re going to get 
it. You know, and that’s how we’re going to keep 
Saskatchewan strong. We’ve got to keep fighting, and we’re 
going to have a fight for a number of years I think when it 
comes to oil, when it comes to grain. 
 
And, you know, this manifesto talks about shutting it down. 
That means refineries. That means trucking jobs. That means all 
the support industry. That means 50, 100,000 jobs gone, just 
like that. Then they just shut her down, you know, not even 
caring about the family, the people. 
 
It’s just not even that. It’s natural gas. It’s coal they want to shut 
down. I mean we’re working to clean up coal. We have some of 
the most stringent environmental rules and regulations there is 
in the world when it comes to oil. For them to say that it’s 
unsafe and that it’s evil bothers myself, bothers constituents. 
 
Because I’ll tell you what. When I was going around door to 
door, and I won quite handily, I’ll tell you, I used to get . . . 
They used to run the NDP down quite a bit at the door. I got 
more Liberals being run down, more people worried about 
what’s going to happen in Ottawa, that’s going to affect this 
province. It’s going to try to shut it down. Those are some of 
the issues we’re going to be facing. 
 
This budget, keeping Saskatchewan strong speaks to what we’re 
going to have to be doing for the next 5 to 10 years, of standing 
up for Saskatchewan. We’ve got the only Premier probably 
that’s standing up for Western Canada. Finally the Alberta 
Premier finally come out a little bit on pipelines. She’s finally 
starting to move. Because I’ve got a lot of friends and relatives 
there, and I think if she didn’t she realized that she could really 
be . . . people storming the legislature. So they’ve come around 
a bit onto that but they’ve still . . . not moving as fast or getting 
behind our Premier as much as we need to. And we’re going to 
need to fight for Western Canada because I think it’s going to 
be suffering hugely as time moves on. 
 
I hate to refer to documents like that but this document is taken 
very seriously by a lot of city people, a lot of Eastern people. 
And when parties federally or even provincially don’t stand up 
and say you know what? You know, this is garbage. You know, 
a lot of the stuff in here doesn’t even make sense. We need, you 
know . . . we’re almost the only voice on there. 
 
I haven’t heard the provincial NDP stand up against it. I’ve 
heard their members say they didn’t sign it and I take their word 
at that. I take their word that none of them signed it and I hope 
and I believe them. But still haven’t heard them, you know, 
come out and say you know what, some of the stuff in there just 
doesn’t make sense. You know, there’s an odd . . . There’s 
some little things that do, but not, you know, the big picture of 
just trying to take the province back and the world back to 100 
years ago. That’s not going to happen. You know, maybe 100 
years ago it was a nicer place to live but things have changed, 
and things are going to keep changing. It’s called progress. And 
what you do is you have to meet the challenges of progress. 
 
And that’s one of the things that this government has done very 
well at. I think that’s why . . . And it showed in the support we 
get each and every election, in the support that I get in Arm 
River, that we move forward with progress. You just don’t say, 

you know what, we throw up our hands and we just can’t keep 
going on. You know, as you face tougher issues, whether it be 
running a deficit or the challenge in health care, the challenges 
in highways, but we keep moving forward and we keep putting 
ideas out there. 
 
The Liquor Board one is one that I never heard anybody on the 
door say, keep them. They say, you know, what’s government’s 
key role in running a government? What’s its core services? Is 
it, like, selling liquor? And they said, no. You know, everybody 
said, no it’s not. You know, we want health care. We want 
highways. We want money invested in education. We don’t 
need to buy a new liquor store. Let the private industry run that. 
We’re moving in that direction. But you do you know how long 
it took because of what happened in the past and the 
fearmongering over the years? But people are past that now. 
They’re starting to see what you can do when you look outside 
the box, and we’re going to keep looking outside the box. 
 
Health has done an excellent job of looking outside the box. 
And what we’ve did with clinics is we’ve moved forward, and 
how we buy drugs and how we do other things, because we 
need to always keep looking forward as we keep moving this 
province. Because if we don’t, you’re going to end up stagnant. 
And that’s what happened through many decades. 
 
And I’ll just say, it just wasn’t their government. There was, 
you know, Liberals through the ’60s. They did some things. But 
I look back in the past. They didn’t move as fast, as quick. They 
probably could have. They did that whole, kind of, well, let’s 
not make . . . 
 
There’s always an old saying: everybody wants progress but 
nobody wants change. But, you know, with progress has to 
come change. And we’re starting to see that with people right 
now. We’re starting to see the generation that’s coming up and 
even the older generations saying, you know what? Why were 
we so stagnant for all them years? We have the most natural 
resources of the world, the most land, cattle industry, 
agriculture, research, you know, all the industries that come 
with that, oil. Why have we been so stagnant for all them years? 
 
Finally we’re moving and people are coming back. And you 
wait. This province hasn’t even started to grow yet, hasn’t even 
seen its best years yet because they’re still coming and they’re 
going to keep coming under this government and with this 
budget of keeping Saskatchewan strong. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
rise in the Assembly to join in the budget debate this evening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I started my Throne Speech reply with a question: 
what’s a girl like me doing in a place like this? Tonight I will 
start with this question: what does a girl like me think of a 
budget like this? 
 
I feel the need to start by reflecting on what I know about 
budgets. My father started his career as a life insurance agent 
and financial broker in 1951 and is still active in his profession 
today. That’s 65 years worth of financial advice. He has kept 



June 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 385 

ledgers throughout his adult life and I follow the practice as 
well. He taught me that you need to know where you are 
spending your money. You need to control your expenses. That 
was my first experience with budgeting. 
 
It is interesting to note that the Merriam-Webster online 
dictionary describes the historical definition of the economy as 
“the management of household . . . affairs and especially 
expenses.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, my volunteer involvement with various 
organizations assisted me with gaining more knowledge about 
budgets. As president of the Lakeridge Community Association, 
I took responsibility for the annual budget. As president of the 
St. Luke parent council I took responsibility for the school year 
budget and I still have a copy of the budget that was sent to all 
school families for input in 2001. 
 
As president of the CTV [Canadian Television Network Ltd.] 
staff association for many years, I was responsible for that 
annual budget. I remember having a conversation with the 
vice-president of CTV Saskatchewan when I was elected as a 
trustee with the Greater Saskatoon Catholic board of education 
in 2003. I shared my concern about being responsible for that 
significant of an operating and capital budget, millions and 
millions of dollars. He assured me that I was just adding zeros; 
the principles were the same, and I would be fine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I share this with you to demonstrate that I take the 
responsibility of budgets and spending other people’s money 
very seriously. Being an elected member of this Assembly, I 
share in the responsibility of managing a $14 billion budget. I 
remind myself that I am adding zeros and the principles remain 
the same. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have moved from a have-not province under 
decades of NDP mismanagement, where we had a dependence 
on federal equalization payments to fund our province, to a 
have province every year since the Saskatchewan Party was 
elected. I was reassured when our province’s credit rating was 
upgraded to AAA status, the highest possible rating. This rating 
confirms that the Saskatchewan Party government has a record 
of prudent spending, paying down the debt and keeping our 
GDP [gross domestic product] ratio the second lowest in the 
country. This rating is a vote of confidence for sound fiscal 
management and is tantamount to getting an A-plus on a report 
card. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under the NDP government from 1991 to 2007, 
56,000 more people moved out of this province than moved in. 
Since the Saskatchewan Party was elected in 2007, over 85,000 
more people have moved into Saskatchewan than moved out. 
 
[19:15] 
 
With a population growth of approximately 132,000 people in 
the last 10 years, you could say that we have 132,000 more 
reasons to keep Saskatchewan strong. This government is 
staying true to its election promise that there would be no tax 
increases and no new taxes. This government has delivered 
nearly $6 billion in tax reductions since 2007. A family of four 
with a combined income of $50,000 has seen their income tax 
reduced by 100 per cent and will pay no provincial income tax 

in 2016. 
 
My husband, who owns a small business, is grateful that we 
now have one of the lower business income tax rates in the 
country. That’s because the Saskatchewan Party government 
delivered record income tax deductions since being elected and 
will not increase income tax during this budget year. This 
government did not want to increase the tax burden on 
Saskatchewan people and businesses. This is in contrast to the 
NDP government that raised taxes 21 times during their 16 
years in power. 
 
Here is what the vice-president of the Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business had to say about our budget, and I quote: 
 

I think small-business owners will be pleased with the 
direction of this budget, the fact that they are looking for 
the government to hold the line on taxes to ensure 
sustainable spending. 

 
Saskatchewan individuals and families continue to pay the 
second lowest overall combined provincial taxes and utilities in 
the country. Mr. Speaker, we want to continue to attract people 
to our province. We want to continue to attract investment to 
our province. 
 
Saskatchewan residents might ask why we would want our 
population to grow. We don’t see growth for the sake of 
growth. More people means an increased tax base to help 
address the health care, education, social services, and 
infrastructure needs of this province. More investment means 
more jobs and an increased tax base to help address the health 
care, education, social services, and infrastructure needs of this 
province. That’s why, as our Premier has said, and I quote, 
“The purpose of growth is to secure a better quality of life for 
all Saskatchewan people.” 
 
We need to control our operational spending. That was the 
purpose of my father’s ledger system, to set priorities and 
boundaries with our household financial management. That 
means facing the fact that we remain a resource-driven 
economy. There is a significant shortfall in non—renewable 
resource revenue from last year’s budget due to a significant 
drop in oil and potash prices. 
 
There were difficult choices to make in order to manage the size 
of the deficit. We’re spending money we don’t have. It’s not 
easy to make tough decisions but, like our households, when 
times are challenging and we need to make adjustments to our 
spending, this government has also made these tough but 
necessary decisions. 
 
Changes were made to programs. For example the children and 
seniors’ drug plan is rising by $5 per prescription to $25. My 
constituency in Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood has a high 
density of seniors and this could impact some of my residents. 
 
There will be some social services and assistance program 
changes that will be introduced to increase fairness and equity 
and enhance sustainability in this coming year. But I also note 
that social services and assistance will see an increase of $34 
million or 2.8 per cent in this budget as this Saskatchewan Party 
government cares for those most vulnerable. I applaud the $7.9 



386 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2016 

million for medically fragile children and those with complex 
needs as well as the $5.7 million for foster care and extended 
family care in this budget to support Saskatchewan people in 
need. 
 
Priority areas such as health, education, and social services 
continue to be supported, although the expense growth was not 
as large as past years. These three areas account for nearly 
three-quarters of our budget expenses. 
 
It was encouraging to hear Dr. Pillay, president of the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association, state and I quote, “Given 
the fiscal constraints, I think it’s good to see the commitment of 
the Saskatchewan government in terms of funding our health 
care system to the extent that they have.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, some might question the wisdom of moving 
forward with a budget that includes more than $3.5 billion for 
infrastructure, the largest single-year capital investment in this 
province’s history. We need to move forward on our capital 
plan instead of delaying projects that would hurt our economy 
and cost more to build in the future. Investing in infrastructure 
adds to the strength of this province and establishes the 
structural framework to help the province’s economy. Our 
capital investment supports construction jobs, improves safety 
on roads, improves the transportation system that is vitally 
important in this export-driven province. It creates better 
learning spaces for children and helps in the delivery of quality 
health care and long-term care. 
 
This budget provides significant investment into schools, health 
care facilities, and highways. We have more roads than any 
other province in Canada. It is a challenge to keep all those in 
good repair. As promised in the recent election campaign, the 
highways 2020 plan will provide $70 million to repair and 
maintain highways across this province over the next three 
years. When the work is completed on the Regina bypass in 
2019, it will improve transportation of goods and people in our 
province and increase traffic safety. 
 
We will see the completion of 18 new elementary schools 
currently under construction on nine joint-use sites in 
Saskatoon, Regina, Martensville, and Warman in 2017. My 
constituents of Churchill-Wildwood will benefit from the north 
commuter parkway bridge that this government has committed 
$50 million towards, along with the federal government and the 
city of Saskatoon, with 10 million for the bridge in this budget. 
My constituents will enjoy the new renovations at Holy Cross 
High School and École St. Matthew Elementary School. 
 
My constituents will benefit from the reduction of regional 
health authority administration expenses by $7.5 million and 
reinvesting those savings in front-line staff in long-term care 
homes. We heard on the doorsteps this campaign that reducing 
health region administration and providing better front-line care 
is important to Saskatchewan residents. Mr. Speaker, let me 
remind you that the NDP government eliminated 1,200 
long-term care beds. Contrast this to the 15 new long-term care 
facilities that have been built or under construction since the 
election of the Saskatchewan Party government in 2007. 
 
My constituents will benefit from the additional $20 million to 
the Saskatchewan surgical initiative in this budget year to help 

ensure that Saskatchewan continues to have the shortest 
surgical wait times in Canada. My constituents will appreciate 
the $14 million in this budget for upgrades to Saskatoon’s 
Royal University Hospital. 
 
My constituents will also benefit from the municipal revenue 
sharing based on one percentage point of the PST [provincial 
sales tax] or 20 per cent of the total that give Saskatoon more 
than $48.5 million. I remember one of my daughters doing a 
policy paper on this very topic for a university class before it 
became a reality. 
 
And my post-secondary graduate constituents will benefit from 
the changes to the graduate retention program that will allow 
recipients to use up to $10,000 of their GRP [graduate retention 
program] benefits towards the down payment on their first 
home here in Saskatchewan. 
 
School boards in Saskatoon will benefit from the additional 
$5.4 million of school operating funding that is being targeted 
to support Syrian refugee students, as well as the new child care 
spaces that are being developed as part of the new joint-use 
schools in the neighbourhoods of Rosewood, Evergreen, 
Hampton Village, and Stonebridge. 
 
As a Métis person, I applaud the $5 million in ongoing funding 
for initiatives that support improving education and 
employment outcomes for First Nations and Métis people 
through the Ministry of Education. Mr. Speaker, let me remind 
you that under the NDP, from 2000 to 2007, Saskatchewan had 
the worst job creation in Canada, behind every single other 
province. The highest rate of First Nations unemployment was 
recorded under the NDP government at 29 per cent in March of 
2006. 
 
We understand the definition of an economy is the production, 
distribution, and consumption of goods and services in a given 
geographical area, but another definition is the careful 
management of available resources — frugality in expenditures, 
restraint. Which is why, Mr. Speaker, this government is 
looking towards transformational change in order to ensure that 
all government programs and services are viable and 
sustainable into the future. This government will work to ensure 
that there are high-quality public services delivered in the most 
effective and efficient way possible. Change pushes us out of 
our comfort zone. It challenges our sense of security, but 
change is how we grow and how we evolve. Heraclitus, a Greek 
philosopher who was known for his belief that change was 
central to the universe said, and I quote, “The only thing that is 
constant is change.” 
 
Why a deficit, you ask. The projected $434 million deficit is the 
balance needed to ensure the programs and services that 
Saskatchewan people need and value. It is sensible that this 
government runs a manageable deficit rather than making 
severe cuts to programs and services or increasing taxes for 
Saskatchewan people and businesses. Here is a quote from the 
Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce: “As long as they have a 
very clear path to find their way back to balance, we could 
support a very short-term deficit.” 
 
Why an increase in public debt, you ask. I was raised to be 
allergic to debt. One of my father’s favourite sayings was, get 



June 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 387 

out from behind the eight ball, referring to the fact that 
imprudent money management and debt leaves one in a difficult 
situation with few options. This debt, however, is due to capital 
spending, spending that is needed to support the growth of this 
province. Unlike our neighbouring provinces, this government 
is committed to returning to a balanced budget by 2017-18. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party’s vision is to be the best place in 
Canada to live, to work, to start a business, to get an education, 
to raise a family, and to build a life. My husband, Jim, and I 
have done just that: got an education, lived, worked, raised a 
family, started a business, and built a life in this province that I 
love. Our three daughters were all educated at the University of 
Saskatchewan and are all employed in Saskatoon. We want the 
cycle to continue. It can and it will if we can keep 
Saskatchewan strong. 
 
What does a girl like me think about a budget like this? We 
have considerable challenges to rise to. These challenges will 
test our mettle and our strength. In challenging economic times 
we find out what we are made of, Mr. Speaker. I believe this 
Saskatchewan Party government succeeded in finding the right 
balance between the reality of its revenue and the demands of 
its expenses. This budget finds a balance between managing our 
fiscal reality and providing the programs and services that are 
important to Saskatchewan people. This budget finds a balance 
between controlling spending, controlling the size of the deficit, 
and controlling borrowing for capital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let us remind ourselves that our province’s 
economy will rebound as it has in the past. The Saskatchewan 
economy is diverse. The Saskatchewan economy is resilient, 
just like its people. The Premier has stated the Saskatchewan 
people are informed by common sense, that they are a veritable 
well of common sense. I believe Saskatchewan people will see 
the common sense in a manageable budget and that common 
sense will guide our transformational change. 
 
As a government, we know we have lots of work to do. As a 
government, we are striving to do better. Mr. Speaker, my 
grandparents arrived in this province from lands far away 
seeking a better life, a better future for their families in this 
abundant province. We have that better future. We want that 
future looking bright with a budget that keeps our province 
strong and moving forward. Let our freshly clad copper dome 
of this legislature serve as a beacon of hope that our best days 
are still ahead. Let us remember that, here in Saskatchewan, 
hope beats fear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I support this budget moved by the Minister of 
Finance and seconded by the member from Regina University. I 
do not support the opposition amendments. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I welcome the 
opportunity to stand here today and deliver my remarks on the 
provincial budget as tabled by the Finance minister. Mr. 
Speaker, there is perhaps no greater indication of a 
government’s priorities than the decisions that it makes at 
budget time. It is here that we see a clear demonstration of a 
government’s values — that is, where the government chooses 

to invest and where it sees fit to cut and what it chooses to 
ignore. I would like to illustrate some of the choices that this 
government made in this budget. 
 
[19:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, like other members of this Assembly, I’ve spent a 
considerable amount of time on the doorstep over the past year, 
and a lot of time over the last week with this budget. I’ve 
weighed the latter against what people have told me on the 
doorstep, in my community, and in stakeholder meetings. 
 
As we know, this budget was much anticipated throughout the 
province. Already much later than in previous years, the tabling 
of this budget signalled the end to a tense waiting game for 
many people in our province, for no sector more perhaps than 
education. Boards were made to formulate best-guess budgets 
in order to get staffing in place for the upcoming year. They 
were struggling to balance budgets at a time of great 
uncertainty. Rates of student need and class sizes have both 
been on the increase over several years and operational funding 
has not kept pace. That is not the first time that they have 
struggled with tight budgets that did not keep pace with growth. 
In fact, the past two budgets presented real challenges to school 
boards. However this was the first time that they had to do this 
so near the end of the school year, and with so little indication 
about what they might expect. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government wastes no opportunity to boast 
about increased population growth, and it is indeed a positive 
thing that people continue to choose to live and work in our 
province, both those who are new to our province and those 
who have been here all their lives. However, consistently we 
have witnessed that this government has failed to provide the 
adequate resources needed to keep pace with this growth, be it 
in education, be it in our universities, in health care, in seniors’ 
care, or in the supports and services needed to provide timely 
mental health care or in the area of housing. 
 
The Finance minister noted that there are years when 
unforeseen events make for difficult decisions. No one faults 
this government for the plight of world oil prices. That is 
beyond any one government’s control. But, Mr. Speaker, I do 
think that it is a reasonable expectation that a government 
handed a resource windfall, a growing population, and a 
sizeable rainy day fund, that it is reasonable that such a 
government would have the forethought to save for the 
inevitable rainy day. I know many others share this view. Some 
have even written columns about it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, besides speaking to priorities and values, budgets 
are also an opportunity to enact long-term planning and to 
invest in the shared future of this province. Given the gifts 
handed to this government, it is reasonable that they would take 
the opportunity to invest in measures to mitigate the boom and 
bust cycle and to invest meaningfully in renewable resources 
and sources of energy, to invest in services that would improve 
the quality of life today and in the future. And that is perhaps 
the most disappointing part of this budget. This government has 
had nearly a decade — eight years, five months — of record 
revenues to meaningfully invest in our future. I would submit, 
Mr. Speaker, that they failed to take advantage of the 
opportunity handed to them. Not only that; as we know, they 



388 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2016 

drained the rainy day fund in the process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, time and time again in this Assembly, when asked 
about current conditions, when asked direct questions about 
issues facing people in the province today, time and again this 
government and its ministers inevitably respond with a laundry 
list of grievances against the NDP and governments going back 
12, 15, 20 years or even further. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people that I talk to want their government 
focused on today and a government that takes a long-term view 
of this province, its people, and its resources. What people 
want, anyone who comes forward with a legitimate concern or 
issue, they do not . . . what they do not want is answers about 
what another government did 20 years ago, and that expectation 
crosses party lines. People want to know that someone is 
listening and understanding the conditions as they exist today. 
 
It is also reasonable, Mr. Speaker, that any government 
operating in today’s world would take seriously the challenges 
facing us with regard to climate change, prepare for the impacts 
of these changes — increased flooding, drought, fire activity, as 
well as impacts on our water and crop production — and take 
seriously the need to invest meaningfully in renewable energy 
and take action to protect our natural habitats to ensure a high 
quality of life for those who will come after us. 
 
This government, called environmental laggards in a national 
news article, continues to lag as if with pride. In the interests of 
all in our province, those who work in resource industries, those 
who rely on forests and crops, on our water supply, this 
government has a responsibility to take action and transition 
towards a more sustainable future. This budget does none of 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget also came up short for our students, 
from the pre-K [pre-kindergarten] level right through to 
university. Mr. Speaker, some students will undoubtedly benefit 
from a boost on a down payment on their first home. But, Mr. 
Speaker, there are too many students who are also picking up a 
crushing debt along with their diplomas. These students need a 
break on tuition costs or in the form of a bursary before they 
can even think of buying a home. 
 
As I have already drawn attention to repeatedly, front-line 
funding and capital funding, particularly to address 
maintenance and crowding in the K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 
12] system, is also of serious concern. This budget provides but 
a pittance, the $1.2 million increase in terms of funds targeted 
to the classroom. Not enough to cover the costs of basic 
inflation, not enough to cover already negotiated increases for 
teaching and non-teaching staff, not enough to buffer increased 
power bills. And so with this budget, class sizes will grow, 
educational assistants will be cut, needs will go on unaddressed. 
And that is not conjecture. That is a fact, and it is already 
happening, as we saw in Sask Rivers today. And if precedent 
holds, this government will shift responsibility for those cuts 
onto school boards, onto school boards who have already lost 
the ability to set their own mill rates and who have been left for 
seven years with an interim funding model. Or perhaps they 
will blame governments past, another favourite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when teachers, parents, school boards, students 

tell us that children today are struggling with issues more 
intense and complex than those 25 years ago, when they tell us 
the class sizes and the diversity of need in our classrooms has 
increased and that funding is not keeping up, they are not 
concerned about what was or was not done for students long 
graduated. They want to know that the supports that they need 
to meet the needs of children and students today are understood. 
And they do not want to be dismissed, told what someone else 
did while they were in power, or told to look under the couch 
cushions or under desks for basic resources needed to put 
teachers in front of kids or to provide needed supports. 
 
They want to know that their government understands and is 
listening. But most of all they want to know that students are 
valued enough to invest the funds needed to ensure that they get 
the education that they deserve, the education that we all need 
all of our children in this province to receive in order to achieve 
our best future. 
 
But as I mentioned, it’s not just the K to 12 system impacted. 
I’m going to take some time to focus on early childhood. In 
researching for this statement, I came across an article that 
caught my attention. The recent article from the Washington 
institute speaks to the value of public investment in quality 
early childhood supports and services. It is noted that such 
investments have been proven to “boost educational 
achievement, improve economic growth rates, and raise 
standards of living across the income spectrum.” That is for all 
citizens, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Such investments also improve the economy’s competitiveness 
long into the future, while at the same time ease a host of fiscal, 
social, and health problems. Further, Mr. Speaker, choosing to 
invest in such programming provides a wide array of significant 
benefits to children, families, and society as a whole. 
Investments in early childhood have additional, long-lasting 
benefits across society and throughout lifespans: improved 
readiness for the K to 12 system regardless of socio-economic 
background, reduced need for educational supports while in 
school, reduced rates of child abuse and the need for protective 
services, reduced criminal activity, improved high school and 
university graduation rates, and still more. 
 
Once these children enter the labour force, their incomes are 
higher, and so are the taxes that they pay back to society. 
Finally as adults they are likely to be in better health, with 
lower incidences of depression. A pretty impressive list, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But what I found most interesting about this article, which 
speaks specifically about universal, voluntary, pre-K 
programming for three- and four-year-olds, is this: “A 
voluntary, high-quality, publicly funded universal 
prekindergarten education program serving all 3- and 4-year-old 
children would generate annual benefits that would surpass the 
annual cost of the program within eight years” — surpass. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the evidence amongst economists, educational 
professionals, and a host of other scholars is clear. An 
investment in education — particularly early childhood 
education, but in all areas of education — is not only an 
important investment in our children, which is paramount. It is 
also an investment in the betterment of our society, our 



June 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 389 

communities, and our economy, period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would submit to you that you do not need to be a 
scholar or an expert to recognize the benefits of investing in 
early childhood education and supports. And the members 
opposite have indicated they want ideas. Well here is one that is 
well researched, has lasting impacts across the economy, and 
pays for itself and more within eight years. It is also the right 
thing to do for our kids. 
 
So what did this government do with this budget? They reduced 
supports for our youngest. Early years funding in this budget is 
down almost $240 million. KidsFirst, a program that provides 
much-needed services and supports to some of the most 
vulnerable children in our province, sees no increase in this 
budget despite growing numbers of vulnerable kids. The same 
is true for the early childhood intervention programs: no 
increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that this government has spent money. We 
hear about it every day in this Assembly again and again. But, 
Mr. Speaker, prudent governance does not just mean throwing 
money around. This government was handed a situation that 
governments around the country and around the world could 
envy: a resource boom; a growing population; an abundance of 
resources; strong, profitable Crown corporations; and an array 
of public assets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for over eight years this government has had 
record revenues. They have put money into health care but 
failed to invest in measures that would improve health and 
wellness and thus reduce the pressure on our health care system. 
In this budget, they have asked seniors and children to pay more 
for prescription drugs. But when a senior halves their 
medication because they cannot afford the whole dose — 
something that I was told on the doorstep — that is not only 
shameful; that has very real impacts for their long-term health 
and health care costs. 
 
I also ran into families, students, as well as seniors struggling to 
make ends meet. They told me that their wages and income 
simply had not kept pace with the rising cost of living. 
 
Mr. Speaker, $5 might seem a pittance to members opposite, 
but these increases most harm those who are already having to 
choose between rent and groceries. Food bank use in this 
province grew at an alarming rate during the boom under this 
government. The rate of food bank use shamefully grew fastest 
amongst seniors and children. Now that more difficult times 
have arrived, who is the first in line to pay the price? Seniors 
and students. 
 
And it’s not just prescription drug costs, Mr. Speaker. In a 
backgrounder document released with the budget, the minister, 
when describing cuts to social services — making use of 
doublespeak that would make Orwell blush, I might add — 
euphemistically describes the impact of some significant cuts. 
On the elimination of the rental housing supplement for those 
on the SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for disability] 
program, adults with disabilities, the minister states that this 
move will “. . . ensure that SAID clients will receive more 
equitable shelter benefits.” Equitably inadequate. 
 

When describing the elimination of the exemption for seniors 
receiving SAID — these are poor, elderly, disabled folks — the 
minister states that this will “. . . restore simplicity and fairness 
in how income is treated under SAP and SAID.” Simply 
inadequate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this abusive language might be funny were the 
consequences not so cruel. Mr. Speaker, what this government 
has proposed with its transformational change agenda on its 
surface appears to propose nothing more than what anyone 
charged with making decisions in any size organization should 
already be doing: making sure that services are provided in an 
efficient manner within the scope of what they are mandated to 
do. And that is what government should have been doing all 
along. And if they haven’t, why not? 
 
However, I have little confidence that this exercise is what it 
appears to be on the surface. Mr. Speaker, the government has 
dug themselves a big hole and has signalled that they expect to 
be out of it by the next budget. But, Mr. Speaker, this 
government has already provided some signals as to how this 
will be achieved. 
 
[19:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government who has wasted money hand over 
fist, this government who chose, for reasons few can fully 
comprehend, chose to add three more MLAs [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly]. This government is now pointing 
fingers at school principals suggesting that they should be doing 
more, hinting that locally determined teachers’ benefits and 
preparation time should go under the knife. The minister has 
also suggested that boards reign in administrative and 
governance costs. Mr. Speaker, school boards spend around 3 
per cent of their budget on these areas. Upwards of 85 per cent 
of their budgets are spent on the front line and keeping the 
lights on in the schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of course school boards need to be held 
accountable for the dollars that they receive, and they are, 
through the auditor’s reports and annual reports. And they 
should be accountable for the quality of education that they 
provide to our students, something that this government is 
making difficult by failing to provide the resources needed to 
meet the costs associated with growth and increased need. 
 
What is more troubling, Mr. Speaker, is that education, along 
with health, seem to be singled out to receive the stick, while 
others are offered the carrot that the Premier has recently mused 
about. Mr. Speaker, I think that this speaks to the government’s 
tendencies to pick winners and losers, to reward some and 
punish others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I have said before, it is true that this 
government won a majority on April 4th. They won the right to 
govern. Mr. Speaker, the right to govern is very different from 
the right to rule unopposed or without consultation. It is not the 
right to do what you want without listening to evidence, ideas, 
hopes, or concerns from across the province, even from those 
who disagree with your policies.  
 
Mr. Speaker, it is relatively easy to govern when the money is 
rolling in. What is more difficult is making smart investments, 



390 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2016 

sound policy decisions, and building towards a prosperous 
future for all citizens when times are tough. Mr. Speaker, in 
tough times this government failed to deliver. With this budget 
they have chosen to single out those who already benefited least 
from boom times — seniors, children, those in poverty, those in 
the North — to pay for their failings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for these reasons and more, I will be voting 
against this budget and in favour of the amendment. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my great 
honour to rise today in support of the budget tabled by the 
Finance minister. 
 
But first, since this is my opportunity to respond to the budget 
and address the Assembly, I have a few acknowledgements to 
make. To my family and friends, thank you for your support 
throughout the previous term and through the campaign to keep 
me here for a second term. Serving the people of Coronation 
Park has been one of the greatest honours of my life and I am so 
grateful to have the opportunity to continue that service. To the 
people of Coronation Park, I am humbled by the faith you’ve 
placed in me and I promise to work on your behalf to serve the 
community and its people. 
 
Coronation Park is a very, very diverse constituency, Mr. 
Speaker, diversity with newcomers from all over the world, Mr. 
Speaker, and diversity in its schools, from the Huda School to 
the Mother Teresa Middle School to community schools, Mr. 
Speaker. We have a wealth of diversity, and I’m happy and 
proud to be able to serve. 
 
I would also like to express my sincere gratitude to the people 
who worked so hard to help me return to the Assembly. Our 
campaign team won one of the most challenging races in the 
entire province, Mr. Speaker. Their hard work, their dedication, 
and their determination was inspiring. To my spousal unit and 
my campaign manager, Lisa Danyluk, thank you. And what a 
campaign she ran. To our core campaign team, Jennifer 
Hartung, David Keogan, Reagan Seidler, Ellen Williams, 
Caitlin Lane-Graham, Clint Fox, and Alyssa Phen, thank you 
for showing up day after day, walking hundreds of kilometres, 
and knocking on thousands of doors. 
 
Thanks also to friends, Keith and Lisa Pratt, Mark and Pam 
Fox, Remi Mike, newly elected chief Myke Agecoutay and his 
then very pregnant wife, Natasha Gladue, who somehow found 
time during their own campaign to lend me their support and 
well wishes. Congratulations to you both on the birth of your 
twins, Nariah and Chicago. 
 
Thanks as well to my constituency assistant, Kristy Shaw, who 
sadly had to miss election day, but for the very best of reasons, 
having just become a brand new mother to a little girl, Kodi 
Lynne. Congratulations on your beautiful little girl and thanks 
for helping Coronation Park grow. But I’m still wondering, 
what’s wrong with naming your child Doc? But apparently that 
didn’t go over well, but we’ll keep working on it. 
 
I’d also like to thank our youngest volunteer, Miss Ava 

Hartung, who kept smiles on our faces and beat me at several 
games — well all the games actually — throughout the 
campaign. Without all of you I would not be here today. 
 
To the friends and family who joined us evenings, weekends, 
and whenever they had a spare moment, who helped all the way 
along and volunteered on election day, thank you. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the men and women who volunteered on 
campaign teams and voted on election day have done their part. 
They’ve exercised their democratic right and have placed the 
future of this province in our hands. 
 
So now it is our turn, our turn to shoulder the responsibility 
they’ve given us, ever mindful of the honour and privilege that 
it is to serve. Our turn to do what we promised them we would 
do — to keep our promises, to keep our economy and our 
province strong despite these challenging times, to maintain the 
services people and families rely on, to invest in critical 
infrastructure, to be prudent in our expenses and expenditures, 
and to reflect the priorities of Saskatchewan families and 
communities. Mr. Speaker, this budget sets out how we will do 
all of those things. 
 
We promised the people of Saskatchewan that despite difficult 
economic times we would not raise their taxes and we would 
not create any new taxes. This budget keeps that promise — no 
new taxes, no new tax increases. Saskatchewan maintains some 
of the lowest personal and business tax burdens in Canada, 
according to the Conference Board of Canada. And by keeping 
taxes low, we’re helping Saskatchewan families keep more of 
their hard-earned money. 
 
Let’s look at maintaining services people and families rely on, 
Mr. Speaker. This budget is . . . We’re talking about 
transformational change, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
here’s some reactions to the budget: 
 

If you can deliver services to a customer, in this case a 
citizen of the province, in a way that they need for a lower, 
better cost, one ought to do that because we know that 
resources have demands on them all over and this isn’t 
about necessarily reducing people, in fact it’s directing 
people resources and human resources to the area of most 
positive impact. So we have continued to support them on 
that front. 

 
That’s from the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
“We are very happy that they are doing transformational 
change.” That’s from Steve McLellan, CEO [chief executive 
officer] of the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
“We’re actually excited with the concept of being able to go 
forward with transformational change. That’s the way we think 
anyway, so we’re aligned with government in that regard.” 
That’s Dave Button, vice-president of the U of R [University of 
Regina]. 
 
“We like to see the commitment to transformational change and 
controlling spending.” That’s Todd MacKay, Prairie director of 



June 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 391 

the Canadian Taxpayers Federation. And lastly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, “We’re looking forward to this transformational 
change exercise.” That’s Marilyn Braun-Pollon, vice-president 
of the Canadian Federation of Independent Business, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of my first roles in government was to serve 
as the Legislative Secretary for disability issues. During my 
time working with members of the disability community, I 
heard over and over again what a game changer the 
Saskatchewan assured income for disability was, or SAID. The 
SAID benefit has been . . . No matter where I went, from small 
rural communities to large urban cities, everyone agreed that 
SAID has given people experiencing disability a dignified 
alternative to social assistance. 
 
And while I’m no longer in that role, Mr. Speaker, it remains 
near and dear to my heart. One of my favourite constituency 
activities is to gather several times a year with the men and 
women who live at Huston Heights, an affordable independent 
living housing complex for adults with disabilities. That’s why 
I’m so proud that this year’s budget includes a $9.6 million 
increase to SAID, and that’s to ensure more people are covered, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have increased SAID benefits four 
times in the last four years. That’s a record I am proud to stand 
by, and unlike the record of the members opposite who ignored 
16 years of demands for a separate assured income for 
disability, for people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk about doom and gloom. Mr. 
Speaker, the members opposite seem to channel a number of 
fictional type characters. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you 
could, if you’d indulge me, I’d like to utilize a little skit I’ve 
watched and said a couple times in this House, but there’s new 
members here and it does . . . I don’t get tired of it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to channel Saturday Night Live. And at 
one point we had Lothar, Lothar of the Hill People, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, came up to his dad and said, “Look, Dad, look what I 
found. I found this disc, this stone disc, and it’s got a . . . And I 
stuck a stick in the middle of it, Dad, and it rolls. It actually 
rolls down the road. And so I took our box and I stuck it on top 
and, Father, look — it rolls. And it’s going to make our work 
easier. It’s going to make all of our burden an awful lot less.”  
 
Lothar says to his son, “Son, that’s a good idea, might even be a 
great idea. But it’s a new idea and, because it’s a new idea, we 
must fear and reject it.” 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d also like to congratulate 
some of the re-elected members. And I’ve called them in the 
past either Pinocchio or Geppetto, or Eeyore, to Chicken Little 
or Turkey Lurkey because the sky is constantly falling. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our government knows how important it is to support 
individuals and families. We also know how important it is to 
work together with our municipalities. That’s why I’ve been so 
committed to providing our partners and municipal government 
with stable, predictable funding through municipal revenue 
sharing. 
 
Municipalities will receive close to $272 million through 

revenue sharing this year, the largest revenue sharing grant ever 
from the province to municipalities. That’s an increase of $6.4 
million this year alone, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and an increase of 
$144 million since 2007. Given the challenging economic 
times, this demonstrates our government’s strong commitment 
to municipalities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
As an MLA for Regina, I’ve gotten to know the mayor and the 
men and women of Regina City Council, and while we may not 
necessarily all agree on each and every issue, where our paths 
cross we do agree that this funding commitment is an important 
one. To quote the Leader-Post: “Communities, both urban and 
rural, will see record revenue sharing and hiked funding for 
municipal infrastructure.” 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to discuss this year’s budget in a 
context of my ministry. I often tell people that I have one of, if 
not the absolute best portfolios in government. Yesterday I was 
looking for a really good description of why I think that’s so 
true, and I came across one of the best descriptions I’ve ever 
found right in this year’s Estimates book: 
 

The Ministry supports, celebrates and builds pride in 
Saskatchewan. The Ministry’s strategic focus is on quality 
of life and economic growth. The Ministry works with 
diverse groups and communities to enhance the Province’s 
cultural, artistic, recreational and social life; promote 
excellence in the arts, culture, heritage and sport; and 
support a vibrant and growing arts and cultural community. 
The Ministry manages and enhances Saskatchewan’s 
provincial parks system, conserves ecosystems and cultural 
resources, and provides recreational and interpretive 
opportunities for parks visitors. 

 
Mr. Speaker, what’s not to like about a job like that? Well 
maybe besides the influx of tent caterpillars we got, but other 
than the tent caterpillars, I think we’re doing pretty good. 
 
Before I discuss the details of the budget with respect to my 
ministry, I want to thank the staff in my ministry, in my 
minister’s office. Ours is a very busy office and the people in it 
make a real difference. So I’d like to thank chief of staff 
Amanda Plummer, ministerial assistants Bob Krawchuk and 
Dylan Pollon, administrative assistants Carla Taylor-Brown and 
Morgan Tangjerd, who may have the most difficult job of all, 
Mr. Speaker, and that’s keeping me organized, which is 
impossible probably, but they’ve done a pretty darn good job. 
 
Last year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our government fulfilled our 
previous commitment of $10 million in parks capital investment 
over four years, and in this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
have further committed another $5.05 million in capital, Mr. 
Speaker. I compare that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the NDP 
record of provincial parks funding. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
NDP government allowed many of the facilities in 
Saskatchewan’s beautiful provincial parks to fall into a serious 
state of disrepair. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party government has 
increased capital funding to provincial parks by 249 per cent in 
our first nine years of government compared to the NDP’s last 
nine years. That funding has been used to create nearly 2,100 
new electrified campsites and repair and rebuild park facilities 



392 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2016 

like bathrooms, boat launches, and visitor centres. As a result, 
visits to Saskatchewan’s provincial parks have increased by 
over 860,000 or 29 per cent since 2007. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget also includes stable funding of 
almost $7 million for the Saskatchewan Arts Board to support 
the arts in Saskatchewan by supporting artists, arts 
organizations, and communities. This funding will support 
programs, services, and grants that will promote a vibrant arts 
community and help artists turn their passions into works of art. 
 
[20:00] 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this year’s budget also provides almost 
$7.7 million for Creative Saskatchewan to promote the 
commercialization of creative products and help our province’s 
creative talent market their creativity both here at home, in 
Canada, and internationally, through grants, mentoring, 
marketing, and partnerships. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m particularly proud of our government’s firm 
commitment in these challenging economic times to this 
province’s creative industries and to the men and women whose 
talent produces works of art that inspire so many of us. 
 
In these challenging times, I’m happy to report that many of my 
ministry’s areas of focus are receiving stable funding: Royal 
Saskatchewan Museum, a slight increase; Provincial Capital 
Commission and Government House, a slight increase; the 
Provincial Archives of Saskatchewan, stable; heritage 
institutions of Saskatchewan and the Science Centre, stable; 
Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation, stable; Community 
Initiatives Fund, with a slight decrease of about $20,000 out of 
a $9.2 million budget; community sport, culture, recreation 
programs, an increase of $750,000 to 3.4 million; and regional 
parks funding, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget recognizes the important role 
that Parks, Culture and Sport play in enhancing the quality of 
life of the people of this great province, but this year’s budget 
also reflects the challenging economic times our province faces, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. While much of my ministry’s budget 
remains stable, difficult decisions had to be made. My ministry 
could not be immune to the necessity of controlling spending. 
We could not shirk our duty to help maintain a responsible 
budget in these challenging economic times, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. We had to do our part, just as all ministries did. From 
Health to Social Services, large and small, we all had to help 
the Minister of Finance table a budget that was responsible and 
attainable and that will support a return to balance in 2018. 
 
Yesterday the members opposite asked about urban parks 
funding. During this year’s budget deliberations, we looked at 
all items in my ministry’s budget and made some difficult 
decisions, most notably eliminating funding for five urban 
parks. This does not mean that parks will close. These parks 
will continue to be assets to the urban municipalities and to 
provide benefits to the quality of life of the residents in those 
cities. 
 
Now we believe that municipalities would be in a better 
position to absorb funding, given record municipal 
revenue-sharing grant increases, increases of more than 100 per 

cent overall since 2007-08. Mr. Deputy Speaker, revenue 
sharing with these specific municipalities has increased 
significantly from 2007 to 2015, in most cases by more than 
150 per cent. This was a difficult choice, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
but in times like the ones we find ourselves in, it is our 
responsibility as government to make tough decisions to ensure 
that the budget we bring down this year is responsible, 
sustainable, and can support a return to balance in 2018. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, choices between infrastructure, choices 
between cancer drugs, choices between more surgeries for 
Saskatchewan people, or funding urban parks when 
municipalities have received huge increases in revenue sharing, 
Mr. Speaker, we’re going to choose to focus on health care and 
things that are clear and an obvious obligation. Mr. Speaker, I 
wonder who, who said that. Who’s that quote from? Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that was our Premier. 
 
I’d like to thank the Minister of Finance for shouldering a heavy 
burden and for working so hard to get us so far. Thanks as well 
to my colleagues who serve on treasury board for guiding our 
discussions. Finally, my sincere thanks to the men and women 
of my ministry for the commitment to serving the people of 
Saskatchewan each and every day. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m proud to stand here today in support 
of our government’s budget. I will be supporting the motion by 
the Minister of Finance, seconded by the member for Regina 
University. I will not be supporting the amendments. Thank 
you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is an honour and a 
privilege to rise today in the Assembly to support the Minister 
of Finance on the 2016-2017 budget. This budget will keep 
Saskatchewan strong, with no tax increases, controlled 
spending, investing in our people and in infrastructure in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a hard act to follow, the minister of Regina 
Coronation Park, after his thoughts today. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to begin my remarks with a few acknowledgements. In a very 
short time I have noticed the value of my two CAs 
[constituency assistant], Carol Sleeva who has been working for 
the past 11 years and has worked for former deputy premier, 
Ken Krawetz. She brings me a lot of experience and 
knowledge. Also my new CA, Gladys Zavislak, and who I look 
forward to working for over the next few years. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank my wife, Lorri, and my 
three children, Jasmine and her husband Shane, Jade and 
Carson, and of course my one and only grandson, Lewis. They 
have been a great support throughout the campaign and election 
and now my new position as MLA of Canora-Pelly 
constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the first budget that I have had the 
opportunity to take part under the Saskatchewan Party 
government, which shows fiscal responsibility that will keep 
Saskatchewan strong. 
 



June 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 393 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to take this time to thank our 
former Finance minister, deputy premier, minister of Education, 
and one of the greatest men to ever work in the Sask Party, Mr. 
Ken Krawetz. His hard work and dedication to this province 
over his last 20 years will never be forgotten. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to thank our current Finance minister 
and all those that helped him putting this great budget together. 
I know there are some tough decisions with revenues down 
nearly $1 billion — with a “b”, billion — with no tax increases 
and controlled spending while investing in infrastructure to 
keep Saskatchewan strong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government continues to support the early 
education and child care across this province. As part of the 
new joint-use school project, over 800 child care spaces will be 
developed in Regina, Saskatoon, Warman, and Martensville, 
which are coming this year. This brings the total funding of 
child care to $53 million. The number of licensed child care 
spaces have increased by over 5,800 since 2008, bringing the 
total to more than 14,600. And since 2007 we’ve had 70 new 
daycare spaces located in Canora. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget also maintains strong investment in 
post-secondary students in education. There’s $475 million 
allocated to the University of Regina and affiliated colleges, 
$156 million to Saskatchewan Polytechnic and Saskatchewan 
Indian Institute of Technology, and another $29 million to the 
Saskatchewan regional colleges including one that was newly 
opened, Trades and Technology Centre in Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that resource revenue is down by nearly 
$1 billion. This government decided not to raise the taxes in this 
year’s budget but to run a manageable deficit rather than severe 
cuts to our programs and services. This focus will be on 
managing cost, sustainability, and looking forward to 
transformational changes. Under the NDP, taxes were raised 21 
times in 16 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, health care is very important to the people of 
Saskatchewan. With over $5 billion being spent or 39 per cent 
of our total budget, we will continue to move forward. And now 
we have the shortest surgical wait times in Canada. And under 
the NDP, Saskatchewan had the longest surgical wait times in 
Canada with thousands of patients having to wait for more than 
a year for their surgery. 
 
Since 2007 we have brought in 650 more doctors, over 3,200 
more nurses. We have increased physician training by 40 seats 
and the number of nurse training seats by 270 since 2007. The 
health budget is an increase of 57.4 million. That is now an 
increase of over 50 per cent since the NDP in 2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, regional authorities will see 3.4 billion for 
operating fund, an increase of $2.3 million — a 56 per cent 
increase since 2007. This is included in the $20 million in 
additional funding to reduce surgical wait times that are now 
the best in Canada. 
 
The Sask Cancer Agency is receiving an additional 9.8 million, 
up 6.2 per cent to pay for 15 new cancer drugs approved last 
year. And since 2007, funding for the Cancer Agency is up 113 
per cent. Mr. Speaker, there will also be $7.5 million reduction 

in administration. These dollars will be reinvested into the 
front-line in long-term care homes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government will continue in capital 
investments across this province: 71.4 million, including a 25 
per cent increase of 34.7 million to capital maintenance for 
power plant upgrade in the Saskatoon Royal University 
Hospital; electrical projects at the Regina General and Pasqua 
hospitals; as well as the completion of the Kelvington integrated 
care facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are continuing to build highways, schools, 
hospitals through these difficult years. This year the 
government will be investing 3.5 billion in capital. One point 
seven billion will be invested to highways, schools, and 
hospitals, and another 1.8 billion invested into the infrastructure 
for SaskPower, SaskTel, and SaskEnergy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to say that all of these builds in our 
province only creates more jobs and more spending in our 
province. Saskatchewan has the lowest unemployment rate in 
Canada. Since 2008 the number of people working in 
Saskatchewan has grown by 68,000. From 2000 to 2007 under 
the NDP, we had the worst job creation in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only did we not raise taxes during the tough 
times but, in Saskatchewan since 2008, we have delivered 
record property tax reductions and record income tax 
reductions. For example, a family of four with a combined total 
of $50,000 income have seen the income tax reduced by 100 
per cent. And we gave back about $6 billion in taxes to the 
people of Saskatchewan. Under the NDP, what did they do? 
They raised taxes 21 times in 16 years of power. They also 
raised the PST four times and the gas tax twice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Agriculture will see an increase of 
7.5 per cent to a total of 389.89 million, point eight million. The 
business risk management program have shown an increase of a 
total of 254.6 million. Ag research will receive 26.8 million in 
funding. There will be a change to the sale of Crown land which 
will end on December 31st and it’s expected to net $148 million 
in land sales this year. 
 
This budget also contains 4.2 million to support program and 
events such as the Canada Farm Progress Show, 4-H 
Saskatchewan, and Agriculture in the Classroom. These 
commitments show the government’s continuing support in the 
agriculture sector to support the Saskatchewan economy and 
ensures that producers will continue to feed the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our commitment to a record 1.15 billion which is 
going to be spent on our highways and infrastructure in 
2016-17: 355 million for capital construction, 30 million for 
new funding for the first year of the highways 2020 plan, a 
three-year plan of 70 million addition to highway repairs, 500 
million for the Regina bypass. There will be more than 1300 
kilometres of repairs to our highways across the province, and 
projects include the Regina bypass, twinning of Highways 7 
and 16 near Saskatoon, twinning of Highway 39 between 
Estevan and Bienfait, starting of new overpasses in Warman 
and Martensville, and 200 kilometres of repaving, upgrading 
our rural, over 100 rural highways. These are all roads that were 
neglected under the NDP. 



394 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2016 

[20:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has a record of record funding 
over 406 million for municipal revenue support. This is a $56.7 
million increase, or 16.2 per cent from 2015-16, and a 
whopping 67.9 since 2007. Municipal revenue shares for the 
cities, towns, villages, and RM [rural municipality] of 174.6; 
revenue sharing for rural and organized hamlets, 76.7 million; 
and approximately 20 million for northern municipalities. This 
funding is up 144 million, or 113 per cent since 2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government has dedicated more than $1 
billion, a 5.1 per cent increase from the last year, to our social 
programs for our children, youth, and families, people with 
disabilities, and people needing income assistance and housing. 
Dedicating 7.9 million for the medically fragile children, 5.7 for 
foster care and extended family, 2.3 in preservative families to 
keep our children from coming into the care of the ministry, and 
point eight million for assisted adoption. In 2016-17, the 
province is dedicating to social services 494 million for income 
assistance programs, $210 million to the SAID program, the 
Saskatchewan assured income for disability. There is 36.5 
million allocated to the transitional employment program. 
These programs and others will serve over 30,000 individuals 
and families to meet their basic needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2016-17 budget maintains strong support for 
our First Nations and Métis programming. This is over $211 
million allocated for the First Nations and Métis people to 
access economic and educational opportunities, 30.8 million for 
on-reserve adult basic education, 5.1 per cent of . . . million 
dollars for funding initiatives to respond to the joint task force 
on improving educational and employment opportunities, $78.8 
million in gaming agreement transfers. This budget will also 
include funding to hire additional wildfire crews and for the 
First Nations apprenticeship program in the Ministry of 
Highways and Infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look at our export industry. I see diversity and 
continued growth. Last year in Saskatchewan, export industries 
reached over $15 billion. That was the target projected to be hit 
by 2020 and we’re already there. 
 
The government’s track record over the last nine years includes 
prudent paying down of debt and keeping our debt-to-GDP ratio 
among the lowest in the country. All this has helped us to obtain 
a AAA credit rating that is among the highest in North 
America. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2016-17 the budget also includes $50.8 million 
in funding for municipalities, 16.9 million for policing grants, 
11.1 million to libraries, 7.9 for grants in lieu of taxes for 
municipalities and libraries, 5.5 million for urban parks, 3.5 
million for transit assistance for people with disabilities, 1.8 
million for the bus pass program, 1.7 for community rinks, 1.2 
million for rural physician recruitment, $700,000 for the 
community airport partnership program, and $500,000 for the 
irrigation bridge rehabilitation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my constituency of Pelly will benefit from this 
budget, and indeed has benefited since the Sask Party took 
leadership in 2007. And I’d like to give you a few examples. 
Revenue sharing in Canora went from 206,000 to 511,000, 148 

per cent increase. Kamsack, revenue sharing is up 185,000 to 
420, 127 per cent. Preeceville, revenue sharing increased from 
108,000 to 247,000, 127 per cent increase. 
 
We also showed investments in education. In Norquay in 2008, 
a $1.1 million project. In Kamsack in 2009, a roof replacement 
of 225,000. In 2010, a new roof on the Canora Junior 
Elementary of 160,000. And 2014, the Canora Junior 
Elementary put a three-classroom new modular in their junior 
elementary to the tune of 900,000. The total amount spent on 
pre-K to grade 12 school capital allocated since 2007 is $6.4 
million. We have 70 child care spaces allocated in 2007, and 
our Good Spirit School Division has had an operating increase 
of over 35.6 per cent since 2007. 
 
Investments in health since 2009: Preeceville and District 
Health Centre was built and there was $6.7 million invested. 
And just last year in 2015, Canora Health and Wellness Centre 
and the collaborative emergency was set up at the hospital, and 
there was $775,000 worth of renovations. 
 
In highways, in 2015-16 there was $4.2 million in culvert 
replacements and bridge replacements. And our infrastructure in 
the area, in 2008 there was a cultural centre in Sturgis built and 
we gave $250,000. In 2009, Kamsack sewage lagoon expansion 
of over 800,000. And there is much, much more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to say a few things about my 14 years 
as mayor of Canora. The first seven years, from 2000 to 2007 
under the NDP and Premier Lorne Calvert, taxes were high on 
the farms and businesses. They tried to close our hospital, and 
we fought hard and kept it open. They shut down our Canora ag 
office. People were graduating, leaving our town and our 
province. We saw a decrease in population, and there was 
much, much more. Mr. Speaker, from 2007 to 2016 under the 
current government, revenue sharing more than doubled so that 
we were allowed to do more infrastructure within the area. 
 
Our population of Canora grew from 2,300 to over 2,800. We 
built three more classrooms in the junior school, 70 more 
daycare spaces. And our area benefited from the municipal 
portion of farm land taxes going down over 80 per cent — more 
money to our people of our area. 
 
We had a new health clinic and a CEC [collaborative 
emergency centre] set up in Canora last year of $1.1 million. 
Mr. Speaker, we have a saying back home, the NDP didn’t care 
about the little farmers and business in rural Saskatchewan. 
They didn’t care about business. They were used to signing the 
back of the cheque, not at the front of the cheque. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget will continue to build our 
infrastructure. This budget will control our spending. This 
budget will continue to grow our province. Mr. Speaker, this 
budget will keep Saskatchewan strong by keeping our finances 
strong and help us towards a balanced budget in 2017-2018. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am in support of the 2016-17 budget, and I will 
not be supporting the amendment. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress 
Hills. 
 



June 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 395 

Mr. Steele: — Mr. Speaker, the 2016-17 budget commits to 
building a solid foundation during these challenging times. We 
will continue to look after and keep the best interests of the 
people in Saskatchewan. 
 
We are not off-loading the budget or stress onto the 
hard-working families, individuals, or businesses in the 
province. More people than ever call Saskatchewan home. 
Instead of people leaving our province to invest elsewhere, they 
are staying in our province or moving here to invest. 
 
The government has also taken a close look at our revenue 
sources to ensure that they are sustainable and to guard against 
too much dependence on volatile revenue sources such as oil 
and potash. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to ensure the sustainability of high-quality public 
services delivered in a most efficient way, effective way as 
possible, this year marks the beginning of the government-wide 
process of transformational change. As part of this process, 
everything the government does will be studied and scrutinized. 
Transformational change cannot be achieved overnight, and it 
cannot be accomplished by government alone. We will look at 
both the spending and revenue sides of the equation as we strive 
to find a proper, sustainable balance between the two. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our main goal is to keep Saskatchewan strong by 
keeping our economy strong, now and into the future. We now 
have over 1.14 million people since 2007. Our province saw a 
population decline under the NDP leadership. Today we boast 
an increase of over 132,000 people. 
 
Oil revenue has been a financial blessing to our province over 
the years. This past year it has been on the downturn, which 
there’s no doubt has given us challenges in our financial budget. 
We are ready to meet this challenge, keeping Saskatchewan 
strong while we continue to move forward. 
 
Saskatchewan remains a resource-driven economy with an 
abundance of oil, natural gas, uranium, and potash. With the 
province in the global downturn of oil, we are excited to 
announce that there will be no increase to personal income tax 
and no additional new taxes. 
 
We have reduced taxes for Saskatchewan people at every level. 
We realize that no increase of taxes is key for a strong 
economy. Low taxes attract new economic activity to create 
new jobs and investments throughout our province. Since 2007 
there has been nearly 6 billion in total tax reductions for 
families, individuals, businesses, and farmers. We are among 
the lowest in provincial and personal tax burden in Canada. The 
NDP government raised the taxes 21 times during 16 years in 
power, including raising the PST four times and the gas tax 
twice. 
 
Even though we are going through some rough times, we are 
still maintaining the infrastructure. It will keep the economy 
growing, create jobs, make it easier to move products, and 
sustain economic growth. This investment will improve the 
quality of life for generations that follow. These smart, strategic 
investments will help grow our economy and make 
Saskatchewan an even better place to call home. 
 

Mr. Speaker, as government, as society, as families, as 
individuals, we must be grateful to those before us who 
dedicated their lives to laying the infrastructure of our 
livelihood today. Let’s continue where they left off and build 
upon it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the budget maintains a strong investment in early 
education, child care, post-secondary students, and education to 
keep Saskatchewan strong. 
 
The budget includes funding of 1.6 million for nearly 200 
previously approved child care spaces. The number of child 
care spaces have increased close to 5,800 since 2008, totalling 
more than 14,600 spaces throughout the province. Eastend, 
Hazlet, Frontier, Gull Lake, Shaunavon, and Cabri are some of 
the many early childhood centres that provide nurturing 
education care for the children of Cypress Hills constituency. 
These early childhood centres ensure a safe, clean, engaging 
environment for the children, allowing parents to go to work 
with peace of mind knowing their children are being well taken 
care of. 
 
We are the teachers for our youth. It’s up to us to make sure 
they are getting the tools they need to succeed and move 
forward, encouraging them, supporting them, and celebrating 
their successes. Mr. Speaker, we introduced one of the most 
aggressive graduate retention programs in Canada that allow 
students who have graduated from post-secondary education to 
be eligible for tax credits up to $20,000 if they become and 
remain residents of Saskatchewan. Over 63,000 graduates have 
taken advantage of this program since 2007. 
 
We are introducing a new program to allow eligible 
post-secondary graduates to use up to $10,000 of their future 
GRP tax credits as an interest-free loan to use for a down 
payment on their first home in Saskatchewan, which will 
partner nicely with the graduate retention program. We 
encourage them to continue to live in this province, not leave 
for greener pastures somewhere else. They bring new ideas, 
skills, energy to our communities, businesses, and help to make 
the province stronger. These programs are great for helping 
graduates get on their feet by supporting them to build their 
homes amongst the communities throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
[20:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, investing and supporting our future is a strong 
commitment. The government is committed to offering strong 
support for students, offering them programs to help them save 
and pay for education: 32.5 million Student Aid Fund providing 
student grants, loans, and bursaries; 14.3 million for 
scholarships; 6.5 million for Saskatchewan advantage grant 
education savings. This continues to keep Saskatchewan strong, 
investing in students’ successes instead of the youth leaving and 
building up different provinces. The NDP wasn’t there to help 
the people when times were tough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we never give up on our people. The budget keeps 
Saskatchewan strong by investing in people, ensuring support 
for families, children, students, working people, and those that 
are vulnerable. We do not give up even when the times are 
tough. 
 



396 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2016 

Since 2007 when the Saskatchewan Party was first elected, 
Saskatchewan has had the second best job creation record in 
Canada, whereas from 2000 to 2007 under the NDP, 
Saskatchewan had the worst job creation record in Canada. Mr. 
Speaker, this shows we are a strong business people. We come 
here knowing, we come here . . . We know how to make and 
manage a budget. We are a government that works with 
communities and partners to help them, support them with their 
growth. 
 
This isn’t the first time we’ve had tough times and it won’t be 
the last. It is important to know how to manage it and work 
together, is how we’ll make it work. Working together will 
make . . . 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan is delivering on its highways 
2020 plan, delivering a 7 million surge in funding for highways 
repairs, maintenance over the next three years. 30 million of 
this total will be invested this year to repair more than 400 
kilometres of highways. Work will include gravel 
improvements, dust treatments, repaving, rut filling, and 
pothole fixing. 
 
Since 2008 the government has invested 6.3 billion in 
transportation infrastructure, improving more than 11,000 
kilometres of Saskatchewan roads. Investing in infrastructure 
builds Saskatchewan’s strength and will show a return now and 
into the future. It establishes structured framework to help the 
province’s economy. The investments support construction jobs 
when other sectors are feeling the downturn. This needed 
investment improves safety on roads and expands and improves 
the transportation system vitally important in our export-driven 
province. 
 
Investing in building new schools with creating better learning 
places for children attending elementary and secondary 
education and post-secondary institutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, capital investments helps in the delivery of quality 
health care and long-term care by building hospitals and 
facilities suited for those vital needs. The four-year plan 
recognizes the importance of maintaining the health care facility 
to keep Saskatchewan strong. The four-year plan increases 
maintenance and equipment funding, recognizing the 
importance of ensuring that adequate support exists to ensure 
the Saskatchewan health system continues to meet the needs of 
its people. 
 
Regional authorities are reducing administration expenses by 
7.5 million a year, redirecting savings to improve seniors’ care 
by hiring more registered nurses, licensed practical nurses, and 
continuing care aids in long-term care facilities. 
 
The last time the NDP controlled our health care, they closed 52 
hospitals, eliminated 1,200 long-term care beds, and we had the 
longest surgical wait times in Canada. Since Premier Wall was 
elected in 2007, we have gone from having the longest waits for 
surgery in Canada to the shortest. We have built new hospitals. 
We are building the first Saskatchewan child’s hospital. We’re 
adding 15 new long-term care facilities, and we’re hiring 650 
new doctors and 3,000 new nurses. 
 
The government’s decision was to keep mill rates consistent for 

now. The NDP raised the taxes 21 times in 16 years. Mr. 
Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has delivered record income 
tax and education property tax cuts for everyone in 
Saskatchewan and has kept taxes low. Since the EPT [education 
property tax] reformed in 2009, mill rates have only been 
lowered and have not been adjusted for inflation, while 
enrolments, teachers’ salaries, and school operational costs have 
increased. The share of operating funding from the EPT is 
currently 36 per cent, lower than the long-standing goal of 40 
per cent. 
 
Balance is sought to ensure the sustainability of the programs 
and services Saskatchewan people value and need today and 
into the future. There are circumstances when global events, 
large drops in revenue, or increased expenses due to natural 
disasters or large crop failures make it more prudent to run a 
manageable deficit rather than implement severe cuts to 
programs and services to increase the cost burden on citizens. 
This year is such a time. The government remains committed to 
returning to a budget, a balanced budget in 2017 and ’18. We 
will help Saskatchewan through a difficult year before the 
economic recovery next year by keeping taxes low and 
controlling operational spending. 
 
We will invest in schools, hospitals, infrastructure such as 
highways. Mr. Speaker, we have been committed from the start 
in building an industry in agriculture that is strong and viable. 
The budget has continued to support the ranchers and farmers. 
We have put in effect programming and strategic investment. 
 
The Ministry of Agriculture budget from 2016-17 will increase 
by 7.5 per cent for a total of 389.8 million. This includes 254.6 
million to fully fund business risk management programs and 
14.6 million to increase from the previous year. 
 
The agriculture industry accounts for more than 50,000 jobs 
across the province and continues to grow. Feeding our 
expanding population is one of the most important issues of our 
time. Saskatchewan agriculture industry can be a leader in 
finding solutions and help meet the growing demand for food. 
 
The farmers and ranchers lead an industry that has tripled the 
yield of food production in the past century while using fewer 
inputs. A farmer in the 1900s produced enough food to feed 10 
people but today’s average farms feed more than 120. 
Advancements in science and technology are helping farmers 
and ranchers become experts in producing more food with less. 
An example is production of crops using low- or no-till systems 
that conserve moisture and prevent soil erosion. 
 
Saskatchewan is a major contributor to the world-class crop 
research and develops efforts that provide innovative ways to 
increase production. Plant breeding programs like those at the 
Crop Development Centre in Saskatoon are creating improved 
crop varieties that boost plant health and yield. 
 
Saskatchewan’s agriculture industry is viable and diversified. In 
Saskatchewan we sit in the driver’s seat of one of the most 
promising sectors in the world’s economy — the food industry. 
Agriculture, the supply source for food for the industry, is often 
called the sector of the future, satisfying the rising demands, 
pushing our industry to come up with new ways to increase 
production. Meanwhile economics, environment considerations 



June 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 397 

force farmers to find ways to produce more with less — less 
land, less water, fewer inputs, and less soil disturbance. This 
creates a significant challenge, one that the industry is 
overcoming through determination and innovation, and one that 
makes agriculture a promising career for our youth. We 
recognize agriculture’s role as a resilient and stable contributor 
to Saskatchewan’s economy and will continue to offer the 
programs and services producers need to keep their operations 
and the entire agriculture industry strong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s 2016-17 budget will keep 
Saskatchewan strong, investing in infrastructure in our people 
while controlling operational spending. The 2016-17 budget 
will keep Saskatchewan strong — no tax increases, controlling 
spending, investing in people, investing in infrastructure. Mr. 
Speaker, I support the new budget and do not support the 
amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Lloydminster. 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before I begin with 
my responses to the budget speech, I would like to express a 
few words of appreciation and give some thank yous to some 
very important and valuable people who were and have been 
very instrumental in allowing me to humbly serve as their 
representative for the Lloydminster constituency and the people 
of this province and this legislature. 
 
First and foremost, I want to thank my family: my husband, 
Kim, and my children: Nevada, Casey, Chester, Riley, Fraser, 
Percy, Duke, and Ace who helped with my campaign and have 
always supported and encouraged me to go for it. I love you 
dearly. 
 
To my campaign team . . . I know many of you have already 
stated how awesome your campaign teams were, but I can tell 
you mine was much more than awesome. They were 
outstanding. Thank you to my campaign manager, Tracy 
Patterson, and her husband, Rob, and sons Brodie and Bryce 
who gave many hours to ensure every little detail was handled 
and handled well. And I’m happy to say Tracy has returned to 
once again be my efficient, helpful, and wonderful constituency 
assistant. 
 
Thank you to my office managers and tech ladies, Carol 
Dayman and Kiran Naqvi, for their hard work and daily 
commitment. Thank you to my sign people, particularly Warren 
Callfas, Steven McKenzie, Wade and Edith Blythe, Surjheel 
Butt, and the Amydiyahh Muslim community, Jon in the 
Filipino community. Thank you to my daily phoners: Zuhy 
Sayeed, Rae Douglas, and Rosemarie Falk. Thank you to some 
very committed door knockers: Kathy Bloch Hansen, Anil 
Sharma, Des McMillan, Edna Mangla, Antonnya Otteson, and 
Adam Gareau who I’m sure were in withdrawal for a while 
after the election when we stopped. 
 
I must tell you that I had some high school students who came 
out to help as well during the campaign. But Adam Gareau, a 
grade 10 student, in particular stands out. His interest in 
politics, his knowledge of politics and history lessons, along 
with his outgoing personality made it enjoyable to work with 
such a fine young fellow. I know our future is in good hands. 

He even travelled with me to door knock in the small 
communities in our northern part of the constituency on a 
Saturday, and didn’t mind spending the whole day watching 
while I judged 4-H speeches. He spent time listening to and 
entertaining seniors at the hall and then door knocked through 
the town until dark. An amazing young man. 
 
There were so many folks, too many to list, whose support and 
help throughout the campaign contributed to the strong efforts 
of getting me elected. Thank you to all of you. I say thank you 
to all the constituents who rallied behind me and gave me such 
strong support. I received the largest majority in this province 
since 1938. I am humbled and honoured to serve you, and will 
always give you my respect, time, and commitment to do the 
best job I can as a member of this Assembly. 
 
I also want to congratulate all those members who have earned 
the honour of being a representative in this Assembly today, as 
well as thanking all those candidates who chose to put their 
names forward for public office. 
 
I congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, on your election as Speaker of 
this Assembly, and to the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood on his election as Deputy Speaker, both 
very important roles to play in the governing of this House and 
province. A most grateful and appreciative thank you also goes 
to our Finance minister, the deputy Finance minister, my fellow 
treasury board members, and the hard-working Finance staff 
who put in many hours reviewing and working on budget 
finalization. 
 
Before I offer some comments on the budget, Mr. Speaker, I 
also want to share a brief story that needs to be told and 
documented in the minutes of this legislature, a story about 
someone who wasn’t elected as a member of this legislature but 
played an important role behind the scenes over 80 years ago. 
And today is that day that I’m about to tell this important and 
special story. 
 
This will also be meaningful to you, Mr. Speaker, as this person 
is a Saskatoon Eastview constituent of yours, and I know you 
had the opportunity to meet him during your campaign. Besides 
my husband, Kim, who was the MLA representing your 
constituency of Saskatoon Eastview, Mr. Speaker, from 1982 to 
’86, this constituent I’m going to speak about served the Hon. 
Charlie Agar who was the Speaker of the House many years 
ago. 
 
[20:45] 
 
As a very young man of 15 years old, Mr. Anton Lloyd Beck 
had to drop out of school and go to work to help support his 
mother and younger sister. His two older brothers had already 
left school and gone to work to do the same. He was born at 
South Allan, Saskatchewan on August 6th, 1920 and, as an 
infant, his parents took him and his brothers to homestead at 
Spiritwood, Saskatchewan. His father died when he was three in 
a farming accident, and his mother died shortly after he left at 
15 to go to work. 
 
Tony Beck, as he is more commonly called, soon found work at 
the farm of Charlie Agar, run then by his son who grew crops, 
had a 300-pig operation, 50 head of cattle, and 1,800 laying 



398 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2016 

chickens from which he supplied eggs to the co-op stores. Tony 
helped in the fields, tended to the livestock during the day, and 
helped candle eggs, a lot of eggs, in the cellar each evening for 
$35 a month. It was hard work, long days, but that was a lot of 
money in those days and considered a good-paying job. 
 
Charlie Agar Senior was initially elected as a member of this 
legislature in 1921, representing Saskatoon County. In 1939, 
when Charlie Agar Senior was elected for the sixth time as a 
Liberal representative in the constituency of Hanley, he became 
the Speaker of this House. Mr. Agar had Parkinson’s disease 
and was unable to drive anymore. 
 
In 1937 while working on his farm just south of Saskatoon, he 
met Tony Beck, a young 17-year-old who had been working for 
the neighbour on and off. Mr. Agar asked Tony if he could 
drive a tractor and when Tony responded yes, he hired him as 
his personal driver to take both him and an opposition member, 
the Hon. Rod Kennedy, back and forth to Regina during 
session. A four and a half hour trip one way, no paved road, just 
gravel, but Tony was a 17-year-old young man behind the 
wheel of a brand new, beautiful, tan coloured 1938 Dodge car. 
He was so proud and excited to take on such an important role. 
He never ever took a driving test, was handed a licence, a 
chauffeur hat and suit by the Speaker of the House, and was 
paid $7.50 a month to drive them back and forth to Regina. 
 
They would arrive at the Hotel Sask in Regina, which was a 
long ways from the legislature then. He shared a hotel room 
with the Speaker and was handed $5 at the beginning of each 
three-day stay during the week in Regina and told to enjoy 
himself. Tony regularly sat in the Speaker’s gallery listening 
and learning or would walk to the Capitol Theatre to watch 
movies and eat popcorn. 
 
Tony remarked to me that during those three years he drove 
those two gentlemen, he never once heard Mr. Agar or Mr. 
Kennedy talk politics on the drive there and back; only farming, 
the weather, family, and anything else but politics. He learned a 
lot as a young man. 
 
In 1939 when young men were joining the forces for the war, 
the Speaker of the House, Mr. Charlie Agar, offered to provide 
Tony with a paper saying he did not have to join the 
conscription but remain as his employee. Tony chose to join the 
RCAF [Royal Canadian Air Force] and flew Sunderlands and 
Spitfires as a flight engineer. Tony chose to swap his 
chauffeur’s uniform for an air force uniform, and just like the 
veteran who was introduced in the House yesterday, Tony 
proudly served this country so all of us could stand here today 
and continue to speak freely about the economics and future of 
our province. Tony did six tours of duty, was shot down over 
South Wales a couple of times, earned medals of valour and 
honour, and was one of the fortunate ones to return home after 
fighting in the Second World War. 
 
Upon returning to Saskatchewan, he took over his uncle’s farm 
near Blucher, Saskatchewan, married a young schoolteacher by 
the name of Brigitta Young, where they grew crops, had a 
mixed farm, and raised 11 children together, one of those 
children, Mr. Speaker, being myself. My dad, Anton Lloyd 
Beck, Tony, will be 96 years old this August. And while sitting 
next to his bed this week at St. Paul’s Hospital in Saskatoon 

after he recently suffered a heart attack, he can still tell this 
story like it was yesterday. Thank you, Dad, for being the best 
dad in the world. I love you. 
 
Now to turn to the budget, Mr. Speaker. Budgets are 
challenging even in the best of times. Decisions always have to 
be made around where one needs to or can spend and where and 
when savings can be found. Incoming revenues aren’t always 
consistent, and create challenges. Every household needs to 
make budget decisions and prioritize spending that keep it 
strong, well maintained, sustainable, the family working 
together, and keeps everyone in the household reasonably 
happy — tough to do but not impossible. 
 
We can look at this province as our household. Our 2016-17 
budget shows challenges, but its design — in controlling 
operational spending, not raising taxes or introducing any new 
taxes, investing in important and needed infrastructure to 
maintain and create opportunity for growth and investment, and 
ensuring the people, our provincial family, that we have a plan 
to get back to balance as revenues improve — has been strongly 
supported by the people of this province. Our modest deficit 
pales in comparison to other provincial deficits in this country. 
 
We could have done what the opposition members did in the 
past and what gets some households in financial straits: rack up 
the big orange credit card, tax the heck out of everyone over 
and over again to put money in the kitty, shut down certain 
parts of the household that we don’t want to repair or invest in 
anymore, cut activities and programs, and watch the kids go 
elsewhere to find jobs and careers. Shameful, but that’s what 
the opposition members did when the economy got tough. 
 
I believe and I know the Saskatchewan Party’s government 
budget will keep Saskatchewan strong through these 
challenging economic times. Many of the members of this 
House have already laid out many facts and figures of 
investment and opportunities given to and put into the people 
and communities of this province over the past nine years. The 
unprecedented population growth, job creation record, strong 
investments in hospitals, schools, long-term care facilities, 
integrated health facilities, highways, bridges, bypasses, 
agriculture programs, social assistance programs, and much 
more have given this government the proven track record of 
being receptive to the needs of this province. Accountable, 
fiscally responsible, transparent, open to new ideas, willing to 
work with businesses and organizations, willing to listen and 
change what we are doing when necessary, and supporting 
those most vulnerable in our population — all because we truly 
do care — the people of Saskatchewan see and know this and 
that is why there are 51 of us on this side. 
 
In my constituency of Lloydminster and in a biprovincial city, 
it’s always challenging to work with two different governments. 
But, Mr. Speaker, in this recent election the voters had already 
seen what an NDP government can do in a short period of time 
to damage and devastate the economy of a province like 
Alberta. Yes, falling oil prices have played a role in changing 
the landscape of an oil-dependent province. But when an NDP 
government contributes to the tax burden and does not support 
pipelines and instead spends millions of taxpayers dollars on 
environmental studies, reviews, and reports, and throws caution 
to the wind in the form of billions of dollars of debt with no 



June 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 399 

plan to bring things back to balance, it’s easy to understand why 
our Premier and province with this budget and plan to return to 
balance in 2017-18 are the envy of this country. 
 
Because our opposition members support the Leap Manifesto, I 
am positive it wouldn’t take them long to do harm and damage 
to the economy of this province and turn back the clock to the 
days of tax hikes, closing hospitals, schools, long-term care 
facilities, losing doctors and nurses, losing investment in 
businesses, and watching our young people walk out of this 
province to find careers and work elsewhere. 
 
Lloydminster and the surrounding area are hurting because of 
the slump in oil prices: job losses, stores and restaurants closing 
down. Oil and truck hauling companies have laid off hundreds 
of employees, and families have had to move elsewhere to find 
work. This is not easy to watch and see in a city with a young 
population of rising entrepreneurs and skilled labourers. It is 
troubling that today there are some in this country who, given 
the opportunity, would shut down major parts of 
Saskatchewan’s economy and put thousands of hard-working 
Saskatchewan people out of work, all in the name of some 
misguided dogma that has no basis in reality. Thank heavens 
the people of this province have more common sense than they 
do. Our government will take every occasion to stand up for 
this province, to defend vital sectors, and to stand up for every 
one of those jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 2007 we have given $6 billion in tax 
reductions which have stayed in the pockets and homes of 
families, individuals, homeowners, businesses, and farmers, as 
compared to the NDP who raised taxes 21 times during 16 
years, including raising the PST four times and the gas tax 
twice. 
 
Because of those tax reductions, we have seen record job and 
population growth in this province. In the last seven years, 
Saskatchewan has had the lowest unemployment rate in Canada 
and the second strongest job creation record among the 
provinces, behind only Alberta. 
 
The number of people working in Saskatchewan grew by over 
68,000. Under the NDP, Saskatchewan had the worst job 
creation record in Canada, behind every other province. We 
have grown by over 85,000 people, whereas under the NDP 
from 1991 to 2007, 56,000 more people moved out of 
Saskatchewan than moved in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been a priority of this government to make 
economic decisions, tough as they may be at times, that truly 
show we are investing back into the people of . . . [inaudible] 
. . . Saskatchewan. Revenue sharing in the city of Lloydminster 
alone has gone from over 700,000 in 2007 to over 2.1 million in 
this budget. That’s a 199 per cent increase in nine years, Mr. 
Speaker. All of the RMs have expressed their appreciation for 
this government’s commitment to the 1 per cent predictable 
revenue sharing from the PST. They never want to go back to 
the time of a guessing game, whether they were getting 
anything under the NDP, up and down mill rates, and tax revolt 
by property owners. 
 
School divisions in my riding have seen significant increased 
operating funding since 2007: year-over-year operating 

increases, two new schools with 72 child care spaces in each, 
and a new $6 million gym in the community of Hillmond. Total 
pre-K to 12 capital allocated to my constituency since 2007, 
Mr. Speaker, has been $65.2 million. 
 
Prairie North Health Region has had a 71 per cent increase in 
operating funding since 2007, with a 3.8 per cent year-over-year 
increase totalling 220.2 million in operating funding. 
 
Mine is just one health region where investment has been 
increasingly made year over year since 2007. This year, even 
with a $1 billion loss in resource revenues due to low oil and 
potash prices, our government is choosing not to close 
hospitals, long-term care facilities, shut down hospital beds as 
they did, as the NDP did in the past. But instead we have 
chosen to continue investing in our health care system to the 
tune of $5.3 billion. 
 
Since November 2007 my community and constituency has 
received more than $3.1 million to develop 31 rental and 
homeowner units and repair four homes in Lloydminster along 
with special housing units for community members with 
intellectual disabilities. Total investments in highways in my 
constituency was $13.1 million last year, and in this budget, 
with a promise of additional 30 million surge in highway repair 
maintenance, my constituency will receive more than 4.1 
million of that 30 million. 
 
Constituency of Lloydminster has a large rural agricultural 
component to it as well and continued investment in this 
industry supports our farmers and ranchers to ensure the heart 
and soul of this province, from the time that the first settlers and 
Barr colonists who arrived in Lloydminster, continues to remain 
a strong, viable, and sustainable source for our province. All 
these investments show that this government’s consistent care, 
concern, and addressing of the needs of the people of 
Saskatchewan is a priority. 
 
[21:00] 
 
Transformational change was noted in the budget speech, Mr. 
Speaker, and as a member of the treasury board I found it 
interesting to see and hear from different ministries about the 
numerous programs and services that as a government we chose 
to fund and choose to fund and provide to the people of this 
province. But I couldn’t help wondering sometimes, and it is 
our role to do so, if some of the programs no longer provided an 
effective, efficient service, if programs were achieving their 
desired outcome, if some services were being duplicated, or if a 
program or service could be provided in a more efficient and 
effective way or by someone else or some other business or 
organization — all questions that over the next few years will 
be important to ensuring that we do the right job in the right 
way for the right reasons for all the people of Saskatchewan and 
with the right amount of funding. 
 
The transformational change will look at both sides of the 
ledger, revenues and expenses, and ask all those same important 
questions while working with our partners and stakeholders to 
find the answers. Going forward we need to have sustainable, 
positive outcomes. 
 
This government has made some tough decisions, Mr. Speaker, 



400 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2016 

but we never, never want to go back to the way it was under the 
NDP and risk becoming a have-not province again. I want a 
strong, positive, and sustainable future for my grandchildren, 
and that’s why I support this government’s 2016-17 budget put 
forth by our Finance minister and will not be supporting the 
opposition’s amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — Whoa. That supplied most of my own 
hear-hearing there, Mr. Speaker. But we’ll give it a whirl. 
 
It’s good to join the debate tonight, and certainly the budget is 
always one of the centrepieces of a government’s agenda, its 
intent in terms of meeting the needs and hopes and dreams of 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And there’s nothing quite like a budget after an election, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of where that situates the province and the 
party that was elected for government around the campaign that 
had just been undertaken, and then the way that the agenda is 
actually folding out and whether that does or does not meet up 
with the agenda that has been put forward by the government of 
the day when they go to the polls. 
 
It was with great interest, Mr. Speaker, that it wasn’t, I think . . . 
maybe not days, but certainly not more than weeks after the 
election in which the government members won quite handily, 
and certainly there’s no disputing that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But they won on a platform of keeping Saskatchewan strong. 
And there was a fairly sparse list of commitments that was 
proffered to the people of Saskatchewan. The spartan quality of 
it was heralded as a virtue by the Premier, Mr. Speaker. And 
you know, it’s fair enough. That’s what the people have decided 
best addressed their needs, best met their hopes and dreams. 
And so we had an election where 51 Sask Party MLAs were 
returned, 10 on the NDP official opposition side. 
 
And I guess the thing that’s interesting about the way that the 
campaign unrolled, Mr. Speaker, is that there are a number of 
things where they were entirely absent from the campaign. And 
if you subscribe to the old-fashioned notion that a campaign is a 
time when, you know, each party puts out their platform, they 
put out their plans, they put out their ideas, the people weigh 
them, say them, and make their decision as to what best meets 
their needs . . . you know, that’s usually how democracy goes. 
 
There are a lot of student groups that come through this 
Assembly, and that’s generally one of the things that we like to 
talk about with the students in terms of there’s a clash of ideas, 
or there are competing platforms that are put forward. People 
make an informed decision as to, you know, combining the 
record, judging the leadership qualities of each of the parties, 
and their platforms. 
 
And certainly I’ve been around here long enough, Mr. Speaker, 
where I can remember the 2007 election with the, you know, 
Ready for Growth theme that was put forward by the members 
opposite. And certainly there was a list of promises that 
attached to that campaign, and I can certainly recall the delight 

with which the Premier would talk about the way that it was a 
promise made and a promise kept. 
 
Now in terms of the campaign, Mr. Speaker, there are things 
that are done in terms of commission and there are things that 
are done in terms of omission. And in terms of things that were 
omitted from this campaign, Mr. Speaker, certainly 
transformational change was not part of the campaign 
discussion. 
 
There wasn’t a talk about, you know, we’re going to, you know, 
not weeks after the election we’re going to start talking about 
how yes, the deficit is bigger; yes, the shortfalls in terms of 
revenue are larger, and as a consequence we’re going to have to 
make some very tough decisions at this budget with worse to 
come. I don’t know what campaign that was part of, Mr. 
Speaker, but it certainly didn’t play on the doorsteps in Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre, and it certainly didn’t play in the different 
debates that I had the privilege of participating in, and it didn’t 
play in terms of the broader public discussion that was 
undertaken. It was very much about keep Saskatchewan strong, 
you know, steady hand on the tiller. 
 
The NDP put forward our platform in terms of ideas that we 
thought responded to the hopes and needs of the people of 
Saskatchewan as we understood them and as we had heard from 
the people of Saskatchewan. And again there were judgments 
made on the relative qualities of those platforms, and the Sask 
Party was returned with 51 seats compared to our 10. 
 
The problem with that, Mr. Speaker, is that in terms of the 
proposition that was put to the people of Saskatchewan upon 
which that majority has been built, is the fact that you’ve got 
transformational change coming forward. You’ve got a 
financial picture that is in much worse condition than was let on 
to in the campaign. And you’ve got a number of decisions that 
have been made in this budget — with more to come surely in 
budgets in the near future — that again I don’t think people can 
be faulted for looking at different decisions that have been made 
in this budget and different decisions that are foreshadowed in 
budgets to come by saying that, you know, when it came to the 
campaign, I didn’t vote for that. That was not part of the deal. 
And for the government to now say that everything is on the 
table, you know, that wasn’t part of the campaign discussion. 
 
In terms of transformational change where you have the 
Minister of Finance, the former minister of Advanced 
Education, talking about how maybe we could be merging 
different departments between our university, maybe we should 
be taking a run at the reserve funds at the University of 
Saskatchewan to cite, you know, two examples, Mr. Speaker, 
that wasn’t part of conversation. And I know that because I 
participated in a debate with the Minister of Advanced 
Education on campus at the University of Regina. 
 
And it would have been very interesting, had that been part of 
the conversation. Because in terms of the post-secondary 
education sector, what we hear time and again from the sector is 
that they want a partner that they can count on in terms of doing 
this very critical work of adding to the innovative nature of our 
economy, to making our economy more productive, to skilling 
up people in Saskatchewan to go on to the better jobs, and to 
make our economy go and make our society more profitable, 



June 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 401 

Mr. Speaker. So that wasn’t part of the campaign. 
 
But here we are now with this, you know . . . Transformational 
change is upon us and it’s been pushed out to the 
post-secondary sector. Will we have one big board for all of the 
regional colleges? How will that work for the Saskatchewan 
Polytechnic? How will it work for the offerings on 
Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies or Gabriel 
Dumont? There’s a fair amount of concern and question that’s 
out there in the sector, Mr. Speaker, again, against the backdrop 
of a financial situation that is worse than was let on, that is 
against the situation where different of these things have been 
looked at in the past, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know, we’re not here by accident in terms of way that 
the post-secondary education sector is deployed. But it would 
have been good to have had that discussion in the campaign, 
again, if you subscribe to the notion that you should be going to 
the people with your plans and, you know, be forward about 
your promises, which again was a virtue or was trumpeted as a 
virtue by earlier iterations of this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In terms of what happens around support for students, there was 
talk about the graduate retention program and enabling some of 
that to apply against mortgage. You know, fair enough. That 
was campaigned on. They’ve got a mandate for that. On they 
go. But in terms of the way that decisions that this government 
is going to be making on the other side of the coin, in terms of 
the cost of admission to the post-secondary education 
institutions, you can almost bet that, sure as the sun comes up in 
the east, that tuition is going to go up, that costs are going to go 
up for students, and that the institutions themselves are going to 
be forced into some kind of transformational change, what-do- 
you-want-to-dispense-with conversation. Again, not part of the 
campaign, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One thing that was part of the campaign was, I remember well, 
a nice ad from the Premier where he’s talking concernedly 
about his college roommate and, you know, this would have 
been about ’87 when that college roommate of his that had 
graduated, and where was he going to go? Well, he went to 
Alberta, Mr. Speaker. And certainly we’ve heard a lot in the 
talking points from members opposite about the gifts of luggage 
that are no longer bought for the grade 12 grads, and on and on, 
and it’s something to hear the recitation, Mr. Speaker. But 
repetition doesn’t lend itself to actual verification in this case. 
Because you’ve got the record which is in . . . I have many great 
constituents, and again I’ve talked about them at some length in 
the Throne Speech debate, Mr. Speaker, so we’re getting right 
to the meat of the matter here. But I turn to Trish Elliott who’s a 
journalism professor at the University of Regina, who’d written 
a great letter in to the Leader-Post October 9, 2015. And part of 
that is: 
 

Saskatchewan’s largest annual population loss occurred 
under a Progressive Conservative government — 19,928 
people leaving the province in 1989-1990. The largest loss 
over a five-year period was 1987 to 1992 — 69,721, with 
all but one of those years under the PCs, who were of 
course turfed in 1991. 

 
And again, Mr. Speaker, I raise that by way of . . . You know, 
you throw stones, you’d be here all day, Mr. Speaker, in terms 

of trying to correct the record in the way that these people have 
put forward talking points that don’t relate to the historical 
record. But that’s the record, Mr. Speaker. The worst population 
loss that this province ever encountered was under the then 
Progressive Conservative Grant Devine government. 
 
And the Premier, in terms of the campaign and this ad that was, 
my roommate’s going to leave to Alberta and, you know, never 
again. You know, what was the Premier’s response at that time, 
Mr. Speaker? It was to go work for the government that was 
presiding over that very greatest period of population loss in the 
history of Saskatchewan. And you know, that doesn’t track with 
the talking points over there, and it doesn’t track with the 
Premier’s ad in the way that the revisionist history that has been 
constructed by these members. But that’s the record, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In terms of, again, how this government came to the people of 
Saskatchewan, put forward, you know, keep Saskatchewan 
strong is the vision. And then after the election it was, oh by the 
way, we’re going to get into transformational change and, you 
know, we’ve got a bunch of cuts that we have to make and on. 
And, oh also, vision 2020, the overall debt of this province is 
going to go up to a level that it hasn’t been seen at since, yes, 
the bad old days of the Grant Devine government. 
 
[21:15] 
 
And I guess the interesting thing about that — and again, I’m 
talking about the budget speech — one of the things that was 
interesting to see with the budget speech, Mr. Speaker, was the 
appearance of Lorne Hepworth here at the budget to take a good 
hard look at his former employee and pupil, the now Minister of 
Finance, the member from Northeast here in Regina. And it was 
very interesting to see, Mr. Speaker. And apparently we’ve 
struck a nerve because apparently this is all part of the rolling 
out platform by which some day soon, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure 
we’re going to see Grant Devine himself come to this Assembly 
to preside and to look on fondly over the way that the forbearers 
have carried the project forward. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, these are folks that want to talk about 
decisions that were taken in the ’90s, in terms of the wrenching 
choices that had to be made because of what had happened to 
our population, what had happened to our economy, and what 
had happened to our society, Mr. Speaker. And in terms of the 
record overall, you don’t hear that in terms of the remarks from 
members opposite. You hear the talking point parade. 
 
To the contents of the budget itself, Mr. Speaker. You spend 
$14-plus billion — guess what? — some good things are going 
to happen in that. And certainly there are some things in 
particular that I am glad to see happening. I’m glad to see the 
increased dollars going to the Cancer Agency. I’m glad to see 
that vital infrastructure projects like the Scott Collegiate 
Mâmawêyatitân together now centre are going forward. I’m 
glad to see Sacred Heart proceeding, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to 
see that in terms of, you know . . . And there are some things 
that remain to be seen in terms of this budget. I’m glad to see 
that some of those vital projects that, you know, have been a 
long time coming, Mr. Speaker, and promised multiple times by 
the government opposite. I’m glad to see them arriving. 
 



402 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2016 

But again it’s balanced off against things like, you know, I think 
about the seniors that I talked to in the campaign who talked 
about the struggle they have with the cost of living and the way 
that again they didn’t talk about the increase to the copay for 
seniors’ drug plan in this campaign, but sure enough here it is 
on budget day. We didn’t see any action in terms of affordable 
housing for seniors, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have seen action on the plans to privatize the 40 liquor 
stores, and again that was something that was campaigned on, 
but what wasn’t campaigned on was taking the Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority out of the Crown protection Act 
altogether. 
 
In terms of deficit projections from the campaign to now — up. 
In terms of debt projections from the campaign to now — up. 
We didn’t hear about the SaskPower rate increase, the 
double-barrelled SaskPower rate increase, that again these 
members brought forward you know mere days, weeks after the 
campaign. 
 
We didn’t hear anything in the campaign about the tightening 
economic circumstances that again are having a devastating 
impact on our labour force. And there are some good things 
under the labour market section of the Ministry of the 
Economy’s budget, but there were also some things that have 
been flatlined and some things that have moved backwards, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And this is against a backdrop of a situation where we’ve lost 
9,400 jobs last April over this and where we’ll be . . . or last 
May over this. And we’ll be looking on with great interest to 
see what happens on the release of labour market statistics this 
coming Friday. But one thing about last month’s statistics, Mr. 
Speaker, is that fully one in four off-reserve First Nations 
people in the province of Saskatchewan are unemployed. That’s 
a disaster. That’s a disaster, and you don’t hear the government 
ringing the alarm in terms of the actions that they should be 
taking to address. 
 
In terms of crime, Mr. Speaker, in terms of what’s happening in 
our inner cities, the crime rate is going up. We see more gang 
activity than we have in the past. And in the face of that we see 
the community justice initiatives that play a very important role 
in taking those things on, we see them being cut back. We see 
no action on the mental health and poverty reduction strategies, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Not true.  
 
Mr. McCall: — Well in terms of full implementation or you 
know, actual moving of the strategies forward, you know it’s 
. . . Okay. To correct myself, Mr. Speaker, you see paltry action 
in terms of the way that this government has moved forward on 
that. 
 
In terms of foster care, Mr. Speaker, and again I know this from 
folks that I have the privilege of representing, we don’t see the 
kind of action that should be part of the situation, in a situation 
where foster families are leaving the system in alarming 
numbers, Mr. Speaker, and have been for the past number of 
years. 
 

In terms of the bypass that doesn’t bypass the city of Regina, 
you know, on that project goes, and the money keeps getting 
shovelled into that. And you know, the point is not about . . . 
you know, there’s been some interesting things said about the 
Saskatchewan jobs that are part of it, Mr. Speaker, and I guess 
that’s the point. That’s the point, Mr. Speaker. The point is 
we’ve got Saskatchewan companies and workers that can do 
that work here. And how we have to fold that into a P3 
[public-private partnership] where we send the money to 
France, Mr. Speaker, instead of making sure that that benefit is 
maximized for the people of Saskatchewan, you know, 
surpasses understanding. 
 
And we’ll see what the big photo op is tomorrow with the 
minister. Maybe she’ll wear a hard hat. Maybe she’ll get behind 
the wheel or something. We’ll see how that goes. But one 
thing’s for sure, Mr. Speaker, they won’t be doing the photo op 
where they fill the dump truck full of money and then drive it 
out of the province headed for France. 
 
In terms of the different critic responsibilities that I’ve been 
tasked with, Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. I have the privilege of 
being the critic for SaskTel. And again even there, Mr. Speaker, 
where something that should be a fairly reasonable proposition 
in terms of evaluating the changing landscape in terms of the 
Bell Canada’s purchase of MTS [Manitoba Telephone System], 
the response after the election from the minister is to say, we’re 
going to respect the Crown protection Act. And what happens 
then when it gets in the hands of the Premier it’s, well you 
know, maybe we’ll have a referendum or something like that, 
something that bears a lot more resemblance to the Sask Party 
circa 2002 or the Progressive Conservatives in 1998, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In terms of parks and culture and sport again, Mr. Speaker, 
there are some great things going on throughout the province. 
This weekend, Mr. Speaker, for example on the amateur sports 
side, Water Polo Canada is going to be meeting in Regina, and 
part of that is going to be celebrating the success of the Armada 
women having won yet another national championship, Mr. 
Speaker, and two other Armada teams having finished second, 
achieving silver. Their home pool, of course, is the Lawson 
Aquatic Centre in Regina Elphinstone-Centre. We’re very 
proud of the work that they do and the accomplishment they 
achieve. 
 
And you telescope out from that in terms of the way that 
amateur sports and sport in general, you know, certainly the 
province was very excited about the last-minute victory of the 
Rush in Saskatoon and the way that the exciting sport of 
lacrosse has been brought . . . And there are a great number of 
examples that can be brought to bear, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In terms of culture, again I’m glad to see that at least they 
haven’t cut the budgets for Creative Saskatchewan or for the 
Saskatchewan Arts Board. But again, flatline is one way to 
characterize it, Mr. Speaker, versus the way that we heard from 
the minister earlier. 
 
And I guess the one thing that’s of particular interest, Mr. 
Speaker, is the way that that minister came forward to talk 
about the cuts to urban parks. And again, Mr. Speaker, in terms 
of, you know, the member from Stonebridge earlier was quoting 



June 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 403 

Huey Lewis and the News. It sort of makes me think of the Hall 
and Oates song in terms of “I Can’t Go For That,” except it’s 
more like, I didn’t vote for that. 
 
And when it comes to the five urban parks, Mr. Speaker, in 
terms of the way that that . . . You’ve got Wakamow in Moose 
Jaw. You’ve got Chinook Parkway in Swift Current. You’ve 
got Pehonan in P.A. You’ve got River Valley in the Battlefords. 
You’ve got Tatagwa in Weyburn. And you know what, Mr. 
Speaker? People didn’t hear about that in the election. And the 
president of the association for those parks, councillor Nancy 
Styles, someone from Weyburn who the minister’s obviously 
familiar with, said that she would have liked to have heard 
about that before the election. And you know, again, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of the message of keep Saskatchewan strong 
in the campaign, and then when it comes to governing, 
something else entirely.  
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it would have been good if they had 
campaigned in all those communities as, you know, how that 
was going to be something that should be undertaken. It would 
have been great to see how that played in P.A. [Prince Albert], 
Mr. Speaker. It would have been very interesting in the 
Battlefords, in Weyburn, and Swift Current. 
 
And it certainly would have been interesting to see how that 
played in Moose Jaw Wakamow, Mr. Speaker. In Moose Jaw 
Wakamow, where yesterday in the budget speech debate, Mr. 
Speaker, you didn’t hear a darn thing about that from the 
member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. Not a thing. Not a thing 
from that member. And I guess it’s surprising on a number of 
levels, Mr. Speaker, but that’s what that constituency is named 
after, Mr. Speaker. You’d think that that would have rated a 
mention or some kind of attempt at explanation. But not so, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In terms of what’s going to come in the days ahead around 
Wascana Centre and Meewasin, again we’ll be watching with a 
dedicated degree of interest. And again, if they want to do away 
with the provincial support for these programs, they should 
have the decency to do it during campaign time. They shouldn’t 
come along mere days and weeks later with the cuts, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
You know, I’d like to see them come forward in terms of, I 
know how important the Wascana Centre Authority is to here, 
is to the city of Regina. It would have been interesting to see if 
the member from Coronation Park, the minister responsible for 
the cuts to the urban parks, if he’d have been as laissez-faire, if 
he’d been as blasé about it in terms of the campaign as he was 
on budget day where he was like, well you know, tough 
decisions had to be made. It would have been good to see how 
the people weighed that proposition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In terms of the other responsibilities that I’ve been entrusted 
with, Mr. Speaker, there’s not enough time in this particular 
debate to go on in terms of the ways that I would like to, but 
certainly we’ll be getting to some of these things in estimates. 
But we’ll be interested to see how the Public Service 
Commission is impacted by transformational change, having 
been hit with a 15 per cent reduction in years previous by these 
members, again something that wasn’t campaigned on. 
 

We’ll be interested to see how that impacts Central Services, 
Mr. Speaker, where today in one of the members opposite’s 
speeches, the member from Stonebridge, I believe she was 
talking about how they’d like to see less being spent on 
consultants and on contracting out. I could hardly believe my 
ears, Mr. Speaker, but you know, I think that’s a great idea. I 
think we’ve heard that idea from the Provincial Auditor, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of the way that Central Services does their 
work. So we’ll see if that works its way into the 
transformational change file. 
 
In terms of the Sask resource council, Tourism Saskatchewan, 
Innovation Saskatchewan, these are vital institutions that are 
doing important work, and we look forward to seeing how the 
flat line that has been given to them, in most cases, how that 
works out. 
 
Just one last thing on advanced education, Mr. Speaker, in 
terms of, you know, what are the plans of this government as 
regards our university campuses, as regards the capital needs of 
those institutions. How is that going to play out? And we’ll see 
again the institutions doing the best to make their projects go 
forward. But as related to the academic health sciences centre, 
Mr. Speaker, that again, this was put off by the government. 
You know, it would have been good to know that during the 
campaign. 
 
[21:30] 
 
It would have been good to know that on the employment front, 
Mr. Speaker, that the deal that was offered up for 
SkipTheDishes would be there for other segments of the 
economy, Mr. Speaker, or even other segments of the 
information technology sector. Or even that, you know, having 
made a decision like that, the error of the ways around the 
approach taken to the film industry would have been realized, 
Mr. Speaker, and the way that at the time the Premier was 
decrying picking winners and losers. And you know, the 
arguments ran pretty thick and fast at that time, Mr. Speaker, 
but you didn’t hear that around the $3 million put up for 
SkipTheDishes. You heard, you know, keep it moving and, by 
the way, there will be nothing like this for anyone else in the 
budget to come. 
 
In terms of First Nations and Métis relations, again, Mr. 
Speaker, to close off here, we have a huge moment of 
opportunity in front of us as a province. In the wake of the final 
report and 94 calls to action from the Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission, this should be a moment of opportunity for the 
province to really go forward, to come together with indigenous 
people in the province of Saskatchewan and say that we’ve got 
to do better for all the people of Saskatchewan going forward, 
that the province of Saskatchewan has a role to play in terms of 
many of those calls to action. So let us sit down together and 
put together that plan of implementation so that reconciliation 
does not pass us by, that this moment of opportunity doesn’t go 
to waste and with it the waste in human potential and the 
success of the province along with it. But you didn’t hear about 
that in the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. You didn’t hear about 
it in the budget. And again it’s a waste of opportunity that we 
only fail ourselves in terms of not taking that action, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 



404 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2016 

With that, Mr. Speaker, I’ve spoken long enough. Certainly I’ll 
have more questions as these different budgets move into 
estimates. But for those and many other reasons, I’ll be 
supporting the amendment and I will not be supporting the 
budget. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Well thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, before I begin my budget speech, I’d like to make a 
couple of thank yous, if I could. Thank you to my new 
constituency assistant, Maddy Fast. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Yes, hear, hear. She helped me prepare this 
reply that you’re going to hear from today, and I think it’s 
pretty good. So I wanted to make sure that I got a thank you in 
to her. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on April 4th, residents of Saskatchewan had a 
choice. We could continue to be a have province with a sound 
record of financial management, AAA credit rating, job growth, 
reduced surgical wait times, and seniors’ support, just to name a 
few. Or we could go back to being a have-not province under 
the NDP, relying on federal equalization payments to fund 
provincial government services, increasing taxes, killing jobs, 
and scaring our population away. Twenty-one times, Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP raised taxes during their 16 years in 
government. And, Mr. Speaker, can you believe the NDP 
government lost nearly 300 million taxpayers’ dollars in failed 
business ventures, many of which weren’t even in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on with reasons why the people 
of Saskatchewan voted with a resounding yes for our leadership 
just a short two months ago. On April 4th, Saskatchewan spoke, 
Mr. Speaker. And what they told us is that our party is the party 
they trust to keep taxes low and the economy steady during the 
slower times. 
 
According to a recent Conference Board of Canada report, 
Saskatchewan has among the lowest personal and business tax 
burdens in Canada. Mr. Speaker, they spoke loud and clear, and 
we are indeed humbled by their trust. You see, Mr. Speaker, the 
residents of Saskatoon University, and all of Saskatchewan, 
chose to keep Saskatchewan strong. 
 
This budget is fiscally responsible. We are keeping taxes low, 
controlling operational spending while continuing to make 
important investments in infrastructure and in important 
government services for the Saskatchewan people. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, people from other provinces and countries 
are seeing our success and saying, I want to live there. And 
guess what? They are. In fact, Mr. Speaker, since our party was 
elected in 2007, Saskatchewan has grown by over 132,000 
people. Saskatchewan is indeed the place to raise your family, 
work, and retire. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my address in reply to the Speech from the 
Throne, I had stated how most residents of Saskatchewan in 

their lifetime use medical services one way or the other. My 
family is no exception. My niece Anna has some extreme health 
difficulties and has been in and out of hospitals in her short 
seven years of life. Health care is something that is extremely 
important to the people of this province. We need to have 
excellent care for our citizens in order to provide the quality of 
life we all expect and we all deserve. Sadly this hasn’t always 
been the case in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is our government that stands up for those who are in most 
need in our province. While the NDP talked, we acted. The 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency is receiving more than $167 
million in funding in this budget, up 9.8 million from last year 
or 6.2 per cent. The substantial increase in funding will help pay 
for the addition of 15 new cancer drugs that were approved last 
year. Since 2007, funding for the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency 
has increased by nearly 113 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the health budget includes $500,000 to fulfill the 
government’s campaign commitment to expand its robotic 
telemedicine to more northern communities. This project allows 
health care professionals to connect with patients remotely and 
provide real-time assessment, diagnosis, and patient 
management. 
 
The budget is also reducing RHA [regional health authority] 
administration expenses by 7.5 million and reinvesting that 
funding to front-line staff in our long-term care homes. This 
equals a 5 per cent reduction in general administration costs to 
be determined as part of the RHA budget finalization in the 
coming months. 
 
Capital investments total 71.4 million in 2016-17 including a 25 
per cent increase for capital maintenance across the province. 
Capital funding is also being provided for a power plant 
upgrade at Saskatoon RUH, Saskatoon Royal University 
Hospital, electrical renewal projects at Regina’s General and 
Pasqua hospitals, and completion of construction at the 
Kelvington integrated care facility. Mr. Speaker, we all know 
that these projects would not have flourished, let alone have 
gotten off the ground, under the leadership of the NDP. In fact 
the NDP government closed 52 hospitals under their so-called 
leadership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my constituency, the University of 
Saskatchewan will be receiving strong investment from budget 
2016-17. Mr. Speaker, our government is investing $475 
million for the University of Saskatchewan and Regina and 
their affiliated and federated colleges. 
 
The word investment appears 85 times in our budget. Mr. 
Speaker, the verb “invest” by definition is, and I quote, “to put 
to use by purchase or expenditures in something offering 
profitable returns as interest, income, or appreciation in value.” 
And that is exactly what this government believes in. 
 
Our young people are going to be aided through more than $53 
million in direct support: thirty-two and a half million for the 
Student Aid Fund to provide student grants, bursaries, and 
loans; 14.3 million for scholarships including the Saskatchewan 
Advantage Scholarship; and 6.5 million for the Saskatchewan 
advantage grant for education savings.  
 



June 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 405 

Mr. Speaker, this government is investing in our young people, 
unlike the NDP days where tuition costs increased by 175 per 
cent when government had no program for reducing 
Saskatchewan students’ tuition. Mr. Speaker, the only 
investment the residents of Saskatchewan could have been 
confident in during the NDP days were shares in luggage 
manufacturing companies. 
 
I’m excited for new first home plan that gives eligible graduates 
the ability to use up to $10,000 of their future graduate retention 
program tax credits as an interest-free loan to use toward the 
down payment on their first home in our province. There’s 
never been a better time to graduate and to stay in 
Saskatchewan. Last week I attended two of seven convocations 
at the University of Saskatchewan and I can tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, we want them to stay here and we want them to be 
successful here, and we are making that happen. 
 
Included in budget 2016-17, Mr. Speaker, are operating grants 
to the province’s two main universities that eclipse $475 
million. 156 million will be provided to the Sask Polytechnic, 
SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies], and 
Gabriel Dumont Institute. 25 million will be provided for 
Saskatchewan’s regional colleges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government remains committed to student 
success, post-secondary, high school, and elementary. That is 
why we are increasing our investment in education by 7.8 per 
cent to a total $2.2 billion. While the NDP shut down schools, 
176 to be exact, Mr. Speaker, our government has invested in 
40 brand new or replacement schools and 25 major school 
renovations. 
 
On this side of the floor, we are ensuring students in 
Saskatchewan are safe and successful in their learning years. 
This could not be done without the strong leadership and 
guidance of our teachers. Mr. Speaker, I come from a family of 
teachers and I can tell you right now, there is no group of more 
dedicated, selfless, and empathetic people who only want the 
best for our children and grandchildren. They are tireless and 
will advocate for their students until their needs are met. And 
this government will be there with them, helping to ensure 
another generation of young people stay here and help keep 
Saskatchewan strong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, from 2000 to 2007 under the NDP, the number of 
teachers teaching here in Saskatchewan schools declined by 
400. Thankfully my mother was not one of them. Our 
government is funding more teachers and student support 
teachers than ever before. It is our government that has the 
record of standing up for our teachers and our educational 
system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government’s investment in infrastructure for 
our Education ministry includes 310 million, an increase of 153 
million for the 18 joint-use schools being built on nine sites; 
$33.4 million, an increase of 6.4 million or 24 per cent for 
preventative maintenance and renewal; $4.6 million for 
emergency building repairs; $41.9 million for ongoing capital 
projects including schools in St. Brieux, Langenburg, 
Gravelbourg, and Martensville; as well as $1 million for school 
facility assessments. 
 

The government remains committed to supporting early 
childhood, early education, and child care across the province, 
including the creation of 810 new child care spaces that are 
being developed as part of the 18 new elementary schools 
currently under construction on nine joint-use sites in 
Saskatoon, Regina, Warman, and Martensville. 
 
In order to meet the needs of a growing and diverse province, 
the ministry’s 2016-17 budget increases funding for classroom 
supports by $4 million. Government is providing 288 million to 
school divisions for supports for learning funding in the 
2016-17 school year. This funding includes supports for 
students with intensive needs, students in vulnerable 
circumstances, and students who require English as an 
additional language support. In addition, $5.4 million of school 
operating funding is being targeted to support Syrian refugee 
students. 
 
Funding for youth at high-risk facilities is also increasing by 
$600,000 over last year to help address salary and enrolment 
pressures for a total investment of 5.8 million. Mr. Speaker, in 
Saskatoon we appreciate these new investments into our 
community and into our future. We are hopeful that they will 
continue to grow and that we will need many more joint-use 
schools very soon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the first time in Saskatchewan’s history, the 
highways and infrastructure budget tops $1 billion. This marks 
another record investment in provincial roads and 
infrastructure. The $1.15 billion 2016-17 highways and 
infrastructure budget includes $355 million for capital 
construction, 30 million in new funding for the first year of the 
highways 2020 plan, a three-year $70 million surge in highway 
repair and maintenance, and $500 million for the Regina 
bypass. More than 1300 kilometres of provincial highways will 
see repairs or upgrades this year. Work will also continue on 
major projects like the Regina bypass and twinning of Highway 
7 and 16 near Saskatoon. 
 
[21:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has always believed in the true 
Saskatchewan way — helping your neighbour. These 
neighbours that require our help sometimes are children, youth, 
and families, people with disabilities, and people needing 
income assistance and housing. Our government has been a 
trailblazer in investing in our people when they need it the 
most. 
 
Social Services 2016-17 budget is $1.052 billion dollars, a 5.1 
increase from last fiscal year. This is good news for people of 
Saskatchewan who are needing a helping hand. Mr. Speaker, 
people in Saskatchewan with disabilities will see $210 million 
dedicated to the Saskatchewan assured income for disability 
program to help make life better. 
 
The 2016-17 budget also includes $3.8 million for housing 
programs. The Saskatchewan Housing Corporation will support 
the disability strategy, poverty reduction strategy, and mental 
health and addictions policy action plan by focusing on 
accessible, affordable housing for those most in need. It’s hard 
to believe that under the NDP, people with disabilities had no 
income assistance program. Mr. Speaker, our government isn’t 



406 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2016 

going to let that happen again. 
 
In my constituency of Saskatoon University, there is the 
Sherbrooke Community Centre. This care home has been open 
since 1966. There are 263 residents, 100 community day 
program participants, 500 volunteers, family, friends, students, 
pets, and over 500 staff members. This community centre has 
been an innovator to long-term care. They have implemented 
many unique programs and services which is indeed keeping its 
residents happy, healthy, and involved in their community. Mr. 
Speaker, it is unfortunate to think that a facility like this would 
have been affected by the NDP’s freeze on the seniors’ income 
plan and their attempt to raise monthly fees for seniors in 
long-term care to 90 per cent of the seniors’ income. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seniors under our leadership have seen the SIP 
[seniors’ income plan] program tripled to $270 per month and 
have been introduced to a new personal care home benefit 
which helps provide low-income seniors over $4,600 per year 
on average to assist with the cost of living in a care home. This 
budget is reducing the regional health authorities’ 
administrations by $7.5 million and reinvesting that funding to 
front-line staff in long-term care homes. These are direct dollars 
facilities like Sherbrooke will see and be able to utilize to 
improve the lives of the people they serve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year my mayor, Mayor Don Atchison, said, 
and I quote: “I don’t know how much more the city of 
Saskatoon could actually ask for.” Mr. Speaker, when the 
mayor of the biggest city in our province can say those words 
about our government’s budget, you know you have the right 
government getting the job done. Our government recognizes 
the need for infrastructure dollars. Budget 2016-17 provides 
more than $3.5 billion for infrastructure, the largest single-year 
capital investment in the province’s history. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my city, Saskatoon, will receive more than 
forty-eight and a half million dollars in municipal revenue 
sharing this year. Mr. Speaker, due to complete in 2018, the 
north commuter parkway bridge project in Saskatoon will 
support the transportation needs of citizens in the northeast and 
the north industrial areas. Budget 2016-17 provides $10 million 
towards this important project. This investment will provide 
significant benefits to the citizens of Saskatoon and in fact our 
whole province. Once completed, this bridge will be providing 
critical commuter connections in key areas of the city, 
addressing traffic congestion, reducing intersection delays, 
shortening travel times, and reducing greenhouse gas emissions. 
Mr. Speaker, traffic volume is expected to be up to 21,700 
vehicles per day when this bridge opens. This will result in a 9 
per cent reduction in existing traffic using the Circle Drive 
North bridge and additional reductions in traffic across the 
city’s other bridges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was tough times under the NDP government. In 
over 16 years of governance they only managed to invest just 
$5 billion in infrastructure projects. They cut revenue sharing to 
municipalities several times and failed to implement a stable, 
predictable formula for municipal revenue sharing. 
 
Since we have formed government, Mr. Speaker, citizens in this 
province have seen infrastructures go up. Our highways, 
schools, and hospitals have benefited from much-needed 

infrastructure dollars. This year the provincial government’s 
revenue sharing with municipalities will approach $272 million, 
up 6.4 million from last year, and an increase of 144 million or 
more than 113 per cent since 2007. 
 
Our party introduced a formula that ties the municipal revenue 
sharing to the province’s economic growth by providing one 
point of the provincial sales tax to our municipalities. Mr. 
Speaker, as the Regina Leader-Post writes: 
 

Municipal officials agreed that, as Mayor Michael Fougere 
put it, cities came out “unscathed” and could even look on 
the budget positively “given the environment.” 
 
Communities, both urban and rural, will see record revenue 
sharing and hiked funding for municipal infrastructure.  

 
Mr. Speaker, revenue sharing plays an important role in helping 
our municipalities meet the needs of people in cities, towns, and 
villages, and also in rural Saskatchewan. Urban revenue sharing 
for all cities, towns, villages, and resort villages will amount to 
almost $175 million in 2016-17. Revenue sharing from rural 
municipalities which includes organized hamlets will total 76.7 
million, and northern municipalities will receive just under 
$20.3 million this fiscal year. 
 
This budget also provides $83.8 million in provincial support to 
municipal infrastructure through various programs: 21.4 million 
from the Ministry of Government Relations for provincial 
support under the new Building Canada Fund, 23.7 million 
from the Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure for rural 
roads through the municipal road strategy and the urban 
connector program. The budget also provides $50.8 million in 
other funding to municipalities from ministries including grants 
for such services and facilities as libraries, policing, urban 
parks, and transit assistance. 
 
Investments in university facilities, regional colleges, and 
training facilities will help keep Saskatchewan strong today and 
into the future. In 2016-17, $25.8 million is targeted for capital 
in the area of advanced education and training, with an 
estimated $170 million provided to the sector over the next four 
years. This is good news for Saskatchewan university 
constituents. 
 
The Saskatoon Regional Economic Development Authority 
says: 
 

SREDA welcomes the approach taken in 2016-17 budget 
to keep the Saskatchewan economy strong during this 
period of economic transformation. [The] Continued 
investment in infrastructure, training, and agriculture bode 
well for the Saskatoon Region economy, as does the focus 
on keeping taxes low and controlling operational spending. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this budget contains no tax increases. In fact since 
2007, the Saskatchewan Party has provided nearly $6 billion in 
tax reductions to family, individuals, homeowners, businesses, 
and farmers. We now enjoy, right here in Saskatchewan, one of 
the lowest personal and business tax burdens in Canada 
according to the Conference Board of Canada. I have to say it 
again, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP raised taxes 21 times in their 
last 16 years in government. 



June 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 407 

An Hon. Member: — How many? 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Twenty-one times, which is kind of hard to 
do, Mr. Speaker, as there is only one budget per year. 
 
Our record, on the other hand, is that we have delivered record 
property tax reductions and record income tax reductions. A 
family of four now, Mr. Speaker, with a combined income of 
$50,000 has seen their income tax reduced by 100 per cent. 
They will pay no provincial income tax in 2016. The 
Saskatchewan Party has reduced taxes for Saskatchewan people 
at every income level and eliminated the PST on used cars. 
 
Under the NDP, from 2000 to 2007, Saskatchewan had the 
worst economic growth rate in Canada averaging just 1.7 per 
cent per year, well below the national average of 2.5 per cent. 
From 2008 to 2015 with the Saskatchewan Party in 
government, Saskatchewan has had the best economic growth 
rate in Canada averaging 2.5 per cent per year, well above the 
national average of 1.6 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as an example of what the municipal revenue 
sharing money is used for in Saskatoon, in the 2015 business 
plan and budget, the city received $47.4 million from the 
municipal revenue sharing. In a general sense, the city allocated 
this money to various business lines to help them deliver 
programs and services that (a) increase public safety, (b) 
improve mobility of vehicles and people, and (c) enhance the 
city’s overall quality of life. 
 
The city of Saskatoon allocated the municipal revenue sharing 
fund — their share — as follows: police received 11.4 million; 
transportation, 10.4 million; fire, 7.1 million; recreation and 
parks, 5.7 million; transit received $4.7 million, Mr. Speaker. 
Waste reduction was almost $2 million, Mr. Speaker, and other 
important initiatives took $3.8 million. This funding is very 
important to the city of Saskatoon and the people it serves. 
Without it the city of Saskatoon’s clients and citizens wouldn’t 
get the level of service that they get today. That money’s very 
important, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under the NDP government from 1991-2007, 
56,000 more people moved out of Saskatchewan than moved in 
and Saskatchewan’s population stayed flat at around just 
1 million people. Since the Sask Party was elected in 2007, over 
85,000 more people have moved to Saskatchewan than moved 
out. And Saskatchewan’s population has grown by over 
132,000 people to an all-time high of over 100 . . . sorry, 1.142 
million people. You have to ask yourself why, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
because of opportunity, prosperity, and optimism. That’s why 
people come here and that’s why people are staying. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to support budget 2016-17. 
Saskatchewan families, seniors, and students will be better off 
under another term of our government. A fragile global 
economy coupled with sharp declines in oil and potash prices 
present considerable challenges to our province’s economy, its 
finances, and its people. We are continuing to keep taxes low, 
ensure sustainability of core services, and keep Saskatchewan 
strong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I support the 2016-17 budget moved by the 
Minister of Finance and seconded by the member from Regina 

University, with no amendments. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to give a reply to the budget released on June 1st, a 
budget that I think is very good for Saskatchewan, and one that 
will keep us focused on keeping Saskatchewan strong. 
 
This budget put forth by the Minister of Finance will keep 
Saskatchewan strong by investing in people, investing in 
infrastructure, and with transformational change. We will invest 
in health care, education, and social services, which accounts 
for a large portion of the provincial expenses. This budget 
provides increases to health care, notably to reduce wait times 
for surgery and diagnostic services. Mr. Speaker, a record 5.17 
billion will be invested in health care infrastructure, improving 
access to care. The 2016-17 health budget includes an increase 
of 57.4 million, or 1.1 per cent, over the 2015-16 budget. 
Incredibly, that is an increase of over 50 per cent since 2007. 
Mr. Speaker, a special commissioner will also be appointed to 
recommend options for fewer health regions and more efficient 
and effective delivery of health care services. The name of the 
commissioner will be announced in the coming days. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency is receiving 
more than $167 million in this budget, up 9.8 million from last 
year. This substantial increase in funding will help pay for the 
additional 15 cancer drugs that were approved last year. Not 
that long ago, Mr. Speaker, under the NDP government, we had 
the longest wait times in Canada. Now Saskatchewan has some 
of the shortest wait times in Canada, Mr. Speaker. Although 
wait times have crept up a bit recently, this government remains 
committed to wait times and will invest another 20 million to 
make sure that those wait times are kept short. 
 
[22:00] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this government continues to put students 
first by investing in pre-K to grade 12 schools and classrooms 
across this province. This government has put student success 
and safety at the top of its priority list by increasing its overall 
investment in education by 7.8 per cent to a total of $2.2 billion. 
This includes 391.4 million for capital investments. This 
government’s investment in infrastructure includes 310.5 
million for the 18 joint-use schools built on nine sites, 33.4 
million for preventive maintenance and renewal, 4.6 million for 
emergency repairs, and 41.9 million for ongoing capital projects 
including St. Brieux, Langenburg, Gravelbourg, Martensville, 
as well as École Connaught, Sacred Heart, and the new 
Mâmawêyatitân Centre replacing Scott Collegiate in Regina, 
and also 1 million for school facility assessments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government remains committed to supporting 
early education and child care across this province, including 
the creation of 810 new child care spaces that are being 
developed as part of the new 18 elementary schools currently 
under construction on nine joint-use sites in Saskatoon, Regina, 
Martensville, and Warman. Mr. Speaker, one of those 
investments is in my constituency of Saskatoon Westview. The 
new joint-use school being built in Hampton Village shows this 
government’s commitment to education in Saskatoon 



408 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2016 

Westview. Mr. Speaker, I should also point out that this 
important school investment was voted against by their 
previous leader and that, under the NDP, they closed 176 
schools. Mr. Speaker, by investing in post-secondary education 
and skills training, this government remains committed to 
building a solid foundation for Saskatchewan’s future. This 
budget also continues to support early education and child care 
across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government continues its unwavering support 
of the province’s most vulnerable through programs and 
services for people experiencing disability and people who need 
income assistance and housing, overall supporting children, 
youth, seniors, and families. Mr. Speaker, this government 
continues its significant commitment to municipalities through 
revenue sharing. And as a previous mayor of a growing 
community, I can assure you that this is an important 
investment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2016-17 budget includes the largest 
single-year capital investment in infrastructure in Saskatchewan 
history with an investment of $3.5 billion. Nearly 1.8 billion 
will be invested by Saskatchewan’s Crown corporations and 
more than 1.7 billion invested in ministries and agencies this 
fiscal year. Mr. Speaker, this budget provides significant 
investment into highways and transportation infrastructure and 
is the largest capital spend in Saskatchewan history for K to 12 
schools and education capital, for strong commitments to our 
health care infrastructure. Mr. Speaker, this government 
remains committed to new capital investment and maintaining 
existing infrastructure in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan vision is to be the best place in 
Canada to live, to work, to start a business, to raise a family, 
and to build a life. Mr. Speaker, I think this budget keeps us 
focused on that vision despite being in a fragile global economy 
coupled with sharp declines in oil and potash prices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, budget 2016-17 reaffirms our commitment to 
building on a solid foundation today and into the future with a 
responsible budget that will keep taxes low by controlling 
government operational spending and continuing to invest in 
infrastructure and government services for Saskatchewan 
people, with a plan to get back to balance. Mr. Speaker, this 
government has a sound fiscal track record of management over 
the past nine years with prudent spending, paying down debt, 
and keeping its GDP ratio among the lowest in Canada. These 
globally uncertain economic times, coupled with low 
commodity prices, give us opportunities to make positive 
changes to keep Saskatchewan strong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a record 1.14 million people now call 
Saskatchewan home. And also a record number of people were 
employed in the province in 2015, and our unemployment rate 
is among the lowest in Canada. Mr. Speaker, this government’s 
pursuit of balance is similar to its pursuit of growth. However, 
the pursuit of growth is not for its own sake. As our Premier has 
said, the purpose of growth is to secure a better way of life for 
all Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget plan is with an eye to getting us back 
to balance and is sought to ensure the sustainability of the 
programs and services Saskatchewan people value and need 

today and into the future. Mr. Speaker, this year marks the 
beginning of the government-wide exercise of transformational 
change to ensure the sustainability of high-quality public 
services delivered in the most effective way possible. Mr. 
Speaker, we need to ensure that our services are viable now and 
into the future, especially in light of much lower resources 
revenues. Mr. Speaker, transformational change can be complex 
and require time to successfully implement. Government will 
need all of its partners across all sectors to work constructively 
together as changes are made to keep Saskatchewan strong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the questions we will be asking are: is 
this something government should be doing? Is this program or 
service the responsibility of government, and if so, Mr. Speaker, 
is it being delivered in the best possible manner and at the 
lowest cost possible to taxpayers? Are there a number of similar 
programs with similar objectives, and if so, can they be 
combined into one program that provides better results with 
lower cost? Could a different governance model provide 
administrative savings while still remaining responsive to 
Saskatchewan people? Mr. Speaker, by answering these 
questions and more, government programs and services will 
remain sustainable and keep Saskatchewan strong and make 
sure we are the best place to live, to work, to start a business, to 
get an education, to raise a family, and to build a life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget will keep Saskatchewan strong by not 
increasing taxes. And there will be no new taxes. During these 
times, Mr. Speaker, of an uncertain global economy and low 
commodity prices, it is important to not raise taxes. I think it is 
also important to remind people as well that during the NDP’s 
last time in government they raised taxes 21 times in 16 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 2008, tax reductions have saved taxpayers 
$5.9 billion, and Saskatchewan has among the lowest personal 
and business tax burdens in Canada according to The 
Conference Board of Canada’s report which was released in 
April 2016. Mr. Speaker, a family of four with $100,000 in 
combined income will see a savings of $2,519 in provincial tax 
in 2016 compared to 2007. And that money will be much more 
effectively spent when taxpayers are left with it in their own 
pockets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just as government will consider transformational 
change and how it delivers services and programs to ensure 
sustainability at the lowest cost, government also needs to 
consider its sources of revenue. Is the revenue sustainable and 
adequate to fund services Saskatchewan people value? Could 
they be simplified? Is dependence on volatile revenue from 
natural resources too high? Mr. Speaker, if we are to embrace 
transformational change, we need to ask the important questions 
on revenue and spending. This is the balance Saskatchewan 
sees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government’s decision was to keep mill rates 
for education property taxes constant this year. Since education 
property tax reform in 2009, mill rates have only been lowered 
and have not been adjusted for inflation, while enrolments, 
teachers’ salaries, and operating costs have increased. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is helping post-secondary 
graduates afford a home and stay in Saskatchewan by 
introducing the graduate retention program first home plan. 



June 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 409 

This is the most aggressive youth retention program in Canada, 
providing personal income tax credits to rebate up to 20,000 in 
tuition fees to post-secondary students. Since its creation, about 
58,000 post-secondary grads have received nearly 200 million 
in tuition rebates. Mr. Speaker, this first home plan gives 
eligible graduates the ability to use up to $10,000 of their future 
graduate retention program tax credit as an interest-free loan to 
use towards their down payment on their first home in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, investing in infrastructure builds Saskatchewan’s 
strength and will show us a return now and in the future as it 
builds a structural network to help Saskatchewan’s economy 
grow. This important capital investment will keep 
Saskatchewan strong by supporting construction jobs while 
other sectors are feeling the downturn. These investments 
improve safety on our roads and expands and improves our 
transportation system which is vitally important to 
Saskatchewan’s export-driven province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the 2016-17 budget highlights is 875.7 
million invested in transportation infrastructure to keep 
Saskatchewan’s economy moving forward. This is an increase 
of 294.7 million or 50.7 per cent from last year’s budget. The 
Saskatchewan Builds capital plan outlines 3.1 billion in capital 
through the Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure over the 
next four years. The highways 2020 plan outlines a three-year 
$70 million surge to fix more highways. There is 30 million 
being invested in preservation and rehabilitation to meet the 
first year of the commitment, a 20 per cent increase over 
2015-16. There is also 20 million committed for each of the 
next two years. Mr. Speaker, work also continues on the Regina 
bypass that is scheduled to be complete by October 2019 and 
will greatly improve safety and improve the efficient movement 
of people and goods in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these investments in infrastructure will create 
better learning places for children attending elementary, 
secondary schools, and post-secondary institutions. These 
important capital investments will also help in the delivery of 
quality health care and long-term care by building hospitals and 
facilities suited for these needs. The Saskatchewan Builds 
capital plan will build and maintain needed infrastructure like 
schools, health care facilities, municipal infrastructure, roads, 
bridges, and highways. This government’s investment in core 
infrastructure is nearly 9.6 billion since 2008-2009 and it’s 
more than 1 billion per year on average. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget includes funding for highway twinning 
and passing lane projects on Highways 5, 6, 7, 16, and 39, as 
well as investments in interchanges in Martensville and 
Warman. Mr. Speaker, there is 10 million in the 2016-17 budget 
for the first year of the province’s commitment to the north 
commuter parkway bridge. It is part of a three-year, $50 million 
commitment on a project in Saskatoon that will help ease 
congestion on existing bridges. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another important investment in infrastructure is 
municipal infrastructure. Over 1.1 billion has been invested in 
municipal infrastructure since 2008-2009. Funding of 127.5 
million has been included in this budget with plans to invest an 
additional 325 million by 2019-20. Including all three levels of 
government, the new Building Canada plan is expected to result 

in over 1 billion in new investment in infrastructure by 2023-24. 
 
[22:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, this budget is built from a strong base, but 
unfortunately not every request can be met. However health, 
education, and social services and assistance expense is 
projected to be 10.52 billion in 2016-17, up 143 million or 1.4 
per cent from the 2015-16 budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, debt management is also an important part of 
keeping Saskatchewan strong. I’m proud to say that our 
province’s credit ratings are among the highest in Canada. 
Saskatchewan’s percentage of total debt to GDP is 17.6 per cent 
as of March 31st, 2016 and is the second lowest among the 
provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2016-17 budget is a budget I am very proud 
of. It was not an easy task for this government to face the 
challenges of lower revenues of $1 billion. However I think the 
Minister of Finance and his officials have done an incredible 
job of balancing the needs of a growing province. This budget, 
Mr. Speaker, has been very well received by the people in the 
business community in Saskatchewan. 
 
I think it is better though at times to let others judge how you 
have done. And with that I will quote Steve McLellan, CEO of 
the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. And I quote: 
 

We are quite pleased. At the end of the day we expected 
this deficit to be larger. Four hundred-plus is not a small 
number, but as compared to other jurisdictions, we are still 
in a very good situation. 
 
And the thing, I think, two things we are very impressed 
with is: one, is that they are proposing to be out of deficit 
by next year; and two, they are welcoming the input of the 
general public and the business community to try and solve 
some of the financial situations. We are going to be big 
parts of the solutions. 

 
Mr. Speaker, companies are investing in our province. Over the 
past eight and a half years, we have seen record business 
investment in our province. Even today, there was a 
multi-billion-dollar investment announcement from Raging 
River resources into drilling and enhanced oil recovery projects 
in the Kindersley area. This is evidence of how our government 
has created an environment where business has confidence in 
the long-term financial and economic prospects of our province. 
Neil Roszell said there’s evidence of consistency in the 
province and no geopolitical risk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I, and I am confident the people of Saskatchewan, 
support the budget put forward by the Minister of Finance, 
seconded by the member from Regina University, and I will not 
be supporting any amendments. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Gardiner 
Park. 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Well thank you so much, Mr. Speaker. The 
first thing I’d like to say: hey, it’s great to be back. It’s great to 
be back. In my previous career, it was kind of like cut-down 



410 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2016 

day in the CFL [Canadian Football League]. You’re not sure 
who’s going to survive, who’s going to make it to the team. 
And I guess every day there’s sort of that feeling that you might 
not be back. But here at least you get four more years. There’s 
members that retire, unfortunately members that weren’t 
successful that reran, and so those are tough times and you lose 
some good people sometimes. And so you know, that’s too bad 
but that’s the profession we choose and that’s the way it goes 
sometimes. 
 
I know that . . . This time of year I’ve never been in the House 
when the Riders are at camp. And I know those are tough days; 
those are long days. Sometimes the next day you’re so sore you 
can barely get out of bed and then you go look at the schedule 
for the upcoming practice day and there’s inside run. And for 
the linemen that’s basically like a couple of games every day 
for about two weeks, and you die a little every day when you 
take a look at that schedule. 
 
But coaches always remind you, and you’ve got to remind 
yourself every once in a while, that it’s tough sometimes but 
there’s lots of people . . . There’s a long line that would take 
your place. And I think that’s the case with this job as well. 
There was a lot of great candidates for all the parties that put 
their names forward, and I think that’s great for our democracy, 
and I think that’s, as I said, a good thing. And I think I like the 
set-up of this room. I think we’ve got a lot of good new 
members. We’ve got a good team over here. I listened carefully 
to all the speeches in the Throne Speech and the budget speech, 
and they were outstanding. Fourteen new members on this side, 
even more than the entire opposition caucus. I had mentioned 
that. 
 
Also the Riders — and, Mr. Speaker, I try and work this into 
my speech whenever I can — not sure how they’ll do but they 
at least have a chance to win the Grey Cup, the old Riders. 
Because of course, the members opposite are in government 
and we know the history of that within our province. It’s been a 
shutout with the NDP for Grey Cups in our province for over 
100 years, Mr. Speaker, over 100 years of this building. 
 
Before I forget, Mr. Speaker, really quick, I was interested to 
hear the member from Northcote. And I congratulate her: the 
NDP finally took a position on the new stadium for the Riders 
as last year, the old Mosaic Stadium, and she was against it so, 
you know, we finally hear . . . I’d like to hear what the Regina 
MLAs on that side have to say about it. I’ve been trying to get it 
out of them for many years now. 
 
But again, I applaud the member from Northcote. She said it 
was a mismanaged project, part of the misplaced priorities of 
this government. And so I remind that member that it’s a city of 
Regina project. And so just like that happened in Prince Albert: 
the construction of the Alfred Jenkins Field House that was 
done by the municipality of Prince Albert; and the government 
through PCS [Parks, Culture and Sport] helped them out on that 
portion; renovations for the Art Hauser Centre, 1.7 million. So I 
understand from her point of view, those aren’t good as well. So 
she can maybe tell her constituents about that. 
 
She doesn’t want the Regina bypass but she wants another 
bridge in Prince Albert. So what’s wrong with Regina? It’s the 
Queen City. I kind of like it here, Mr. Speaker. 

I don’t have a lot of time, Mr. Speaker. I will hopefully get to a 
part of the budget speech. This is my first time in the House and 
again, with a large caucus, you know, you don’t get a lot of 
speaking time, and so you’ve got to make your time count. And 
so just real quickly, I’d like to thank members of my campaign 
team, like other members have done. And boy, they worked 
really hard. We had a small group but I took care of the door 
knocking and they took care of everything else, and that worked 
real good. I don’t have time to mention them all but we had a 
lot of fun. And of course we were successful. That makes it 
even more fun. 
 
I’d like to thank, of course, my family. My family helped me 
out on the campaign when they could. We’re a very busy family 
of course. Three boys, they’re very busy in sports and other 
things and school and such. And you know, they helped out a 
bit. I had to bribe them with slurpees once in a while, but they 
came out. Got to thank my wife, Tami. I mean obviously the 
bedrock of our family. She essentially runs two households, 
ours, and then we have elderly folks that we help out a lot with 
that way. And she works as well. She’s an RN [registered 
nurse]. And she’s a great door knocker. She’s been at it for a 
while and definitely very up on the health file and helps me out 
a lot that way. And she definitely remembers the ’90s, under the 
members opposite. She definitely remembers those. We could 
go on in that area for quite some time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Of course the people of Regina Gardiner Park, a new 
constituency, slightly new boundaries, Mr. Speaker, in that part 
of Regina, and again proud to represent them. It’s an honour to 
be here. Lots of great families and boy, I enjoyed it. Again I had 
great conversations with all the folks. They’re very informed, 
and it really helps you as a member to know what’s important 
to them, first of all, but also helps you with your knowledge of 
all the things that are in the platform and what the government’s 
done, etc. And I’ve really enjoyed those conversations. Knew 
quite a bit of families in the area, again as the boundaries 
changed. A lot of kids go to my kids’ school, and I was able to 
coach a lot of the kids in the families in that area over the years. 
 
And just a few real quick stories. I went to a door and a former 
player recognized me and was a little surprised that I was at the 
door. And he asked me, what are you doing here, coach? I don’t 
know if I can use my name or not. And he, well, what are you 
doing? Well it’s part of my job. And he asked, are you a 
door-to-door salesman? And well kind of, yes I am. And he said 
to his mom, Mom, coach wants to sell you something. So I 
guess that was part of it. I had one little guy, he helped me 
deliver flyers, and I think that’s pretty good for a 10-year-old to 
help out that way. Not many kids would do that. 
 
Another former player, his neighbour had an orange sign on it, 
and he wasn’t too impressed with that. So he made his dad 
come to the office and get one of our biggest signs to put on the 
lawn. And he got his older brother out of bed to get to the 
voting place, who happened to be just turning 18. So I guess I 
coached him a little bit of persistence. And boy, those are great 
times, Mr. Speaker. And you’re not sure if you have an impact 
on those guys, but I think some of those stories, it reinforces 
that you are too. 
 
But I guess on the other hand though, Mr. Speaker, I had a guy 
in flag football. You know, you ask him what position you want 



June 7, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 411 

to play today and he said, oh coach, I want to play quarterback. 
And I said okay, yes, that’s great. And then he said to me, 
what’s the quarterback again? So maybe I’m not quite getting 
through to them to the extent I was hoping for. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m really limited in the time I have here 
this evening and I just want to talk real quick just about the 
budget and some of the replies I heard, especially from the 
Finance critic, Mr. Speaker. There were some things that were 
in her reply speech that weren’t quite accurate or it didn’t really, 
you know, I didn’t like. They didn’t really jibe. 
 
She talked about the failed bypass project. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s being built right now. I’m not sure how you can judge it as a 
failure already. I mean I suggest she maybe go take a drive out 
on Victoria Avenue East and all the earth that’s been moved 
and the massive project it is and how important it’s going to be 
for the safety. 
 
And I know the member from Northcote as well didn’t like it. 
And I heard the other day from the new leader and, you know, 
there was definitely some misinformation going out about the 
bypass. He said it was $1 billion over budget. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I think that disparages this House when there is such 
misinformation going out. Of course it’s an apples-to-oranges 
comparison. The scope of the project has increased greatly and 
it’s going to be a great project for not only Saskatchewan but of 
course Regina and area. That’s all I can say about that, but there 
is much more I could say about that. 
 
They talked about power rates going up 5 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. And coming from that member who actively supported 
the Leap Manifesto . . . You know, if we ever get the NDP in 
power again, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be pining for the halcyon days 
of only 5 per cent increases, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve seen what’s going to happen in Ontario, in other parts of 
Europe, Mr. Speaker. You know power rates have gone through 
the roof. It’s hurt their economy. New businesses won’t be 
coming to those jurisdictions I’m sure. The member from 
Nutana supported the Leap Manifesto as I mentioned. She . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, she doesn’t. But you know 
what, Mr. Speaker? It’s right here in the Leader-Post April 
16th, Murray Mandryk, the reputable reporter who’s been 
around for 30-plus years. They like to deny it. They don’t think 
that . . . It didn’t happen. They just try to pretend it doesn’t 
happen, Mr. Speaker, but right here it says, “Interestingly . . .” 
This is a quote; I’m sorry. “Interestingly, re-elected Saskatoon 
Nutana MLA Cathy Sproule was the one caucus member who 
voted in favour of the Leap Manifesto [It says right here, 
granted] for reasons she says had to do with simply having the 
environment discussion.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, you’re either for or you’re against it. I think 
those members are definitely for it, especially when they’re not 
in Regina, okay? It’s like Mr. Mulcair. He went down to the 
United States when he was the leader, bashed Canada — 
something you just never do, Mr. Speaker. Members of the 
NDP when they’re with their friends in, you know, far-off 
places, they bash Saskatchewan privately I think. And this 
proves it here, the support for the Leap Manifesto. They change 
their tune. So again, Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s firmly on both 
sides of the fence on a lot issues. Unfortunately I have a long 

catalogue here, Mr. Speaker. I wish I had a little more time. I 
wish I had a little more time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a copy of the Leap Manifesto here, Mr. 
Speaker, and it’s good to hear the members opposite shouting. 
That means I must be on the right path, Mr. Speaker. Just in 
some of these first opening lines of the Leap Manifesto it says 
the new jobs, the non-renewable jobs “. . . and opportunities of 
this transition are designed to systematically eliminate racial 
and gender inequality.” So overnight, Mr. Speaker, turning a 
turbine from using natural gas or coal to wind power is just 
going to change that. 
 
Of course we need a few more details. So this is a leap 
manifesto. There’s quite a few leaps in logic in this document 
supported by the NDP, Mr. Speaker. Maybe in a next speech, 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll be able to go into more detail about this 
document that’s hugely, hugely negative to the economy of 
Saskatchewan. It would be a disaster for Saskatchewan and 
certainly if those members ever became government again, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I wish I got to all the great points of the budget, Mr. Speaker. I 
would really like to support the budget, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
definitely not going to be supporting the amendment. Thank 
you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 10:30, this Assembly stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
MOTION FOR APPROVAL OF BUDGETARY POLICY 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 383 
  Lambert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 384 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 387 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 390 
  Dennis ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 392 
  Steele .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 395 
  Young ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 397 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 400 
  Olauson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 404 
  Buckingham .............................................................................................................................................................................. 407 
  Makowsky.................................................................................................................................................................................. 409 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


