






















































Hansard: November 10, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 40A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 10, 2016, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (Ind.) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10; Independent (Ind.) — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1265 
 November 10, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
To you and through you, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to welcome 
some guests in the House today. They’re sitting in your gallery. 
 
Here on behalf of the Government of India, secretary to the 
Government of India and the Ministry of Tribal Affairs, Dr. 
Shyam Agarwal; chairman and managing director at the 
National Scheduled Tribes Finance and Development 
Corporation, Ramesh Kumar; consul general in India, Mr. 
Linghichetty; and Mr. G.V. Shankar of Global Connect. 
 
Representing the Government of India, Mr. Speaker, the 
delegation is in Saskatchewan this week to learn about some of 
the best practices being utilized in Canada for the empowerment 
of indigenous communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They’ve had a busy schedule upon arriving in Saskatchewan, 
visiting Prince Albert, Saskatoon, and today in Regina. While in 
Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, they visited the Forest Centre. Then 
they travelled to Saskatoon where they had the opportunity to 
meet with the Saskatchewan Research Council to tour their 
hybrid energy container power system. They’ve also met with 
representatives of Saskatchewan’s First Nations and will be 
touring a wind energy initiative later today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re pleased to see our already strong 
relationship with India, Saskatchewan’s third-largest trading 
partner, expanding into new areas of co-operation. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d ask all members of the Assembly to join me today 
in welcoming Secretary Agarwal and his delegation to 
Saskatchewan’s legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it’s my honour to join with the minister opposite 
and welcome this delegation from India here today to the 
Saskatchewan Assembly. It’s an honour to have you here. 
Included in this delegation we welcome Dr. Shyam Agarwal, 
the secretary to the Government of India. Thank you so very 
much for your presence. Mr. Ramesh Kumar, Mr. Linghichetty, 
and also a friend to many in Saskatchewan, Mr. Shankar for 
being in this Assembly here today. 
 
Your presence in our Assembly, the Saskatchewan Assembly 
here on Treaty 4 territory and the homeland of the Métis is 
valued by all members of this Assembly, and I provide you a 
warm welcome from the official opposition. I’m glad to hear 
that you’re here to learn from and work with indigenous 
communities here in our province and to see some of the work 
and some of the empowerment that’s going on within our 

province, and certainly we value that. 
 
There are many success stories here in our province with 
indigenous leaders and industry and government that participate 
in all forms of partnerships. And that treaty relationship is one 
that we value in Saskatchewan, knowing that we’re all treaty 
people working towards making sure that there’s a mutual 
benefit for all. 
 
I think of the First Nations University of Canada here in 
Regina. I think of the Treaty Four Governance Centre. I think of 
the Office of the Treaty Commissioner or Treaties in the 
Classroom. I think of NORTEP-NORPAC [northern teacher 
education program-Northern Professional Access College] in 
La Ronge. I think of the International Centre for Northern 
Governance and Development at the University of Regina and 
so many other projects that are examples of empowerment, 
indigenous empowerment within our province. 
 
Like any relationship here in our province, it’s important for us 
to continue to place energy into this relationship because the 
work isn’t done. And we’re far from being where we need to be 
on these fronts, and the work toward full reconciliation 
continues in this province to address injustice and to ensure 
hope and opportunity and fairness for all. 
 
It’s my pleasure to welcome this delegation from India here 
today, of course a very important trading partner, world’s 
largest democracy. And it’s fair to say that Indo-Canadians 
themselves have left their mark on our province, building and 
shaping who we are as a province for many years in all facets of 
our province. So it’s my pleasure to welcome this delegation to 
our Assembly here today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Well just 
very quickly before I get to my introduction, I’d like to join the 
Leader of the Opposition and the Attorney General and 
welcome our friends from India. Between 35 and 40 per cent of 
all of Canadian exports . . . all of India’s imports come from our 
province. All of the Canadian imports to that country, 35 per 
cent come from Saskatchewan. And we welcome them here to 
the Assembly here today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m also very honoured to be able to introduce a 
group that are in your gallery here this morning. We are all very 
well served by constituency assistants who work hard to deal 
with concerns that are raised and advocate for constituents on 
our behalf, Mr. Speaker, and I’m no exception. 
 
I am very grateful for the work of my constituency assistant and 
for her friendship. And she is here with her husband today. Nola 
Smith is my constituency assistant. Her husband is Dave, who 
is also our worship pastor at the church we attend. And 
notwithstanding the fact that they have spectacularly poor taste 
in CFL [Canadian Football League] teams, they’re a wonderful 
couple. One’s a Tiger-Cat fan and one’s an Eskimo fan. I’ve 
tried to make Rider allegiance a condition of employment but 
apparently that contravenes some sort of codes and laws in the 
province of Saskatchewan. But I do want to welcome them. 
 



1266 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2016 

And joining them today is Nola’s mom. Linda McDougall is 
here from Paradise Valley, as is Nola’s sister Penny 
McDougall, also from Paradise Valley. And joining them as 
well, Scott and Janessa Bockint, who are from Winnipeg, 
Manitoba. Mr. Speaker, Nola and Dave and our guests are here 
attending the U18 National Hockey Championships that are 
being hosted here. Dave and Nola’s daughter Chloe is an 
outstanding hockey player and so they’re here for that 
tournament. Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to please 
join with me in welcoming this group to the Legislative 
Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Gardiner 
Park. 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed my 
pleasure to introduce a couple of folks in the west gallery, and it 
literally is a Folk. Mr. Kim Folk is here today from the Chris 
Knox Foundation, and we’ve heard from them over time. And 
as I’ll be mentioning in a member statement coming up, our 
caucus along with Harvard Broadcasting and the Chris Knox 
Foundation have teamed up to send two recipients to the Grey 
Cup this year in Toronto. And we’re very lucky to have one of 
the recipients here today in the gallery. Her name is Natasha 
Achter. She was able to attend the 2013 Grey Cup as well, I 
understand. So I ask all members to help me welcome them 
here today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour 
to join with the member opposite to welcome Kim here with the 
Chris Knox Foundation. It’s remarkable work that this 
foundation takes on and it’s a pleasure to have Natasha here as 
well. It’s my pleasure to welcome them here, but most 
importantly, to the Chris Knox Foundation, all of its leadership, 
all those that support it, I say thank you on behalf of the official 
opposition and all the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to introduce to you and through you to the rest of the 
members of the Legislative Assembly, the MP [Member of 
Parliament] for the riding of Beauce, Quebec, Maxime Bernier. 
Maxime was first elected in 2006, 2008, 2011, and 2015. 
Maxime completed his law degree at the University of Ottawa. 
Then he held positions in several financial institutions and was 
the vice-president of the Montreal Economic Institute. 
 
So Maxime has two daughters. He’s very proud of his young 
daughters. Also he’s very committed to his community. He 
made a commitment to run across his whole riding and raised 
153,000 for the local food bank, so congratulations to Maxime. 
Maxime is also vying for the leadership of the Conservative 
Party of Canada. So thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
please welcome Maxime to our Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On 
behalf of the official opposition we too want to welcome Mr. 

Maxime Bernier. As an MP I understand he’s got two 
daughters. Well I have three. So it’s often a difficult task of 
being a father away from home so much, but we have such 
wonderful parents on . . . well the mom is such a wonderful 
parent that we don’t have to worry about our children while 
we’re travelling. So I’d like to take this opportunity to welcome 
him to the Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have 
a special guest in the Legislative Assembly today up in your 
gallery, Mr. Larry Mueller, who is a long-time friend of ours 
and is very active in the football community here in Regina. But 
probably he’s best known for being the father of Marc Mueller, 
who we’ve sadly lost to the Calgary Stampeders but is making 
his mark there as an excellent coach, unfortunately for us, I 
guess, in some ways. But Larry has dedicated countless hours in 
the football community here in Regina, and I just want to 
welcome him to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
privilege to stand in the House today and welcome three people 
that are seated in the back row of your gallery: Helen Harvey, 
James Harvey, and Les Dahlen. These people farm in the Pike 
Lake district of Saskatoon which is in the Rosetown 
constituency. Having said that, however, Mr. Speaker, all three 
of them have chosen to work in Saskatoon constituencies. Just 
saying we commend them for their good taste in where they’ve 
chosen to work. And they’re here in Regina for some other 
matters. And we’re pleased to have them in the legislature today 
and would ask all members welcome them to their Assembly 
today. 
 
The Speaker: — I too would like to join the Deputy Premier in 
introducing my CA [constituency assistant], and unlike the 
Premier, I did make it a condition of employment for my CA, 
Helen Harvey, to be a Rider fan, and I know James is as well. 
And I’m so grateful, as we all are, of the great work that gets 
done back in our offices. And Helen’s been with me from day 
one, and very appreciative of her hard work on keeping me in 
line. I know it’s not easy sometimes, but I do appreciate her 
effort in that regard. So please join me in welcoming Helen 
Harvey to their Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
yet again today to present a petition to reverse cuts to the 
Lighthouse program. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that 
in April 2014, the then minister of Social Services said the 
Lighthouse in Saskatoon would “. . . take pressure off of 
existing detox facilities, hospitals, and police cells while 
keeping people safe, especially in our brutally cold winters.” 
That same day, Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that the 
minister of Health said, “We want to ensure that individuals 
with mental health and addictions . . . have a safe place to stay.”  
 



November 10, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1267 

And again the petitioners point out that this government has 
repeatedly indicated that the Lighthouse stabilization unit keeps 
individuals out of hospital emergency rooms and jail cells. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we in the opposition could not agree more. We 
only need to look at the Saskatoon Health Region and the over 
capacity that has been happening there recently, record over 
capacity actually, Mr. Speaker. Although the Lighthouse cuts 
aren’t the whole problem, they certainly do not help, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately reverse 
their recent cuts to funding that allows extremely 
vulnerable people to access the services of the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit in Saskatoon, and revisit their imposition 
of a strict and narrow definition of homelessness in 
November of 2015 which forced the Lighthouse to cut 
back its hours of essential services in February of 2016, 
and take immediate steps to ensure that homeless people in 
Saskatchewan have emergency shelter, clothing, and food 
available to them before more lives are lost. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Regina and 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Saskatoon, 
Humboldt, Martensville, Warman, Perdue, Rosetown, and 
Clavet. I do so present. 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition to stop the redirection of funding for 
the Northern Teacher Education Program, NORTEP, and: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to immediately restore 
their five-year agreement to fund the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council and to continue to fund the 
NORTEP-NORPAC programs in La Ronge. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition are from 
all throughout the province. And on this particular page, Mr. 
Speaker, the people that have signed the petition are primarily 
from La Ronge, and I so present. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition to stop the SaskParty’s sell-off of SaskTel. 
The people that have signed this petition wish to bring to our 
attention the following: in the last five years alone SaskTel has 
returned 497 million to support government programs and 
services like education and health care. SaskTel’s an important 
part of building a stronger and fairer Saskatchewan together. 
And once SaskTel — and, may I add, SaskPower — is gone, 
there is no getting it back, no telling what else the Sask Party 
will sell. The prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party government to keep their promise, stop their 
plan to sell off SaskTel, and keep our valued Crown 
corporation in the hands of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by individuals 
from Prince Albert. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
present a petition condemning the Sask Party’s cuts to the SAID 
[Saskatchewan assured income for disability] program. After 
nearly a decade of wasting the economic boom and blowing 
through the savings, the government is now forcing the 
province’s most vulnerable people to pay for the Sask Party 
mismanagement. 
 
The Sask Party’s latest cold-hearted cut will take money away 
from people who are unable to work due to a disability; that 
many people who are being hurt by the Sask Party cut live with 
serious illnesses such multiple sclerosis, autism, and cancer, 
among other illnesses; and that contrary to the Minister of 
Social Service’s claims, the government underfunds clients in 
regards to shelter allowance, and that shelter allowance should 
be reflective of the current rental costs. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to stop their plan to cut 
the SAID funding and immediately restore funding for 
those living with a disability; that shelter allowance is 
reflective of the current rental costs; and that the 
Saskatchewan Party government implement the 
recommendations of the Advisory Group on Poverty 
Reduction. 

 
Mr. Speaker, individuals signing these petitions come from the 
communities of Clavet, Saskatoon, and Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise yet again today 
to present another petition calling on the government to reverse 



1268 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2016 

the cuts to the Aboriginal court worker program. The 
Government of Saskatchewan cut the budget for the Aboriginal 
court worker program in the 2016-2017 provincial budget. And 
those on this side of the House know that Aboriginal court 
workers play an important role helping Aboriginal people in 
criminal and child apprehension cases. Aboriginal peoples are 
disproportionately represented in Saskatchewan’s correctional 
centres, and Aboriginal court workers successfully help to make 
our communities safer through reduced recidivism rates. I’d like 
to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan reverse its 
short-sighted and counterproductive cuts to the Aboriginal 
court worker program. 

 
I have several pages of this petition to submit today, Mr. 
Speaker. And those signing the petition today come from Rose 
Valley, Regina, Saskatoon, Drake, and Outlook. I do so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

We Will Remember Them 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Tomorrow 
Canadians everywhere will stop to remember. For as long as we 
have existed as a country, there have been men and women who 
have defended it and, in doing so, given the ultimate sacrifice. 
 
Saskatchewan has an unfortunate honour, Mr. Speaker. Private 
George Price enlisted in Moose Jaw in October of 1917. He was 
sent to France and served with the 28th Battalion. With the 
armistice finally signed to end that terrible conflict, minutes 
before our world could return to peace, Private Price was shot 
and killed by a German sniper. He was the last life lost in that 
conflict. We will remember him. 
 
Other conflicts followed that one. Etched in our national 
memories are places like Ortona, Sicily, Calais, Juno Beach. 
More recently, Kapyong, Bosnia, and Kandahar. The names 
may change but the sacrifice does not. A parent has lost a child. 
A spouse, a partner. A child has lost a parent. This is a sacrifice 
we need to remember not just on November 11th but every day: 
 

They shall not grow old, as we that are left grow old: 
Age shall not weary them, nor the years condemn. 
At the going down of the sun and in the morning 
We will remember them. 

 
Some Hon. Members: We will remember them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Remembrance of Sacrifice and Service 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured to stand and 
recognize the service of our veterans and the service of the 
women and men currently in uniform who, without reluctance, 
have performed and performed their duty to combat tyranny and 
oppression in our world. They have sacrificed, and they 
sacrifice so much to protect the freedom and democracy that our 

great country values and enjoys today. 
 
Saskatchewan itself has a proud history of service to our nation. 
People from all corners of our province have served 
courageously in every branch of the Armed Forces. Like so 
many others, my family has a history of service, including my 
grandfather who left Saskatchewan as a young farmer to serve 
Canada with the distinguished Royal Regina Rifles Regiment in 
the Second World War, as well as family members that 
continue to serve. 
 
Such stories of sacrifice and service are common across our 
province. They traverse political divides, and they shape our 
identity as a nation, a province, as families, and as people. That 
is why Remembrance Day is such an important time for all of 
us to come together so that we can collectively — as friends, 
families, communities, a province, and a nation — reflect on the 
sacrifices of those who have served and those that continue to 
serve. 
 
And there isn’t just one day then which we should remember. 
These sacrifices are something that we should be thankful for 
every day. It is with that in mind that I ask all members of this 
Assembly to join with me in extending our thanks and our 
respect to those that serve, have served, and importantly those 
that we’ve lost. May we always remember and may our resolve 
for peace be strong. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Gardiner 
Park. 
 

Appreciation for Chris Knox Foundation 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. As I 
mentioned earlier, I’m pleased to rise and recognize the good 
work of the Chris Knox Foundation. The foundation’s named 
after a young Saskatchewan Roughriders fan who battled, 
bravely battled cancer in 2007. Word of Chris’s story spread 
following the Labour Day Classic in that year ’07 which 
inspired Saskatchewan residents to launch a fundraising 
campaign to send Chris, his mom, and his palliative care nurse 
to Toronto to attend the Grey Cup. Mr. Speaker, the campaign 
was so successful that an additional 10 families with sick 
children were also able to travel to Toronto for the game. 
 
Sadly a short time after the Rider nation celebrated the big Grey 
Cup victory, Chris passed away. In his memory, Chris’s family 
and friends launched a foundation in his memory to help young 
people battling cancer attend sporting, art, and cultural events to 
give they and their families a reprieve from their illness. So far, 
Mr. Speaker, 1,541 tickets to events have been distributed since 
that time. Every year they’ve sent a contingent to each and 
every Grey Cup. 
 
I’m pleased to announce that our caucus is partnering with 
Harvard Broadcasting and the Chris Knox Foundation to help 
Natasha Achter and Lenore Bergeron attend this year’s Grey 
Cup in Toronto. 
 
I’d like to thank all the donors, board members, other 
volunteers of the Chris Knox Foundation who do such 
wonderful work in our province. Thank you. 
 



November 10, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1269 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Letters of Hope and Support Sent to Northern Children 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The past year has 
been very difficult for northern Saskatchewan. We suffered the 
tragedy in La Loche, and recently six young girls have taken 
their lives in northern Saskatchewan communities since the start 
of October. Mr. Speaker, northern people are hurting, but 
Saskatchewan people are responding with tremendous acts of 
kindness and love. People are holding vigils, sending prayers, 
and writing letters of support.  
 
Mr. Speaker, Fran Forsberg of Saskatoon started a card-writing 
campaign last week to let young people in northern 
Saskatchewan know how much people are thinking about them 
and that you matter. Fran invited people to go to Grosvenor 
Park United Church in Saskatoon and write letters of support 
for children in northern communities. She said her idea 
snowballed as people from across Saskatoon and the country 
expressed interest in sending their own messages. Mr. Speaker, 
on Wednesday thousands of handwritten cards arrived in La 
Ronge. Their goal is to have a letter of hope and support for 
every child in the North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 13-year-old Krista Forsberg, Fran’s adopted 
daughter, said she wants to encourage young people to stay 
strong. She went on to say, “We should be really doing 
something about this and not just be sitting around and 
watching it happen.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say thank you to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and I want the children of the North and of the 
entire province to remember you are loved and you matter. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 

Ranchers Inducted Into Canadian Agricultural 
Hall of Fame  

 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my pleasure to acknowledge a rancher in my constituency, a 
friend and a relative who was recently inducted into the 
Canadian Agricultural Hall of Fame on November 5, 2016. 
 
Bob Switzer and his wife Gail of the Sandy Bar Ranch south of 
Aneroid is an innovator in Canada’s beef industry and has 
become a purebred Angus champion, judge and mentor, and an 
industry leader. Mr. Speaker, Bob was only 12 years old when 
he bought his first animal, and one year later he bought his first 
registered Angus cow. Throughout his life, he has been a 
passionate advocate for the industry and has used creativity and 
innovation to bolster the Angus industry and promote Canadian 
beef in southern Saskatchewan and around the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would be impossible to list Bob’s 
accomplishments in this time frame, but here are a few. He 
organized the first Angus feeder sale in Canada, which has been 
operating for close to 40 years. He founded a project called Red 
Coat Feeders, which employees local people and runs about 
20,000 head of cattle in a feedlot. He has bred and judged elite 

herds, is very involved various stock growers associations and 
local 4-H clubs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bob and his wife Gail are leaders in the cattle 
industry, and I can’t think of a more fitting inductee into 
Canada’s Agricultural Hall of Fame. I ask members to join me 
in congratulating Bob Switzer on this great accomplishment. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 

B’Nai Brith Silver Plate Dinner 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this last Tuesday, I, along with the Minister of Justice, attended 
the 62nd annual B’Nai Brith Silver Plate Dinner in Saskatoon. 
B’Nai Brith is an international Jewish organization that is 
committed to doing charitable work in the community and 
combats racism on the local and international level. 
 
The Silver Plate Dinner is the longest running charitable dinner 
in Saskatoon, and this year it brought together 975 men from all 
walks of life. For the past 10 years, the organization has been 
focusing on supporting the youth in our community. They 
provided funds to help start the Children’s Hospital Foundation 
of Saskatchewan, and they were the first contributors to the 
Saskatoon Public Schools Foundation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the dinner, the former dean of education at the 
University of Saskatchewan, Murray Scharf, was presented the 
2016 We are Proud of You Award for his exemplary volunteer 
service. Mr. Scharf retired from his position as dean in 2006, 
but is far from settling down. He was recently named an 
ambassador for the Saskatoon Council on Aging and also 
volunteers for the local military institute and numerous other 
organizations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 
B’nai Brith on a successful 62nd annual Silver Plate Dinner, 
and thank Murray Scharf for his volunteerism. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 
 

Opposition to Federal Carbon Tax 
 
Mr. Steele: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this morning, 
93 per cent of the delegates at the SARM [Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities] Association of Rural 
Municipalities meeting passed a resolution against a carbon tax. 
 
SARM members understand, just like members on this side of 
the House do, what the new tax could do to our economy. 
SARM understands the roles that Saskatchewan can play in 
mitigation and adaptation to climate change. They also 
understand what this tax means for our energy, mining, and 
agriculture sector. 
 
[10:30] 
 
This resolution comes a day after an announcement of more 
than 300 potash workers going back to work at the Colonsay 
mine. And members opposite would not stand up against a tax 



1270 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2016 

that could send those workers right back out the door again. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition claimed once that he would not 
just blindly oppose us here just for the sake of cheap politics, 
Mr. Speaker. I do not know if he has lived up to that. But I 
know he does attend SARM meetings and likes to glad-hand 
attendees. I ask him not just to smile and nod at those people, 
but take the common sense from the delegates, many of whom 
are farmers, potash miners, and oil field workers. Listen to 
them. Stand up for them. And stand up in this Assembly and 
oppose the carbon tax. 
 
The Speaker: — Before question period, I would like to 
caution the members again. In an effort to preserve order and 
decorum, I would like to again caution the members not to 
dispute the truth, character, or honesty of hon. members. A full 
and thorough debate should be encouraged in the Assembly. 
However we must not say indirectly what we can’t say directly. 
If this continues, I will be exercising rule no. 57(1) where the 
Speaker will revoke the member’s access to taking part in 
proceedings for the remainder of the sitting day. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Donations to Political Parties 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the other day when the 
member from Saskatoon Centre asked for the Sask Party’s 
support to change Saskatchewan’s broken and outdated election 
finance laws, the Premier, who has been refusing day in, day 
out to answer questions on his GTH [Global Transportation 
Hub] scandal, jumped to his feet and said that there is nothing 
wrong, that big corporations should be allowed to dump 
hundreds of thousands of dollars — well in fact millions of 
dollars — into the Sask Party because that’s democracy, and 
Alberta companies are basically Saskatchewan people too. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you can’t make this stuff up. Will the Premier take 
this opportunity to admit that Saskatchewan’s democracy 
should be for Saskatchewan people? And will he work with us 
to update our electoral finance laws and get big money out of 
Saskatchewan politics? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I welcome the question from my honourable friend. 
 
I would note for the record that I think it’s over the last 10 years 
or so, roughly 10 per cent of corporate donations to the 
Saskatchewan Party, one-tenth, has come from companies 
whose headquarters is outside the province, most of whom 
invest inside Saskatchewan. And so we do think it’s reasonable 
that they would be able to participate, Mr. Speaker, just as we 
think it’s reasonable for unions to have supported the NDP 
[New Democratic Party] with huge donations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and I would say the premise of his question is that 
this has been, in the past and in the future, this is inherently 
wrong, this practice. If that’s the case, has he refunded the 
unions the huge donations they’ve given his party over the 

years? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — That’s almost as ridiculous as the 
responses we were getting on his GTH land scandal. 
 
Democracy. He keeps using that word. I do not think he knows 
what it means. Democracy comes from the Greek words for 
“power” and “the people.” Mr. Speaker, I know the Premier 
knows this, and the Premier’s an honourable man. So will the 
Premier stand with the people of Saskatchewan, change the 
laws, give them the power back, or will he stand with the big 
corporations in and out of this province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — The average corporate donation to the 
Saskatchewan Party is just over $1,000. This is over the life of 
the party. The average individual donation is just over $100, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m not sure where the big corporate money is coming from. 
Maybe he’s referencing his own scenario, Mr. Speaker, where 
the NDP have accepted tens of thousands of dollars from 
unions. Now I understand he’s saying he’s prepared to go 
without those; he’s prepared to have that eliminated as well. But 
the heart of the question is, if it is fundamentally wrong and 
anti-democratic for political parties to fundraise in this way, 
what’s he going to do with the fact that his party has been so 
heavily dependent on the unions? And is he going to send that 
money back, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The bottom line is this. When companies are employing people 
in our province in the thousands, if they want to get involved, if 
they want to come to a leader’s dinner, if they want to be 
involved in politics, I don’t think that’s a problem. 
 
In fact, you know, Great Western brewery just won an 
injunction yesterday against the NDP government in Alberta. 
Mr. Speaker, I would expect . . . That particular company, for 
example, has 16 employees in Alberta. We know that the NDP 
in that province undertook predatory practices, we would argue, 
against non-Alberta brewing companies. Mr. Speaker, I think 
it’s reasonable that companies from outside of Alberta would 
want to get, brewing companies would want to get involved in 
their political process, especially when they employ people in 
that jurisdiction. I think their employees would want that. Mr. 
Speaker, I do think that’s part of democracy, Mr. Speaker. We 
welcome the questions and the discussion, but we’re satisfied 
with the current rules in the province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — What a ridiculous response. We can 
pass laws next week that would fix this and that would ban 
union and corporate donations, Mr. Speaker. No one on this 
side of the House is suggesting that the Sask Party’s breaking 
any laws. The fact is the laws themselves are already broken. 
They need to be fixed. 
 
And so, you know, I guess I’ll press the Premier once again. 
And he dismisses the couple of million dollars that he hauls in 



November 10, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1271 

from corporate Alberta, but will the Premier recognize the flaw 
in this, the perception that exists, and will he work with us to fix 
the outdated election finance laws and end pay-to-play in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this issue goes to 
the importance of transparency and democracy. It’s this side of 
the House that finally brought in a lobbyists registry to the 
province of Saskatchewan. The NDP had . . . Well he laughs. 
The NDP had 16 years to do more than ask questions or talk 
about these things. There was no lobby registry when they were 
on this side of the House. They had 16 years to transparently 
report on ministerial travel, 16 years to improve reports to 
Saskatchewan taxpayers on how money was being spent. They 
never got it done. This side of the House got it done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is an issue with respect to campaign finance 
that I have heard from Saskatchewan people, a source of 
concern. It’s the fact that in the last election campaign, in the 
last election campaign, 72.5 per cent of all of the dollars they 
spent to try to get elected, on all of the services in their 
campaign, went to out-of-province companies, Mr. Speaker. 
There is an out-of-province concern in politics today, and the 
Deputy Leader, your own Deputy Leader doesn’t think it’s a big 
deal. 
 
Here’s what they outsourced to out-of-province companies: all 
of their advertising, all of their polling and focus groups, their 
website and digital advertising — I think there’s companies in 
Saskatchewan that could do that — their election consulting, 
sound and lighting. They couldn’t find a sound and lighting 
company from this province; they went outside for that. Online 
surveys and tour planning, Mr. Speaker. They took good 
Saskatchewan money, maybe money they accepted from unions 
from outside of the province, and they actually hired someone 
from outside Saskatchewan to plan their election tour. That’s 
the election spending fundraising issue people are wondering 
about. Why won’t the NDP, Mr. Speaker, support 
Saskatchewan business first? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, outrageous. If that 
Premier, that Premier who’s outsourcing project after project 
after project to a foreign corporation, wants to get into this 
debate — like the bypass that ballooned to $2 billion to a 
company from France — we’ll take on that debate and we’ll 
fight for Saskatchewan companies any day of the week. But you 
know, really, on front after front, that Premier’s gone from 
newsmaker to noisemaker, and he’s distracting once again here 
today. 
 
Lobbying is part of our democracy. Paying for access, though, 
shouldn’t be. So why is the Premier so content on leaving 
legislation the way it is and letting big money’s power come at 
the expense of Saskatchewan’s people? Let’s fix it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the premise of the member’s 
question is fundamentally wrong. Maybe that’s how they 

operated. Maybe when unions gave them the big money, or 
companies — and they accepted corporate donations — maybe 
the quid pro quo is that they would do their bidding, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s not been the case on this side of the House 
since 2007, since nine years ago, Mr. Speaker. And the hon. 
member wants to actually debate about outsourcing business 
out of province. We’ve heard him stand in this legislature and 
lecture members on this side, lecture members on this side 
about buying Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we just had an election campaign in the province. 
Over $1 million spent by members opposite — probably, we 
think, probably over $1 million spent by members opposite to 
try to get elected. Mr. Speaker, interesting, interesting that 72 
per cent of the $1 million, 72 per cent of the $1 million they 
actually spent outside the province. The list goes on. Their 
database support came from Ottawa. Their telemessaging — I 
think there’s a telephone company that they purport to defend in 
this province — telemessaging came from Toronto. Election 
support came from Ottawa. Tour planning came from 
Mississauga. Online surveys came from Toronto, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There might be a discussion about out-of-province issues with 
respect to campaigns. It has to do what members opposite . . . 
Why wouldn’t they support Saskatchewan businesses in the 
expenditure of the funds they raise in politics? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Auditor’s Report and Public Accounts Committee Meeting 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, the Premier’s pretty worked 
up. The guy who’s sending $2 billion to a company from 
France at a time when we need jobs and opportunity here in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, in politics, perception is reality. The perception of 
influence raises questions about government’s motivations. 
Real or not, when thousands or millions of dollars change 
hands, questions get asked. That’s why it’s so important to get 
the details on the Sask Party’s GTH land scandal, such as: who 
was the person that contacted the former minister about the . . . 
with the land deal that wasted millions of dollars? Who was 
that, that knew the government was going to acquire this land, 
and how did they know it? The Premier said, on the floor of the 
Assembly just last week, that “the phone records, all the 
documents were made available to the Provincial Auditor.” Mr. 
Speaker, as I said yesterday, the auditor has now confirmed that 
she was not given those phone records. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier admit this, and will the Premier 
finally commit today to bring those records to the floor of this 
Assembly? This should not be a problem if he doesn’t have 
anything to hide. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Now he’s back to the GTH, Mr. Speaker. 
Notwithstanding the fact that the Provincial Auditor appeared to 
the Public Accounts Committee, Mr. Speaker, and answered 
every one of the NDP’s conspiracy theories . . . Well the 
member from Nutana wants to chirp from her seat, Mr. Speaker. 
I think she is interested, I hope, in the answer that we’re 
providing here, because I don’t think she was interested in what 
the Provincial Auditor had to say when it came to this phone 



1272 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2016 

call, when it came to “leaked cabinet documents.” 
 
All of the conspiracy theories raised by members opposite were 
debunked. They were taken apart systematically by the auditor. 
Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is, every record — including 
phone records — was available to the auditor. And the auditor 
indicated that if there was . . . had been red flags about matters, 
they even had a forensic auditor on staff to further look into 
those issues, but those red flags didn’t exist. Every document 
was available to the auditor that the auditor wanted, including 
cabinet documents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re happy to spend question period time on the 
Global Transportation Hub where we did, in the interest of 
transparency, asked the Provincial Auditor to do a complete 
review. She has verified there was no conflict of interest. There 
was no fraud. There was no wrongdoing. And systematically 
debunked all of the NDP conspiracy theories. We’re happy to 
answer more questions about it if that’s where the Leader of the 
Opposition would like to go today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The Premier knows full well that there 
was not a forensic audit. He also should know that the statement 
he references about wrongdoing certainly does not include the 
Sask Party cabinet or senior officials or actors of government, 
Mr. Speaker. And we know that millions of dollars have been 
wasted, and he can bet that we will push, day in, day out to get 
to the bottom of this scandal that wasted their hard-earned 
money. 
 
Two businessmen, two businessmen have made big donations 
to the Sask Party. They made about $11 million off the GTH 
land scandal. I’m not accusing anyone of anything, but we’re 
trying to get the truth. And it would help if the Premier would 
provide a response to some pretty basic questions. Why is the 
Sask Party government working so hard to hide the facts and 
doing things like blocking key witnesses from testifying before 
this legislature? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much. First of all, Mr. 
Speaker, I know it was a long time ago, but just three days ago 
the Provincial Auditor had this to say before committee, and I 
quote:  
 

. . . frankly, if we did a forensic audit, there would . . . 
[have been] a lot of matters that we included . . . [in] our 
report that would not have been provided to the committee. 

 
So why would the Leader of the Opposition want the committee 
to have less information than what she provided by her audit? 
 
With respect to the phone calls, she said, and I quote: 
 

. . . there was allegations of fraud and error and so as 
auditors . . . we call it professional skepticism — so we 
keep that up. And so we ask, we have lines of inquiry. So 
what we did . . . at the information . . . [was that] in the 
emails, and we corroborated it with interview evidence . . . 

and through that we didn’t see a need to pursue phone 
records. 

 
Why is the Leader of the Opposition and the members opposite 
questioning the work of the Provincial Auditor? Do they 
support her? Yes or no? 
 
[10:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, they claim to be open and 
transparent, and they say they have nothing to hide. Will the 
now Minister of Government Relations stand up and tell us why 
she endorsed this land scandal even before it made it to the 
cabinet table? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, time and time again the 
members opposite stand in their place and, I would say, call into 
question the work of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
The Provincial Auditor appeared before the Public Accounts 
Committee. The Public Accounts Committee, I believe by a 
resolution put forward by the government, by the Premier, 
asked the Provincial Auditor to do the work of looking into this 
matter. She did that work. She appeared before Public 
Accounts. She, at Public Accounts just three days ago, 
confirmed the findings of her report, Mr. Speaker, and 
answered all the questions that the members opposite put 
forward. 
 
I don’t understand the members opposite now questioning the 
work of the Provincial Auditor, believing that they can do a 
better job than the Provincial Auditor. That’s the work of the 
Provincial Auditor. She did her work. Her office did their work, 
Mr. Speaker. And I would hope the members opposite would 
accept the findings of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the now minister and member 
from Humboldt was in on the scandal from the very beginning. 
In fact she’s the only one whose name appears at the beginning 
and who still sits in cabinet. So can she tell this House how it all 
started? Can she tell this House how it all started and why was 
the recommendation — this is the key question — why was the 
recommendation to have Highways buy the land scrapped for 
the scandal to go through? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I think the key question is, 
why do the members opposite, why does the Leader of the 
Opposition and the opposition New Democrats not support the 
work of the Provincial Auditor? 
 
The Public Accounts Committee asked the Provincial Auditor 
to investigate this matter. The Provincial Auditor went through 
that work. It was a very comprehensive report that she and her 



November 10, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1273 

office did undertake. She answered questions to the Public 
Accounts Committee indicating that she had co-operation from 
everybody that they asked for co-operation from, that she had 
access to all documents that she believed that she needed access 
to, and answered questions, Mr. Speaker — systematically went 
through — that the members opposite have posed in this House 
and committee, and answered every single question. Why do 
the members opposite not support her findings? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, that question was to the 
Minister of Government Relations. It’s the same talking points 
over and over. But surely some of the members over there are 
starting to want straight answers as much as we do, Mr. 
Speaker. So how about the current Minister of Health? He was 
around the cabinet table then. Will he tell us what he thought of 
the deal? Why was it dismissed the first time at cabinet but 
approved the second time? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor has 
outlined that a number of questions were raised with the 
processes that the government has undertaken, Mr. Speaker. But 
the Provincial Auditor did also say in her report — she has said 
it publicly — that there were no red flags that were raised as a 
result of her work and that there was no wrongdoing, there was 
no conflict of interest, and that there was no fraud. And then 
later did say publicly on province-wide radio that there were no 
red flags that were raised. 
 
I don’t understand, Mr. Speaker. The members opposite, they 
asked the Provincial Auditor to do this work through the Public 
Accounts Committee. She does the work. They asked the 
Provincial Auditor to come to the Public Accounts Committee 
to answer questions about her own report. She answered every 
single question the members opposite have raised, and yet they 
still, for whatever reason, don’t support the work of the 
Provincial Auditor, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I don’t 
understand the members. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, that whole cabinet discussed this 
scandal. They voted on it and it passed. They all know 
something about it, and some may want to clear the air about 
some of the questions the people of Saskatchewan have. So 
what about the current Minister of Central Services? Will she 
tell us what she thought of the deal and why it was dismissed 
the first time at cabinet but approved the second? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’ll again quote just from . . . I know it was a long time ago. 
Three days is a long time, Mr. Speaker. I understand that. So 
I’ll refresh the member’s opposite memory. At Public 
Accounts, the Provincial Auditor said, and I quote: 

In our view, we thought we did a thorough job, given the 
objective of what we were doing as an audit office. We 
thought we did a thorough job. We had hoped to have it to 
the committee earlier but, as I indicated, there were certain 
things that took us additional time because we . . . [took] 
additional steps. Bottom line, an audit . . . You use your 
lines of inquiry to determine what you’re going to do next. 
 
I know . . . [that there’s a lot of media] that says we did a 
process audit. 

 
Which is one of the things that the members opposite are 
chirping, that this was a process audit. She says: 
 

I know [there’s a lot] in the media . . . that says we did a 
process audit . . . But I think people have to understand in a 
process audit you still look for corroborating evidence and 
consistency of evidence. It’s not just looking at what 
people have in terms of policies. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the auditor did a thorough job. She said that at the 
committee. I don’t know why the members opposite don’t 
indicate that they support the Provincial Auditor and her work. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, the talking points aren’t 
actually answering any of the questions the people of 
Saskatchewan have about this scandal. So how about the 
Minister of Education? Will he stand up and clear the air? Will 
he tell us what he thought of the deal, why it was dismissed the 
first time at cabinet but approved the second? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased 
again to rise on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan to 
answer these questions. I certainly hope the member from 
Prince Albert is not saying that I, as the minister that is 
answering these questions, is using talking points that have 
been provided by the Provincial Auditor, because I am quoting 
the Provincial Auditor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite profess to support the work 
of the Provincial Auditor. The Provincial Auditor, in her report 
and then again in committee just a couple of days ago, said that 
there were no red flags. There was no wrongdoing. There was 
no conflict of interest, and there was no fraud. Would the 
members opposite please indicate whether or not they support 
the Provincial Auditor and her work? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Rural Municipalities and Revenue Sharing 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, still no answers. All we get 
from the Sask Party is spin, spin, spin. And worse, cuts, cuts, 
and more cuts: schools, hospitals, people living with 
disabilities, and the list goes on. Now it’s rural municipalities 
who will see the cuts. 



1274 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2016 

Leading up to the election, this government promised there will 
be no changes to revenue sharing for rural municipalities. But 
they also didn’t release a budget. Maybe that’s because they 
knew they would have to break their promise. Less than a year 
later, the Minister of Government Relations said they will be 
reviewing resource sharing. That would be less money for 
municipalities, even though they promised things would be the 
same. To the Minister of Government Relations: why weren’t 
they upfront with rural municipalities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate that day 
after day, question after question, we need to correct what the 
members opposite say. That is really unfortunate because that’s 
not what was said. 
 
Yesterday when I spoke with SARM, I reviewed the 
revenue-sharing commitments that we have made over the years 
since we introduced revenue sharing, with a formula, something 
the members opposite wouldn’t do. I think the member opposite 
should know at the time that they had the honour of being 
government, there were tax revolts around this province 
because of the lack of action under the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I did outline that there are some challenges and 
that we would be reviewing everything, but I did not say that 
we were going to discontinue revenue sharing. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, rural municipalities will be 
getting less money, even though they were promised that they 
could count on that funding. These municipalities grow the food 
we eat and they are essential to our resource sectors. They are 
major players in our economy. 
 
SARM has said they need more money to address crumbling 
roads and bridges — crumbling roads, Mr. Speaker, and 
crumbling bridges. This infrastructure is essential. It is essential 
to our economy. But the Sask Party isn’t interested. They are 
saying one thing and doing another. Whether it’s a bridge in 
Prince Albert, a road from Wollaston Lake, or the many rural 
and remote roads that SARM is speaking about, this 
government turns a blind eye. Mr. Speaker, when will the Sask 
Party acknowledge that their scandals and mismanagement are 
costing our municipalities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, since we formed 
government, $580 million has been dedicated to municipalities 
through the municipal sharing agreement. The member opposite 
needs to understand her file before she stands up to do a 
question. She should know that the revenue sharing is a formula 
based on the PST [provincial sales tax]. The PST is down, Mr. 
Speaker. Municipalities understand that it is a percentage of the 
PST. If the PST reduces, so does the revenue sharing, Mr. 
Speaker. She needs to understand her file and do the math. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Budget Legislation 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, earlier this spring, the Sask Party 
scrapped our province’s balanced budget law retroactively. 
With one stroke of the pen, they undid 20 years of protection 
for taxpayers and left Saskatchewan people vulnerable to that 
government’s growing debt and scandals. 
 
This is alarming, because that cabinet just authorized the 
government to take on $6 billion more in new debt, and the 
Minister of Finance wants us to just trust him. At committee he 
told me that he was getting together with officials “in 
preparation for new legislation which will be introduced in the 
fall session.” Mr. Speaker, we are quickly running out of days 
in this fall sitting. Will the Minister of Finance deliver on his 
promise and present a balanced budget law before the end of 
this fall sitting? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker and I thank the 
hon. member for the question. The fact of the matter is, Mr. 
Speaker, we are consulting as I indicated in committee and 
when we talked about this in committee in the spring session 
with respect to a new fiscal accountability framework for the 
province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are consulting with the Provincial Auditor . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well is the member from Athabasca interested 
in an answer or is he just going chirp from his seat, Mr. 
Speaker? . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Okay, he’s going to 
chirp. He’s going to chirp from his seat then, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what I’ve indicated is we are going to consult with other 
ministries of Finance across the country, Mr. Speaker, to see 
what’s working in those provinces. We’re going to consult with 
academics. We’re going to consult with the Provincial Auditor. 
We will be bringing forward a fiscal accountability framework, 
Mr. Speaker, when it’s ready to introduce in this Legislative 
Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Government House Leader on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — To move a motion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked for 
leave. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Leaves of Absence 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
move the following motion, by leave of the Assembly: 



November 10, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1275 

That leave of absence be granted to the members of Regina 
Pasqua, Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood, and Regina 
Lakeview for Thursday, November 10th, 2016 to attend the 
38th CPA Canadian regional seminar in Quebec City, 
Quebec on behalf of this Assembly. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has a moved 
a motion: 
 

That leave of absence be granted to the members of Regina 
Pasqua, Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood, and Regina 
Lakeview for Thursday, November 10th, 2016 to attend the 
38th CPA Canadian regional seminar in Quebec City, 
Quebec on behalf of this Assembly. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Before orders of the day, I would like 
to . . . Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would request leave to 
introduce a very special guest. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave to introduce 
guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 
thank members for their indulgence. Actually it’s rare that I get 
to introduce my wife in this Assembly, and she’s here. She’s 
just joined us, seated in your gallery. I think she was in town 
yesterday for some meetings. She’s on the board of the Red 
Cross. And, Mr. Speaker, I’ve tried to put it on the public 
record just the importance of our relationship and of our 
marriage. I don’t think I’ve done it adequately, and she may be 
not very pleased with this, me doing it in this way. But I just 
want to say for the record that I simply couldn’t do this job 
without her and she means the world to me and I’m so grateful 
that she’s here today in Regina. I’d ask members to welcome 
Tami to her Legislative Assembly. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I’m prepared to rule 
on the point of order raised yesterday by the Government House 
Leader. 
 
[11:00] 
 
He stated that during question period the Leader of the 
Opposition used the term “scandal-plagued member” as well as 
“scandal-plagued minister.” He asked that the phrases be 

reviewed to determine if they were in order. The Opposition 
Deputy House Leader responded that she believed that the 
words used were, “minister who is plagued by scandal.” 
 
I reviewed the record from November 9th, 2016 on page 1236 
of Hansard. The Leader of the Opposition said, and I quote, 
“The minister of course has been plagued by scandal . . . ” I find 
the language used by the Leader of the Opposition is 
acceptable. The point of order is well taken. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Members should know not to challenge the 
Speaker unless the Speaker made a mistake on a Thursday, late 
in the week, session. The last line, to clarify for members, is, 
the point of order is not well taken. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to question 172 and 173. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered questions 
172 to 173. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 
 

Accelerated Well Cleanup Program 
 
Mr. Steele: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you and to all the members of the Assembly and to 
all those around this great province watching this debate, it is an 
honour to stand before you today and speak about a proposed 
program that this government feels very strongly about. The 
program to which I am referring is accelerated well cleanup 
program, AWCP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the remarks today I will be speaking about 
the importance of the energy sector in this province as well as 
going into detail about potential of this program and outlining 
the positive economic and environmental impact it could have. 
And at the end of those remarks I will be making a motion that 
will call upon the federal government to support and invest in 
this proposed program and in turn put many hard-working 
energy sector employees of this province back to work. 
 
I want to begin, Mr. Speaker, by highlighting the fact that oil 
and gas industry has been a long and proud part of the national 
and provincial history. With the discovery of an abundant 
supply of crude oil and natural gas in the West, Canada’s oil 
and gas industry began expanding its vast pipeline network 
back in the 1950s. This expansion contributed significantly to 
the development of domestic and international energy markets, 
all while propelling the Canadian economy forward. Mr. 
Speaker, those facts still ring true today, as Canadians and their 
international counterparts still rely on natural gas products 
made from crude oil to meet more than two-thirds of their 



1276 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2016 

energy needs each and every day. 
 
Furthermore the oil and gas sector still remains an important 
driver not only to our provincial economy but also of our 
national economy. In fact my home constituency of Cypress 
Hills, although sparsely populated, has a large oil and gas 
industry which contributes greatly to overall energy sources 
within this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan has a significant 
interest in ensuring that the Saskatchewan oil and gas industry 
is maintained and holds a competitive position amongst 
Canadian energy producing provinces while ensuring the 
development occurs in an environmentally responsible manner. 
This is because the oil and gas sector alone will bring in $600 
million of revenue into our province this year alone in form of 
corporate income taxes, resources, sales taxes, fuel taxes, 
personal income tax, and royalties and surface lease rentals. Mr. 
Speaker, this revenue will help to support public pensions, 
provide health care, build schools as well as hospitals, housing, 
and highways. 
 
In addition approximately 300 oil and gas well companies that 
operate wells in Saskatchewan generate significant profits for 
both SaskPower and SaskEnergy. Moreover the energy sector 
accounts for 15 per cent of Saskatchewan’s gross domestic 
product, GDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2015 the oil and gas industry accounted for an 
estimated 33,000 direct and indirect jobs and years of 
employment. Also in 2015, there was nearly 178 million barrels 
of oil produced in this province for a combined value of 8.3 
billion. 
 
Industry investment of oil and gas in the new exploration and 
development is also accounting . . . account in this province. In 
fact this year alone it is estimated that 3.6 billion has been 
invested in further exploration in Saskatchewan’s land. Mr. 
Speaker, it appears that trend will continue into the next year, as 
it has been reported that Saskatchewan is expected to drill more 
oil and gas wells in 2017 than any other Canadian province, 
even more than Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Although this is great news for our province, there is no 
denying that since the global oil and gas markets began taking a 
downturn in late 2014, our oil and gas companies at home have 
also taken a hit. During oil price downturns, producers 
implemented steps to reduce costs in drilling, operating, 
servicing wells. This often translates into layoffs of the energy 
workers and, in many cases, abandonment of oil and gas wells. 
 
Mr. Speaker, although this province maintains an 
unemployment rate below the national average and is in a 
unique position to weather the effects of the oil and gas price 
slump due to our diversified economy when accompanied to 
other resource-driven economies, we as a government take the 
plight of these energy workers very seriously and want to 
continue to do our part to minimize the impact of falling oil 
prices on Saskatchewan’s oil and gas services employees and 
their families. 
 
Furthermore, Mr. Speaker, we believe that we have a plan that, 
if supported by the federal government, would put over 1,000 of 

these laid-off energy workers back on the job sites and clean up 
around 1,000 of those abandoned well sites. The proposed 
accelerated well cleanup program, which this government first 
brought to the attention of Ottawa back in February of this year, 
calls for a $156 million investment from the federal government 
to stimulate employment into the energy sector of this province. 
That type of investment would give this government the ability 
to create an estimated 1,200 jobs by accelerating the cleanup 
and decommissioning of abandoned and suspended oil and gas 
well sites all over Saskatchewan over a two-year period. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that means that former oil and gas services 
workers would not only be put back to work, but would also be 
working in the sector that they are knowledgeable in, making it 
the most qualified profession to do this type of work. These 
workers would be working on cleaning up and reclaiming a 
wide variety of non-producing oil and gas wells, ranging from 
smaller well sites that cost around $50,000 to clean up to much 
more complex projects that would require around $1 million to 
complete the decommission. 
 
Regardless of the size of the abandoned wells, these 
re-employed energy workers would be tasked with sealing up 
wellbores so that no fluids or gases could escape, and would be 
removing any distracted equipment left on these sites. 
 
Additionally the province would receive another economic 
benefit from the creation of this program. Industry would pay a 
tax to the province for taking on the cleanup of these abandoned 
wells, giving us another source of revenue. Mr. Speaker, I really 
want to draw your attention to that. 
 
Government is dedicated to creating employment opportunities 
for our citizens. In fact this government has a record of creating 
these, job growth for the citizens, since we’ve taken office 
nearly a decade ago. In fact, between 2007 and 2015 our 
province’s employment numbers increased by over 13 per cent. 
The numbers are even higher for full-time employment, which 
increased under this government by over 15 per cent. Mr. 
Speaker, the creation of nearly 1,200 jobs through this proposed 
program in one of the other most important industries is just 
another example of this record. 
 
Moreover, this government knows that the creation of these 
jobs would not only be great for those individuals, families, and 
communities who have felt the impact of low oil and gas prices, 
but also for Saskatchewan and our economy as a whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know what to point out that the advantages of 
this program are not limited to only job creation and economic 
stimulus. If this proposed program is backed with a one million, 
fifty-six dollars investment by our national program, there 
would also be numerous environmental benefits. Mr. Speaker, 
much of the positive environmental impact I’m referring to 
would be seen during the reclaiming and restoration stage of the 
orphan well and gas well sites cleanup. 
 
Each site would receive an environmental assessment upon the 
beginning of the abandoned well cleanup to determine the 
environmental impact the well site had on the area and to 
determine if there are any remaining environmental hazards on 
the site. The reclamation process would then begin. This would 
include the safe removal of, recycling of any old equipment left 



November 10, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1277 

and abandoned on well sites, attempting to redeem an 
environmental impact identified in the initial environmental 
assessment, such as oil or salt-water spills, and then further, 
finally restoration of the contouring of the sites so that is 
formed . . . natural conditions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another environmental benefit would be through 
the reduction of greenhouse gases and emissions emitted by 
these old sites. With the sealing of these orphan wells, 
greenhouse gases like methane and carbon dioxide still present 
in the well would no longer be able to escape into the 
atmosphere through the wellbore. 
 
Furthermore a proper and thorough decommission and cleanup 
of these abandoned well sites would enhance public safety, as 
the area of land which the sites occupy will no longer pose an 
environmental threat nor will they be potentially a safety hazard 
to people or animals. 
 
[11:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, one final note I want to mention, something that 
the leader of this government, our Premier, Mr. Brad Wall, has 
said about this program. Although it is well documented that the 
province is not legally responsible to clean up these orphan 
wells, the Premier noted when he first sent this proposal to 
Ottawa, that what is our responsibility is helping our people of 
this province. I along with all my colleagues on this side of the 
House agree with this and as a government feel that the 
accelerated well cleanup program has the potential to allow us 
to fulfill that responsibility and help some of the individuals and 
families from the energy sector in this province who are 
struggling right now. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, because of the importance of the oil and gas to 
our province and the national economy, as well as potential in 
the economy, the environmental benefits that the proposed 
accelerated well cleanup program could have for the citizens of 
the province of Saskatchewan, I would like to make the 
following motion: 
 

That this Assembly supports a call on the federal 
government to immediately implement our government’s 
proposed national abandoned well completion program that 
would put over 1,000 Saskatchewan energy workers back 
to work. 

 
And I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Cypress Hills has moved 
the motion: 
 

That this Assembly supports a call on the federal 
government to immediately implement our government’s 
proposed national abandoned well completion program that 
would put over 1,000 Saskatchewan energy workers back 
to work. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker 
. . . or Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry. As always, it’s important to me 

to be able to rise in the Assembly here to enter into these 
debates. This particular program, I think the first thing that is 
very important to note is how the downturn in oil prices across 
the world have affected families and people here in 
Saskatchewan. And we know that the Estevan area and 
Weyburn area have been particularly hard hit, and this has 
caused so much distress for young families, people who have 
moved there to work in the industry and now, as the global 
production increases, we see the price dropping and they’re 
subject to the whims of the international global oil market, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So that’s a devastating hit for these young families. I’ve heard 
stories of, you know, a wedding happening near Kipling, and 
the day before the wedding the man in the couple lost his job in 
the oil patch. So you can just imagine how this is hitting these 
young families that have moved there with the hopes of finding 
work for their families. That’s something I think we need to 
keep first and foremost in this discussion. 
 
And this downturn in the economy is affecting other parts of the 
province as well, Mr. Speaker. There was just an article in the 
paper yesterday or the day before of the impact on downtown 
Saskatoon. And we know that corporate and retail spaces are 
hurting right now, Mr. Speaker. It was an issue in discussion in 
the Saskatoon civic election, Mr. Speaker, where we know that 
the downtown Saskatoon is hurting because of the downturn in 
the oil prices. And even there was an article about Unreal City 
in downtown Saskatoon on 2nd Avenue where my son used to 
really enjoy going to buy his comics, and this store is closing 
down. It’s been in operation for many years but the downturn in 
the oil economy is affecting him and his business. It’s driving 
prices in retail spaces in Saskatoon downtown into places where 
people simply cannot keep their doors open anymore. 
 
So certainly this is something we know. When oil prices drop 
like this, it creates all sorts of issues for a lot of people, and 
very serious issues for a lot of people. And you know, then I 
think what the problem then is, what do we turn to look to? 
When the global markets are depressed like this and our own 
sector then is hit really hard, what do we do? Well I think one 
of the things we look to is the government for much better 
leadership. 
 
And what I want to harken back to is the opportunity that’s 
been lost since 2009 when this government went through the 
third reading of The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse 
Gases Act, but never actually put that bill into effect. And what 
we know that would have done, is it would have put a number 
of high emitters into sort of a cap system where they could only 
emit so much, and anything that came over that, they would be 
required to pay a price for that carbon into what they call a 
technology fund. This is a very useful mechanism to inject 
money into the economy. 
 
And also what The Conference Board of Canada said, it would 
also create jobs. And we do not see a government focused on 
creating new greentech jobs which would help us buffer in the 
times when oil prices are depressed by a glut in the market. So I 
think that’s really unfortunate. 
 
Another opportunity that may be missed as long the Premier 
continues to throw temper tantrums about the federal 



1278 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2016 

government’s heavy-handed imposition of a carbon tax, is the 
fact that this government will be able to use those revenues to 
help deal with some of these programs. The revenues that come 
from that heavy-handed carbon tax would actually be given to 
the Premier and to his cabinet, and then he could certainly work 
on programs like the accelerated well cleanup program, if in 
fact it is something that the government should even get 
involved in, in the first place. 
 
Because we know full well, Mr. Speaker, that when oil was a 
dollar forty a barrel, Mr. Speaker, these oil companies knew 
that the decommissioning of these well sites was their fiscal 
responsibility. And you have to ask yourself, what sort of 
preparations, what sort of advance preparations did these 
companies look at when oil was a dollar forty a barrel, to take 
care of their legal obligations? 
 
And it just makes you wonder, Mr. Speaker, what were they 
thinking when they actually don’t have the funds in place right 
now? Or perhaps they do. That’s the other question, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s an article coming out of the Oilfield Service 
News on February that talks about how oil companies deal with 
their responsibilities under these types of arrangements. 
 
Now this article was in response to the Premier’s impassioned 
plea for assistance from the federal government back in 
February. And here we are talking about it again, Mr. Speaker, 
as probably a diversion so we don’t have to talk about the 
scandals of the GTH and the excessive — well the auditor 
called it very irresponsible — spending of money, which we 
can’t hear from any members of cabinet who were involved in it 
at the time, get up and tell us what really happened. 
 
And as always we are stuck listening to one or two appointed 
cabinet ministers to use the same tired old lines about how the 
auditor did her job. And you know what, Mr. Speaker? The 
auditor did do her job. We’ve said that repeatedly The ministers 
opposite aren’t listening. She did her job and now we have a job 
to do. We in the official opposition have a job to ask those 
questions that arise out of her report. 
 
Why this government is so scared of answering those questions 
is something that provides me with great concern, Mr. Speaker. 
And it’s something I think the people of Saskatchewan need to 
be rightfully concerned about because we’re not getting the 
answers from the Minister of Justice. We’re not getting the 
answers from the former ministers who were responsible for 
those portfolios. The Minister of Health used to be the minister 
of Highways responsible for GTH. We know that the Minister 
Responsible for Government Relations was the head of Crown 
Investments Corporations when that deal first went on the 
cabinet table. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have a government that won’t answer 
questions about that, and then they use this kind of 75-minute 
debate motion, and then they use this kind of motion to divert 
the discussion from where the real issues are, Mr. Speaker. So 
that’s really, I think, deceptive. It’s deceptive on the part of this 
government and it’s deceptive on the part of the former cabinet 
ministers who were trying to not discuss the issue. 
 
At any rate, here we are again on this red herring, and it’s 
unfortunate that the poor member from Cypress had to bring it 

forward. What I know is really interesting is why . . . We know 
that the riding of Cypress Hills would have benefited greatly 
from the Keystone XL pipeline. We have to ask why it didn’t 
go through, Mr. Speaker. It’s because the stubbornness of this 
Premier to deal in the global world in terms of how things are 
unfolding with the . . . 
 
And if he hadn’t made such a mess of his negotiations, if he 
hadn’t made such a mess of the negotiation and made us look so 
bad to the American government, that pipeline would have gone 
through. 
 
And they laugh, Mr. Speaker. They laugh because they know 
I’m right, Mr. Speaker. They’re laughing because they know 
I’m right, and that Brad Wall did everything he could do . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I’m having trouble . . . [inaudible] . . . 
hearing the member from Saskatoon Nutana. I recognize the 
member. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
One of the things this article pointed out was that this idea, and 
I’m quoting, “The idea was the brainchild of Dan Cugnet, 
chairman of Valleyview Petroleums Ltd., an independent 
exploration and production company from Weyburn.” Mr. 
Speaker, we know that Mr. Cugnet is a big supporter of this 
party and has continually helped out this party with corporate 
donations. And we have to wonder why an exploration and 
production company who is responsible legally for the 
decommissioning of these well sites, why was it his brainchild, 
and what is it he’s looking for? He is looking for help because 
he can’t pay for his own responsibilities, Mr. Speaker? I think 
that’s too clever by far. 
 
This article goes on to say, “That Saskatchewan would be 
requesting federal financial assistance for activities well-known 
to be the responsibility of the E & P company mineral rights 
lessee seemed to take everyone by surprise,” Mr. Speaker. And 
well it should. Why would Saskatchewan intervene in some sort 
of plan like this to take over the responsibilities of the E & P 
[exploration and production] companies whose liability it is, 
who didn’t save for these times when oil was a dollar forty a 
barrel, much like this province went through our rainy day fund 
in the best times this province has ever seen? So I guess the oil 
companies took a page from the Premier’s book when they 
blew through all that money, and now all of a sudden the oil 
companies . . . And there’s no motivation for the oil companies 
to clean it up at this point, Mr. Speaker, so I’m going to . . . As 
always, running out of time. 
 
But here’s a quote again from the article: “After all, E & P 
companies try to compliantly decommission wells with minimal 
investment because there is no upside beyond the settlement of 
an existing liability on their balance sheet.” No motivation for 
these oil and gas companies to do that, and yet the Premier is 
asking the taxpayer of Saskatchewan to do the same. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would like 
to add my support to the motion: 
 



November 10, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1279 

That this Assembly supports a call on the federal 
government to immediately implement our government’s 
proposed national abandoned well completion program that 
would put over 1,000 Saskatchewan energy workers back 
to work. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, whether the opposition wants to accept it 
or not, the oil and gas industry in Saskatchewan now plays, and 
will continue to be, a very important part of our economy. Oil 
and gas accounts for just over 15 per cent of this province’s 
GDP. New exploration and development in the oil and gas 
sector was $3.6 billion in 2015. The combined value of oil and 
gas production was 8.3 billion in 2015. There were an estimated 
33,000 direct and indirect person-years of employment in the 
upstream oil and gas sector in this province. In Canada, 
Saskatchewan ranks number two in national oil production, and 
number three in national gas production. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are at an unprecedented time in our 
economic history. After cleaning up the NDP legacy of poor 
resource sector development and stopping the flow of young 
people to Alberta to find work, we find ourselves in an 
economic downturn. Unfortunately pipeline development has 
hit some major hurdles. Oil prices are mired in below 
cost-of-production levels, and we’re hearing daily from skilled, 
out-of-work oil workers who are walking that fine line of 
whether they’re being able to support their families. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, my hometown of Churchbridge, located 
60 miles north of the nearest oil well, I know of a number, a 
number of young people who have been working in the oil 
patch. A couple have managed to stay on with the original 
companies, but at a significantly reduced salary. One individual 
owns his own oil service company and has laid off 50 per cent 
of his employees. One has gone to work on an American-owned 
rig in Kyrgyzstan. A couple others went to BC [British 
Columbia] in hopes of finding work in gas fields. The rest are 
applying, waiting, and wondering if there’ll be work for them 
soon. 
 
These are all young people with families to feed, house 
payments to make, and a community to support. At $50 per 
barrel oil and an uncertain future lying ahead in regards to 
pipeline development, they are really unsure of where their 
future is. Mr. Speaker, we need to keep our rural communities 
strong. Schools continue to have students. The hockey rinks 
keep busy, and there are parents shopping at the local co-op. 
These communities continue to have good-wage-earning 
taxpayers that help keep the local and the provincial economy 
strong. 
 
[11:30] 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan has one of the most 
productive workforces in the country. In 2014 Saskatchewan’s 
labour productivity was $56.50 per hour, compared to $53 an 
hour nationally, meaning for every hour of labour worked, 
$56.50 was added to Saskatchewan’s real GDP. Saskatchewan 
has the lowest unit cost of labour among provinces and one of 
the most loyal workforces in the country. Despite net 
employment growth of 5,200 jobs in 2015, the resource sector 
has been struggling during that same period. We cannot afford 
to lose these quality workers to some other province or 

jurisdiction. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a solution to retaining the skilled 
workforce in this province, and it is called the accelerated well 
cleanup program in Saskatchewan. This proposal calls for $156 
million in federal funding to help stimulate employment in the 
oil and gas support sector by accelerating the cleanup of oil 
wells no longer capable of production. There are an estimated 
20,500 suspended wells in this province that are currently not 
producing and are waiting to be decommissioned and/or 
reclaimed. Not all of those are truly orphan wells. 
 
An orphan well is defined as a well that has been investigated 
and confirmed as not having any legal responsible or financially 
able party to deal with its abandonment and reclamation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, contrary to what the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana believes, our province has acted very 
responsibly, and that has developed an orphan well program in 
2009 that was designed to ensure that the cost of abandoning 
and remediating orphan wells and facilities are being paid for 
solely through an industry-funded levy system or security 
deposits that are collected from the licences before they become 
defunct. 
 
Since that fund was established, the ministry has observed 230 
orphan wells that have been successfully abandoned and 
decommissioned and has remediated and reclaimed 
approximately 63 orphan wells at a total cost of approximately 
$8.3 million. 
 
They also have security deposits totalling $68 million from 
distressed oil companies to ensure that there is money available 
to decommission in times of bankruptcy or financial distress. 
However there are far more wells abandoned than there are 
security deposits for, and this is where we are seeking federal 
assistance to get those truly abandoned wells reclaimed and our 
oil field workers back to work. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, with our federal ask of $156 million, it is 
estimated that our province could clean up an additional 1,000 
orphan wells. On the average, a well cleanup could cost 
anywhere from 50,000 to $150,000 per well. At the $156 
million funding level, it is estimated that the cleanup project 
could bring 1,000 more oil field employees back to work. These 
employees would be responsible for environmental site 
assessments, removal of old equipment, remediation of oil and 
salt-water spills, restoration and re-contouring the site, and the 
revegetation of land. 
 
Not only are there physical environmental benefits, but it will 
also assist the government in reducing its greenhouse gas 
emissions by eliminating fugitive emissions from the old 
wellheads such as methane and butane. 
 
A Princeton University study analyzed a small number of 
abandoned wells in Pennsylvania. They found that all wells 
leaked a certain amount of methane, but they found that over 16 
per cent leaked more than 3.2 cubic metres of gas per day. This 
amount would supply a large house its daily gas requirements. 
Unchecked in the United States, this could represent 13 per cent 
of all the human-caused methane emissions in that country. 
 



1280 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2016 

Mr. Speaker, orphan wells are not just a western Canadian 
issue. All through the shale oil region of the United States 
similar numbers are evident — North Dakota and South 
Dakota, Nebraska, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Oklahoma, just to name 
a few states. These have abandoned oil wells found beneath 
homes. They’ve found them underneath buildings, underneath 
streets. They’re under busy streets. They’re in parks. They’re 
found in backyards, forests, and cornfields all through the 
United States. There have been open well holes in the ground in 
the United States from the 1800s. And these are concerns 
throughout North America, that these abandoned wells have 
been leaking oil, natural gas, and brine into soil and drinking 
water. And it even posed explosion risks. 
 
Secondly, fixing orphan wells in Saskatchewan is going to 
restore agriculture land and habitat to its original state. Oil and 
salt-affected soils will be removed, and this land will be placed 
back to its original productive state. This is going to improve 
the safety of grazing livestock and wildlife around the old well 
sites. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that this is a common sense 
approach to a multi-level problem. If these environmental issues 
are not cleaned up soon, they’re going to become a larger, more 
expensive environmental issue into the future. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, critics of this idea have suggested that the 
industry should pay for this problem. However a recent court 
decision in Alberta, the Redwater Energy case, ruled that in the 
case of a bankruptcy, energy companies must use their 
remaining assets to pay back their lenders before cleaning up 
old well sites. Unfortunately this ruling reduces the ability of 
even government regulators to ensure that they have secured 
adequate funds to properly decommission a well. 
 
With the economic slowdown in the oil and gas sector being 
experienced today, it’s safe to assume that the levies generated 
for the orphan well fund are going to be reduced, and that the 
impending bankruptcies that we’re going to see among 
producers is going to increase the number of orphan wells into 
the future. 
 
While increasing levies on solvent producers, which our friends 
across the floor are encouraging, it’s going to add additional 
taxes to an already struggling industry, as it’s about as 
beneficial as adding a carbon tax to that same industry. 
 
The federal government is searching for new and unique ways 
to stimulate the economy. What better way to get small 
companies and people back to work. It’s these small companies 
and their workforce that are the backbone to the oil and gas 
industry in this province. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we owe it to the 
Scotts and the Davids and Jackies in rural Saskatchewan; they 
deserve to get back to work. Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting 
the motion put forward by the member of Cypress Hills. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I want to add my voice to some of the issues that we’re 
speaking of today. 
 
And before I begin that, I want to point out that from our 
perspective as a caucus in opposition that we certainly 

understand that the oil patch has been hurting. There are many 
families impacted. There have been many people that lost their 
jobs, and you see evidence of that throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, the whole western part of the 
country in fact certainly has paid their price as a result of the 
low oil prices, Mr. Speaker. And as official opposition, we want 
to be able to recognize that and to tell the workers that, from 
our perspective, we certainly feel their pain. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the reasons why this debate is 
coming forward is because the Saskatchewan Party wants to 
play politics with the oil workers, Mr. Speaker. That’s exactly 
what this is about. We all know it, in the sense that . . . The hurt 
is happening out there, Mr. Speaker, then they shouldn’t further 
exacerbate the issue by simply playing politics with many of 
these workers’ lives and certainly their livelihood. 
 
Now what I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, is that as we begin 
the discussion, the first thing I want to do is recognize that the 
oil patch is hurting. And this motion is really asking the federal 
government to spend something like $156 million on cleaning 
up some of the wells that the various members made reference 
to. I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that this is the same 
government that’s standing up here today and that killed the 
film tax credit that created a lot of jobs in the province of 
Saskatchewan. The Saskatchewan Party government ended that 
program. That cost a lot of jobs for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
You look at the northern part of the province, Mr. Speaker. 
Now they’re really messing up the opportunity behind the 
NORTEP program. Well nobody’s talking about those jobs lost, 
Mr. Speaker. You look at the Buffalo Narrows Correctional 
Centre, the jobs lost by those families in that particular 
community, Mr. Speaker. We’re not making any reference to 
that. Let’s talk about the SaskTel jobs that have been recently 
slashed in Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. How come we’re not 
speaking of those families impacted, Mr. Speaker? Let’s look at 
the challenges of housing in northern Saskatchewan. Why 
aren’t those issues being addressed, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Let’s talk about the infrastructure commitment that the federal 
government made, Mr. Speaker. Let’s talk about the federal 
government making commitment towards infrastructure for 
water and sewer and highways, Mr. Speaker, for all these 
necessary projects that really quite frankly the people of 
Saskatchewan are in desperate need of, Mr. Speaker. Let’s talk 
about the uranium industry, where they’re also hurting, Mr. 
Speaker. Let’s talk about forestry, where it also has many great 
challenges. Let’s talk about tourism in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So one of the points that I would raise, Mr. Speaker, is the fact 
that all these industries in Saskatchewan that are hurting, 
including the oil sector, Mr. Speaker, is because we had the 
opportunity a number of years ago — four, five, six years, Mr. 
Speaker — and this government refused to react to the situation 
then, where people were telling them, take the record revenue 
that you’ve enjoyed, create a legacy fund, stimulate the other 
sectors of the economy as quickly as you can. And, Mr. 
Speaker, in their failure to do that, they come along years later 
when they’re broke and try and play politics with many of the 
oil workers’ lives. And I say shame on them, Mr. Speaker. That 
is simply not something that they should be doing on a 



November 10, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1281 

continual basis because, if I was an oil worker, Mr. Speaker, 
and I lost my job and I see these kind of antics that the 
Saskatchewan Party is pulling to try and create uncertainty out 
there, Mr. Speaker, well that’s not fair at all. 
 
So one of the things I think’s really important is that as some of 
the members throw out these stats, Mr. Speaker, we want to 
throw out some stats as well. Why all of a sudden, out of the 
blue the Premier makes this motion, makes this motion without 
advising the opposition that this motion was coming forward? 
That goes to our point, Mr. Speaker. We were totally blind 
sided by this motion. Had the Premier had provided the 
leadership necessary on this particular motion and consulted 
with us, Mr. Speaker, we wouldn’t be in a situation where we 
are allowing them to play politics with many of these oil 
workers’ lives. 
 
But for the reference and for the record, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
point out some of the things that people should know. We know 
that the Saskatchewan Party government in 2014 received the 
following amounts from some of the oil and gas companies in 
donations, and I’m saying the oil and gas companies, not the 
workers: from the Canadian Association of Oilwell Drilling 
Contractors, $1,820; from CAPP [Canadian Association of 
Petroleum Producers], 1,183; from CNRL [Canadian Natural 
Resources Ltd.], 1,820; from Cenovus, 14,618; Crescent Point, 
5,820; Ensign Well Servicing, 2,825; T Bird Oil, 1,000; Teine 
Energy, 1,000; Villanova 4 Oil company, $1,820. So, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s seven or eight companies there that provided 
the Saskatchewan Party with $31,900 in 2014 in donations 
alone. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what is this about? Is it about protecting 
workers out in the field, Mr. Speaker? Is it about having the oil 
rig workers and the people that are going to clean up these sites, 
is it about them, Mr. Speaker? No, it’s not about them, Mr. 
Speaker. They have . . . Quite frankly, the Saskatchewan Party 
are using, are using these workers, Mr. Speaker, simply because 
they’re in a situation where they’re being called on some of 
their scandals. And the fact of the matter is, is that to use the 
workers in this distracting way does a great disservice to them. 
 
So we go back to our earlier points, Mr. Speaker, around the 
economy itself. There are so many areas that are hurting. And 
the millions of dollars that are being required and requested 
from the federal government, we ask . . . The question is: where 
should some of those issues be addressed? And the hurting oil 
patch is one area we obviously have to focus on, Mr. Speaker, 
as government. And I want to point out that the NDP certainly 
have a proud history of how we’ve attracted investment in the 
province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we have in many 
ways, shapes, or forms have done a great service to the oil 
sector and the oil industry the province of Saskatchewan 
throughout our history. 
 
Now the Premier very well knows that when the former premier 
of Saskatchewan, Lorne Calvert, when he designed the royalty 
structure for oil and gas, Mr. Speaker, it prompted a lot of 
investment in the province of Saskatchewan. We brought the oil 
industry to the province of Saskatchewan. The Premier very 
well knows that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And look at the history. So one of the things that’s really 

important is that . . . The backbenchers may not know this, but 
when the Premier, when the current Premier became Premier, 
he said we’re not going to mess with the NDP’s royalty regime 
because that’s what’s attracting business and oil investment into 
Saskatchewan. Those were his exact words, Mr. Speaker. He’s 
going . . . They’re going to make sure that they’re not going to 
mess with the model set up by the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think it’s really important for the people out there in the 
oil sector and the oil patch to know, is that we did bring oil 
investment to the people of Saskatchewan. And this whole 
notion by the right-wing governments and the Saskatchewan 
Party’s mindset, they often make statements, Mr. Speaker, that 
are not very, not very visionary or well taken on our side of the 
Assembly. 
 
[11:45] 
 
Every time the economy of Saskatchewan . . . You look at the 
history of us as a province, and every time the economy of 
Saskatchewan is doing well, Mr. Speaker, the New Democrats 
were government of the day. Now what happened to the 
Saskatchewan Party? What happened to the Saskatchewan Party 
is they inherited, they inherited the boom, Mr. Speaker. They 
inherited the economy, and they inherited money in the bank. 
And a short time later, eight months later, Mr. Speaker, or eight 
years later this province is now in deficit. Every sector of our 
economy is hurting, Mr. Speaker.  
 
And they play politics by picking one particular part of the 
economy to try and create a nuisance for the NDP, Mr. Speaker. 
And I say shame on them for using the workers in this way. Do 
not use the workers as pawns in this whole challenge to try and 
get more revenues from the federal government to help a 
number of sectors in our economy. And I say to them today that 
it’s of great disservice to our oil industry overall. It’s a great 
disservice to the workers when you use them in this fashion 
because we know the only reason that they’re using them is to 
distract from many of their current challenges around the GTH, 
Mr. Speaker, and many of their scandals. That’s the reason 
they’re doing that today. We know it. The media know it. The 
people of Saskatchewan know it. And I daresay to the people 
. . . the Saskatchewan Party government that the workers know 
it too. So I think it’s time that the Saskatchewan Party start 
showing leadership and maturity around some of these things. 
These motions that they bring forward are meant to use people 
and meant to use the oil workers, Mr. Speaker. It’s not meant to 
support and defend them. 
 
And I’ll say to the people that are working in the oil sector, we 
understand that you’re challenged right now. We understand 
that you’re in a downturn. But I want to point out as a final 
comment that we will work with the oil sector to really begin to 
rebuild that industry, Mr. Speaker. That is our history. That is 
our legacy as a New Democratic Party. And I say once again 
that we understand the challenges that they’re facing. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to enter the debate around this important question 
because it’s something that is certainly a part of my 



1282 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2016 

constituency with the large amount of oil and gas activity in the 
constituency of Kindersley and well beyond that of course in 
many areas of our province: the Shaunavon area, the Swift 
Current area, the Lloydminster area, Estevan, Weyburn, and so 
on and so forth. Many, many areas of our province have oil and 
gas development in Saskatchewan. 
 
And the member opposite, the member from Athabasca, listed 
off company after company that may have contributed to the 
Saskatchewan Party. And I would also say that they make 
something much more of a contribution to Saskatchewan. They 
invest millions and millions of dollars into our economy of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. In addition to that, they employ 
thousands and thousands of people in Saskatchewan, those 
companies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think it’s time that members opposite said something 
other than derogatory comments about oil companies here in 
Saskatchewan and said, welcome to our province. Welcome to 
the investment that you have. Welcome to the jobs that you 
employ with people here in Saskatchewan. That’s the kind of 
thing . . . That’s the reason why there is so few members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why after April 4th of this 
year, Mr. Speaker, there are more members in this House than 
ever, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is an initiative to help the oil industry, Mr. Speaker. If you 
listen to the NDP opposite, it makes it sounds like this is an 
issue that’s just come up, oil well abandonment here in 
Saskatchewan. We have some 40,000 wells in our province, Mr. 
Speaker. Some of them have been in existence for decades, 
absolute decades, Mr. Speaker, and they’re at various levels of 
development. Some are abandoned. Some are still in play but 
are not producing right now because oil prices are as low as 
they are, and some are producing. And there’s other levels of 
development as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But you listen to the member from Nutana. It makes it sound 
like this is something that just happened in the last few years. 
Well it’s gone through successive governments, through many, 
many governments, where we’ve seen development of the oil 
and gas sector here in Saskatchewan. And unfortunately until 
recently, there was no oil abandonment reclamation plan in 
place until we made it happen here in Saskatchewan. And I 
think that’s an important point, Mr. Speaker, is we made it 
happen here in Saskatchewan to ensure that the future of the 
industry would be a much more responsible industry in terms of 
making sure that wells were cleaned up when they are 
abandoned in the future. And that’s an important point. And 
yes, absolutely there’s been companies that have gone bankrupt 
over the years or are no longer in existence, and wells that have 
to be cleaned up as a responsible way to do things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if the member from Athabasca was truly interested in 
seeing environmentally things being done in Saskatchewan and 
truly interested in employment, he would support this motion, 
Mr. Speaker. But he won’t, but he won’t support this motion, 
Mr. Speaker, and the reason is quite simple. The only thing he 
is ever interested in and the NDP are ever interested in is 
playing politics when it comes to these kinds of things, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s the true legacy of the NDP around the oil and 
gas industry. It’s all about the politics. And I will agree that, 
under the Lorne Calvert administration, they made some 

positive steps to attract industry here in Saskatchewan. And we 
supported it all the way, all the way. 
 
And if you were truly interested in again seeing the industry 
progress further, you would support this motion. But we all 
know, we all know that the member from Athabasca 
particularly, won’t do it. He’s only interested in the politics. 
He’s not interested in anything else. He’s not interested in the 
jobs. He’s not interested in cleaning up the environment here in 
Saskatchewan, and there’s lots of work to be done on that. And 
that’s precisely the reason why this government brought 
forward this idea that came from the oil industry itself because 
we feel that it’s important to take the steps. And they may be 
small steps initially to make a difference in the oil patch to 
clean up some of these wells. 
 
I come from an area that has oil and gas development. We see 
them all over the place and many of those companies are long 
gone, Mr. Speaker. And as a result of that, there has to be an 
initiative to drive this forward. There has to be something done, 
an impetus to make sure that we see this problem addressed in 
the future. And that’s precisely why, when the Premier went 
and spoke to members of the oil industry, they said this is 
maybe a small step, but at least it’s a step forward. And that’s 
something that I think is very, very important that we all have to 
recognize.  
 
Let’s set aside the politics for a little bit. Can we? I would ask 
the member from Nutana, if you are truly interested — and I 
know you are, I know you are — if you’re truly interested in the 
environment of Saskatchewan, and I think you are, you would 
support this motion because it is at least a positive step in the 
right direction, and she knows it. 
 
But unfortunately I don’t think that they will support this 
motion even though it speaks to the issues that they have been 
raising in the legislature for a long time which is the 
environment and jobs. I think this is a great initiative, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s something that the people of Saskatchewan, I 
believe, support very directly, Mr. Speaker. I think when you 
talk to people here in Saskatchewan they say, of course we want 
to see abandoned wells cleaned up properly. 
 
And of course there’s nobody in the industry anymore that 
believes that they should be absolved of any kind of liability 
around this, Mr. Speaker. In fact, I think the industry is very, 
very supportive of this simply because they know they have a 
responsibility to address the problems of the past, Mr. Speaker. 
And that’s why I think we will see the oil and gas industry . . . 
If the federal government offers some support for this program, 
and I hope they will, if they offer some support for this 
program, you would see wells being cleaned up in a systematic 
way here in Saskatchewan. They range from a relatively modest 
cost of a few thousand, $50,000 perhaps, to many hundreds of 
thousands of dollars depending on the amount of environmental 
reclamation that’s necessary, Mr. Speaker, for these wells. 
 
But at least it would be a step in the right direction. Any well 
that’s cleaned up is a well that doesn’t have to be cleaned up in 
the future, Mr. Speaker. It is an environmental liability that 
doesn’t have to be addressed in the future. It can be addressed 
now, Mr. Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, I think there’s very good 
reasons why the people of Saskatchewan would support this 



November 10, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1283 

motion before the people of Saskatchewan. I think we would 
see jobs being created here in our province. 
 
In the oil and gas sector right now, it is hurting. There’s no 
question about it. When you talk to members of the oil industry, 
and I talk to them all of the time in my constituency and other 
constituencies as well, many, many of them are laid off, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s a tough thing for a young family to have to 
deal with. That when the economy is as difficult as it is and 
there’s initiatives put forward by the government to help 
address the problems that there are in the oil industry, that we 
don’t see support from the federal government, and 
unfortunately we most certainly don’t see support from 
members opposite, Mr. Speaker. And that’s unfortunate to say 
the least, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The . . . [inaudible] . . . industry creates a tremendous amount of 
employment here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. It has for 
years and years and years, and that’s again a very important 
thing for the province of Saskatchewan to have that kind of 
development here in our province. About 15 per cent of our 
GDP is a direct result of the oil and gas industry here in the 
province, Mr. Speaker. There are thousands and thousands of 
people employed in the industry. Many unfortunately have been 
laid off. At least this is an initiative to try and reclaim some of 
those jobs for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s why I think . . . We certainly believe that there is 
initiatives here that are very, very good for Saskatchewan. 
There are billions of dollars that have been invested in the oil 
and gas sector here in Saskatchewan. We have a responsibility 
as legislators, I believe, to ensure that it is done in a responsible 
fashion, Mr. Speaker. And I would ask members opposite to 
really think about that, that we are doing everything we can, I 
believe, as a government to ensure that the oil and gas industry 
operates in a responsible fashion. And they do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If you go on any recently drilled oil well site here in 
Saskatchewan, you will see all of the efforts to mitigate 
problems that you can possibly imagine, Mr. Speaker. There’s 
huge amounts of training taking place, education taking place, 
new initiatives taking place, new technology that’s being put in 
place to ensure that spills don’t happen, to ensure that there’s 
going to be responsible education and responsible development 
in the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, yes, there are problems from time to time, and we’ve all 
seen those kinds of problems, most recently in the North 
Saskatchewan River. But it’s still, Mr. Speaker, the 
responsibility of all of us, I think, to ensure that the proper steps 
are put in place, to ensure that development is done in a 
responsible fashion. And this is one of those initiatives. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I will conclude by just saying once again, if the 
NDP were truly interested in the environment and truly 
interested in jobs, they would support this motion. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m happy 
to participate in this debate today. And I have to say, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, it’s not very often that I agree with some of the 
members across there, and I have to say there was a couple 

things there that I do agree about. 
 
When the member for Cypress Hills was talking about how 
orphan wells, if we don’t address them, there will be great 
environmental issues. There’s a lot of information with regards 
to that, and it is really troubling knowing that we have this 
potential environmental problem, you know, that we’re not 
completely addressing. And also the member for Kindersley, 
he’s right. Orphan wells aren’t anything new. It’s been 
something that’s been going on for a long time. 
 
When you have the oil and gas industry in your country and 
province, there’s going to be chances that that might happen. 
And I feel that this government didn’t fully look into a plan on 
addressing that when our oil and gas industry peaked, and . . . 
which was good. But we know that markets fluctuate, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And so as a government that’s responsible to 
plan for that. And this government was warned by the 
Provincial Auditor in 2012 about the issues of the orphaned 
wells. And so I’m going to summarize some of the things she 
said here: 
 

Oil and gas exploration and development provides a key 
source of revenue for the province; however, it comes with 
inherent environmental and financial risks. Based on our 
audit, we concluded that the Ministry of the Economy did 
not have effective processes to manage the financial and 
associated environmental risks related to the future 
clean-up of oil and gas wells and related facilities. 
 
The Ministry currently estimates the future clean up costs 
of existing oil and gas wells and their associated facilities 
could total $3.6 billion. Although licensees are responsible 
for cleanup, there is a risk that a . . . [potential] of the $3.6 
billion . . . [will] be borne by the Ministry and hence 
taxpayers because licensees may one day not have 
sufficient financial means to clean up their wells and 
facilities or they may not be identifiable or locatable when 
cleanup is needed. 
 
To date, only 10 of the estimated 700 potentially orphaned 
wells in Saskatchewan (wells where the licensee has no 
money or cannot be located) have been cleaned up. The 
Ministry needs to address the cleanup of orphan wells on a 
timely basis, update its estimate of clean up costs, and 
record the related liability in the Government’s financial 
statements. Its last estimate of $26 million to clean up 
orphaned wells and facilities is five years old. 

 
[12:00] 
 

Saskatchewan has 87,000 oil and gas wells and 5,300 
facilities. The number of non-producing wells increased by 
31%, or 7,000 wells, over the last five years. In order to 
mitigate the potential risks associated with an increasing 
number of inactive wells and facilities, the Ministry needs 
to assess what steps are needed to encourage their timely 
cleanup by licensees. 
 
The Ministry also needs to improve its public reporting on 
the effectiveness of its oil and gas well cleanup programs, 
so that the people of Saskatchewan are aware of the 
progress of its initiatives. 



1284 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2016 

Finally, we noted that the Ministry of the Economy is 
responsible for both promoting the development of oil and 
gas, as well as protecting the environment and the public 
from the impact of this development. We recommend that 
the Ministry assess its responsibilities and mitigate the 
risks associated with its dual, potentially conflicting, roles. 

 
This was presented by the auditor in 2012, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And I don’t understand why that wasn’t dealt with at that time. 
So the government has an Orphan Fund levy and fee, which I’m 
sure most of the members here are aware of. And so the purpose 
of this Orphan Fund levy and fee is so that it could deal with 
this exact issue. 
 
So this legislation was developed June of 2007, which I think 
was a great idea. And again that was supposed to . . . I’ll read 
what the purpose of it was: 
 

The Oil and Gas Orphan Fund provides funding to address 
the costs of abandoning and decommissioning orphan 
wells and facilities and reclaiming the sites, as well as the 
costs of containing environmental emergencies arising 
from oil and gas operations. The fund receives revenue 
primarily through an annual levy that is paid by the oil and 
gas industry, thereby protecting taxpayers from exposure to 
these industry liabilities. 

 
So again, this was introduced to protect the taxpayers so they’re 
not paying for the consequences of orphan wells due to the oil 
and gas industry and making the oil companies have to pay for 
that. So I don’t understand why that fund is not being used to 
deal with this issue. 
 
So the Saskatchewan Oil and Gas Orphan Fund was established 
as a means through which industry pays for the costs associated 
with orphan wells and facilities, therefore ensuring these costs 
do not get passed on to the Saskatchewan taxpayers — right 
here in the legislation.  
 
So that’s one of the issues that I feel is something that needs to 
be addressed is that this problem has been brought forward 
before. And what is the government doing with regards to the 
oil fund and levy that has already been collected? And if that 
wasn’t enough to deal with the situation we’re in . . . The 
auditor said in 2012 it wasn’t going to be enough. So why 
wasn’t something addressed then? Is it because they don’t want 
to approach the oil companies to get more money? Possibly. 
 
So we talked a little bit about the environmental . . . I want to 
discuss the environmental issues with regards to leaving these 
orphan wells. And so the major risk the ministry faces in 
cleaning up orphan wells and sites is ensuring the ability to 
respond in a timely manner when they occur. Often as sites 
become orphaned they may have fallen into a state of disrepair, 
and there are environmental impacts. 
 
So that’s something that we really need to look at. Even the 
provincial government said in a press release, environmental 
site assessment, the safe removal and disposal of old equipment, 
the remediation of oil and salt water spills, the restoration and 
re-contouring of the site, and the re-vegetation of the land — 
that’s what is really important. And again I thought that’s what 
that fund was originally for, was to restore land back to normal 

after orphan wells became orphan. 
 
So one thing I wanted to point out is that the oil industry again 
has been around for years and years and it’s been in other 
provinces, and it’s been in other countries, and especially the 
United States, and so I was doing some research with regards to 
what North Dakota does because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you 
might be surprised that right now for North Dakota they say that 
they only have one orphan well in their whole state. And the 
last time that they had more than one orphan well was in 2011 
when they had two orphan wells. And the reason why they 
don’t have the situation that we do is because they have some 
strict, firm timelines with regards to well reclamation, and so 
then they’re able to go after the oil companies in a timely 
fashion so that they didn’t declare bankruptcy. 
 
So what they have is, they have a use-it-or-lose-it policy in 
place. If a well has not produced any oil or gas in 12 straight 
months, one year, 12 straight months, North Dakota’s industrial 
commission requires the owner of the well to either start 
pumping or plug the well. If the state doesn’t get a response 
from the producer, it calls the company’s bond, levies fines, and 
plugs the well itself. So they’ll do it and then they bill the 
company, and so they hold the old oil companies responsible. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m not one that says that we 
shouldn’t be asking the federal government for some money, 
but there’s more than just oil workers that are out of jobs right 
now. We have 4,900 agriculture jobs that are lost in the past 
year. There’s 7,700 construction jobs lost over the past year, 
and there’s 4,400 fewer jobs for people who are age 15 to 24. 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we are going to go after the 
feds for some money, maybe we could put that towards getting 
other jobs as well, or fixing our highways and roads. Our 
infrastructure is challenged. Creating water and water waste 
infrastructure so communities across our province have access 
to clean drinking water, or fixing our schools and hospitals. 
 
I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there’s a lot of benefit if we 
do get some federal money from the feds, but I don’t 
necessarily think it should be covering up for oil companies. So 
thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Before we go to questions, I’d like to 
simply remind members to put their questions and their answers 
through the Chair. I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And we know that this motion is here today because it’s a 
channel changer for other issues that this government is dealing 
with. So I’m glad to see the member from Kindersley has 
finally found his feet and his voice. I would like to ask him why 
he encourages a special adviser to negotiate a deal that wasted 
$12 million, and will he let us know who . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The questions need to pertain to the 
motion, not to other subjects. I recognize the member from Sask 
Rivers. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t think 
there’s any doubt about it. This is a good idea that puts people 
back to work and has the benefit of being good for the 



November 10, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1285 

environment. Mr. Speaker, my question is to the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. Will the NDP go against their federal 
counterparts and join with us on calling for the Government of 
Canada to immediately fund this accelerated well cleanup 
program? Yes or no? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As we 
know, this particular debate is a channel changer for this 
government, and they’re using it to avoid answering questions 
— very important questions — on other issues such as the GTH 
scandal. So I think what really should be debated in this House 
is why this government won’t be able to put forward speakers 
that should answer important questions for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We know that this is a . . . The accelerated well program is one 
that’s the responsibility of oil companies. It always has been. It 
always will be. And for the government to step in in this way is 
a very unusual move. So it would be nice to hear from the 
member of Kindersley about what he thinks about this as well. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — The Premier has made helping companies 
who have not cleaned up their abandoned well sites a priority. 
His priority for scarce federal dollars is for these companies. 
How does the member from Cypress Hills think it looks when 
some of the companies that would benefit most have given the 
Sask Party over $55,000? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress 
Hills. 
 
Mr. Steele: — The oil well program is designed to take care of 
cleanup that should have been done in the past from when the 
opposition was in power. And companies are more than willing 
to step up and take care of this. We just need an incentive to 
move forward. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. In your speech, you said you understand the 
devastating effects of low oil prices. Then why would you not 
support this motion and support the Leap Manifesto? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — I’d like to thank the member from Moosomin 
for his question, Mr. Speaker. Of course we support the oil 
economy and we support the industry, and that’s why we’re 
asking for the industry to actually deal with this issue because 
it’s their legal responsibility. And we know that when . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Orphan wells is a completely 
different issue. Obviously the Minister of Finance doesn’t know 
about. 
 
No, we’re talking about abandoned wells, which is a completely 

different issue, Mr. Speaker. Orphan wells, there’s $11 million 
in the fund right now. There’s only 98 orphan wells, so that’s 
not the question that the member from Cypress put forward. 
 
We’re talking about the abandoned wells that the Premier asked 
the federal government to support, and these are not orphaned 
wells. These are the wells that are about to be decommissioned. 
This is a decommissioning process. You can check with the 
government officials if you’re not sure what we’re talking 
about. The point is, is that those companies are currently in 
business and they are currently liable for paying for those. 
That’s their legal responsibility, and that’s all we’re asking. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — How does the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats think it looks when on the same day that the 
Sask Party was asked to stop letting big company’s money flow 
into political coffers, the Premier called for public dollars to 
flow into some of those same private company’s coffers? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what we’re asking is the 
federal government to help participate in an environmental 
issue that we’ve got to deal with in this province. And you 
know, the access that we’ve allowed to this party, I think is 
open access that really anybody has available to them. So I 
guess I’m just a little perplexed by the question to be honest 
with you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Although we have a 
very resilient economy in Saskatchewan, we are not immune to 
low commodity prices. This is the reason why so many oil field 
service workers now are having trouble finding full-time work. 
The accelerated well cleanup program is a simple way that the 
Government of Canada can help put workers, in an industry that 
is hurting, back to work. Mr. Speaker, to the member from 
Prince Albert Northcote: will they join us in our call to put oil 
field service workers back to work? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We do 
know that markets go up and down, and that’s no surprise. So 
this government should have saved money when we had record 
revenues and put money away to deal with this situation, but 
they didn’t. They spent all the money and now they’re 
wondering what to do. 
 
So if we get some federal dollars, I’d like it to address all the 
unemployment in this province — 11,000 less jobs. That’s 
horrible. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 



1286 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2016 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is to the member from Melville—Saltcoats. The 
reference to some of the job losses in SaskTel and also the 
shutdown of the Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre, does he 
believe those jobs are less important than the jobs being 
proposed here? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville—Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, I guess just to clarify, there are 
no job losses in SaskTel. 
 
And the second thing that we need to deal with is that every job 
is important to this government in Saskatchewan. And we’ve 
put lots of efforts into trying to provide opportunities for every 
person in this province. 
 
We’ve got some concerns certainly with the economy. We’ve 
got job losses in every sector here. And I think we’ve done a 
remarkable job in Saskatchewan to be able to retain the jobs 
that we do when we start looking at other jurisdictions around 
us and the job losses that they’ve faced. And I think we’ve done 
a remarkable job in keeping the jobs that we do have right now. 
 
[12:15] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In question period 
on Monday, the Leader of the Opposition asked the following 
question: 
 

Will the Premier admit that he wasted a historic 
opportunity for Saskatchewan people? Will he now take 
action and implement a strategy to create jobs for 
Saskatchewan people? 

 
Yet on two occasions in the last nine months, members opposite 
have refused to debate rule 61 motions calling on Ottawa to 
support our well cleanup program. 
 
My question is to the member from Saskatoon Nutana. Since 
you refuse to debate our proposals, will you commit to 
proposing some ideas of your own to create jobs? 
 
Maybe you’re waiting for the launch of Festivus, Mr. Speaker, 
and the traditional airing of grievances . . . [inaudible] . . . 
debate, while trying desperately to score political points in 
question period. Mr. Speaker, I want the members opposite to 
air their grievances. Festivus for the rest of us. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Obviously the member opposite is a fan of the Seinfeld TV 
show — and I know we all were — so that was a humorous 
approach there. 
 
But I think the important thing here is the reasons . . . You 
know when the government puts silly questions forward for 

political gain, there’s no point engaging in those discussions. 
Unfortunately we’re in the same spot here today. 
 
This is a non-issue. We know the Premier has already tried this 
and the federal government has refused. The federal 
government has refused, so now he’s still knocking on that door 
and the door is closed. You kind of have to ask what’s going to 
happen when the Premier then turns around and lambastes the 
federal . . . the Prime Minister, and he thinks that this program’s 
going to get the federal funding that he thinks it should get, 
when he’s turning around and calling down the Prime Minister 
all the time. That’s not good tactics, Mr. Speaker, and it’s hard 
to understand why the Premier is closing the door on that. So 
once again, the tech fund, it belongs to these guys. They 
could’ve created 8,500 jobs and they haven’t. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, to the member from Kindersley: 
how many shut-in wells do we currently have in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kindersley. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — I don’t know the exact number, Mr. Speaker, but 
there’s lots here in Saskatchewan, and that’s why this motion 
has come forward. That’s why we feel that the important thing 
for the environment here in Saskatchewan, and for employment 
here in Saskatchewan, is to ensure that there are jobs available 
for people in our province and to ensure that we’re protecting 
the environment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don’t know the exact number of them, and I think it’s 
irrelevant, frankly, with respect to this. It’s important to know 
that there’s an initiative on the floor here right now that would 
deal with wells that are shut in, Mr. Speaker, that need to be 
addressed and environmentally cleaned up, and it would create 
jobs for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Gardiner Park. The time has expired. Oh, no, we’re done. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 2 — Calls to Action in the Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission’s Report 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Mr. Belanger.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am happy 
today to talk about the motion that was put forward by the 
member of Athabasca. I think it’s a really important motion that 
needs to be discussed. And I was happy to be asked to put some 
of my thoughts with regards to . . . Especially, I’m going to 



November 10, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1287 

focus on the calls to action with regards to the child welfare 
calls to action from the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the first call to action is: 
 

We call upon the federal, provincial, territorial, and 
Aboriginal governments to commit to reducing the number 
of Aboriginal children in care. 

 
And then they give some suggestions here, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. So the first one is “monitoring and assessing neglect 
investigations.” So this is really important, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because a lot of the kids that are in care are First Nations, and 
they well overrepresent the number of kids that we have in care, 
which is unfortunate. 
 
So the second recommendation that they have here is: 
 

Providing adequate resources to enable Aboriginal 
communities and child-welfare organizations to keep 
Aboriginal families together where it is safe to do so, and 
to keep children in culturally appropriate environments, 
regardless of where they reside. 
 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that’s so important. We need 
to really help foster families and help keep them together, and 
whatever we need to do to provide that. And we know that a lot 
of these situations are intergenerational. And so we need to 
make sure that we have programs that will help keep these 
families together, whether it’s parenting programs or whether 
it’s family-based programs because a lot of the situations with 
regards to residential schools and the Sixties Scoop, they 
prevented families from being able to foster and learn how to be 
healthy families at times. So I think it’s really important that 
our first measure is to try to keep families together. 
 
And I think when we do focus on programming that we have to 
really focus on the intergenerational effects from residential 
schools. And they say with the documentation, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is that even if, like now we’ve got generations, so even 
if your parents or your grandparents were residential school 
survivors, that that had an impact on you as well, and that 
trauma. So we can’t forget to discuss that and talk about how 
that has the impact. You see that with a lot of things with 
regards to attachment as well. So I think that that really needs to 
be part of the programming that we provide. 
 
And I think if we can’t, if the families can’t stay together 
because of safety issues, that we need to then . . . The second 
plan would be to keep children with extended families if at all 
possible, so grandparents, aunts, uncles. If there’s another 
healthy family option, I think that needs to be a priority. And 
I’ve been getting a lot of calls from families — grandparents, 
aunts, and uncles — saying that their family member was 
placed in care and they want to be the care provider, and there’s 
no issues with them being the care provider. 
 
But sometimes the systems that we have take a long period of 
time to investigate and ensure that that placement is a good 
placement. And I think with some work with the ministry, that 
we can maybe look at a different way of providing that, like 
deciding which homes would be safe. 
 

I know it’s not a one quick, easy answer, but I think we could 
work at maybe expediating that process because the longer that 
kids aren’t with their biological families, that’s when the 
attachment issues will progress. And you could just imagine 
being a young child and you might not completely understand 
the whole situation of the adult issues that are going on, and 
being placed with people that you don’t know who they are. 
They have different cultures or different systems, and it’s scary. 
And it has long-lasting effects. So if we can minimize that, that 
would be priority. 
 
And I think another thing too is working with some First 
Nations communities or families to try to recruit them for foster 
homes, like looking at that being an avenue of recruiting. So if 
you can’t stay with your actual natural family, then maybe you 
could be with someone who maybe is a little bit more closer 
related to your cultural beliefs. So that would be some 
recommendations I would have, or suggestions. 
 
The third one is ensuring that social workers and others who 
conduct child welfare investigations are properly educated and 
trained about the history and impacts of residential schools. 
 
First of all, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m a real advocate of 
ensuring that child protection workers who have a social work 
degree are registered as social workers so they could be titled as 
that. The reason for that is because when you are a registered 
social worker, you’re bound by the code of ethics and you are 
expected to have a certain number of professional development 
standards. And then you have the standards of practice, so you 
have that professional body that really holds you accountable. 
And I think when you’re working with the most vulnerable kids 
or the most vulnerable families in this community, that it’s 
really important that you are a registered social worker or 
registered in your field so that you have those standards of 
practice and you know that you’re bound by that practice. I 
think it’s troubling to know that that hasn’t been a priority for 
the Ministry of Social Services. And I think with regards to that, 
then we’ll have better standards. So I would like to see that 
happen. 
 
I think when you have staff and you’re hiring them, ensuring 
that they already are trained. Like the post-secondary training 
oftentimes has a lot of First Nations courses that you can take 
and stuff, and workplace training. And another thing that I 
know I’ve been having more involvement myself with is 
working with the First Nations students, with the First Nations 
University. So encouraging them to do their practicum 
placements at our ministry, and working at trying to recruit 
some of those students from those programs because the First 
Nations University does an excellent job with talking about 
cultural situations and talking about, you know, the importance 
of having culture in your life and what that culture looks like. 
 
And then the other recommendations here is: 
 

iv. Ensuring that social workers and others who conduct 
child welfare investigations are properly educated and 
trained about the potential for Aboriginal communities and 
families to provide more appropriate solutions to family 
healing. 
 
v. Requiring that all child welfare decision makers 



1288 Saskatchewan Hansard November 10, 2016 

consider the impact of the residential school experience on 
children and their caregivers. 

 
So that’s all very important. And then the second 
recommendation is: 
 

We call upon the federal government, in collaboration with 
the provinces and territories, to prepare and publish annual 
reports on the number of Aboriginal children (First 
Nations, Inuit and Métis) who are in care, compared with 
non-Aboriginal children, as well as the reasons for 
apprehension, the total spending on preventive and care 
services by child welfare agencies and the effectiveness of 
various interventions. 

 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that’s really important. We 
know that we have a high population of youth that are in care. I 
think in Saskatchewan, just in Saskatchewan in general, 25 per 
cent of our child population is Aboriginal, but in care it’s about 
65 per cent. And so again, like I said, it was high. 
 
And so I know when I did estimates with regards to the 
Ministry of Social Services, I was able to get those numbers, so 
that was readily available. We never really got the layout of the 
reasons for apprehensions. I hope they have that laid out 
somewhere, and it would be really good to keep that 
information just like the calls of action says, so we could track 
what do we need to funnel our services into. 
 
And the total spending on preventative and care services, I 
know there’s a whole bunch of different programs that are 
being offered and the layout of exactly how much I think has 
been done in the budget. But we do know there was some cuts 
with regards to that, and I think at all means that we should try 
not to make cuts in those specific positions because it’s just 
going to have a backwards effect. And it’s not going to help 
families and the issues that we have with children in care, and 
the effectiveness of the various interventions. So that’s also 
important to keep track of so that we know that we’re investing 
our money in the certain areas. 
 
So the third recommendation is, “We call upon all levels of 
government to fully implement Jordan’s Principle.” That is 
absolutely critical. We can’t be sitting and fighting with the 
federal government with regards to dollars. We’ve got to make 
sure that the services are there for children and then we fight for 
dollars. And so that’s a great principle to always keep in the 
back of our mind. 
 

4. We call upon the federal government to enact Aboriginal 
child-welfare legislation that establishes national standards 
for Aboriginal child apprehension and custody cases and 
includes principles that: 
 

i. Affirm the right of Aboriginal governments to 
establish and maintain their own child-welfare agencies. 
[We’ve got to work hard with the Aboriginal 
governments so that they’re able to maintain their own 
child-welfare agencies.] 
 
ii. Require all child-welfare agencies and courts to take 
the residential school legacy into account in their 
decision making. 

iii. Establish, as an important priority, a requirement that 
placements of Aboriginal children into temporary and 
permanent care be culturally appropriate. 
 

5. We call upon the federal, provincial, territorial, and 
Aboriginal governments to develop culturally appropriate 
parenting programs for Aboriginal families. 

 
And again I think that’s a big thing that we need to focus on, is 
the parenting programs. And I really want to stress again that I 
think that it needs to identify intergenerational effects of 
residential schools, the trauma, the intergenerational trauma and 
attachment, and how that has issues with regards to the families. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my time is up. I could talk for 
probably hours with regards to this, but I do want to say that 
I’m in favour of this motion. And I’m going to adjourn debate. 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert 
Northcote has moved to adjourn debate on the motion. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
move that this House be now adjourned. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this House does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. This House stands adjourned 
until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:30.] 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1265 
  Wotherspoon ................................................................................................................................................................. 1265, 1266 
  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1265, 1275 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 1266 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1266 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1266 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1266 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1266 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1266 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1266 
  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1267 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1267 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1267 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1267 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1267 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 We Will Remember Them 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1268 
 Remembrance of Sacrifice and Service 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1268 
 Appreciation for Chris Knox Foundation 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 1268 
 Letters of Hope and Support Sent to Northern Children 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1269 
 Ranchers Inducted Into Canadian Agricultural Hall of Fame  
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1269 
 B’Nai Brith Silver Plate Dinner 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1269 
 Opposition To Federal Carbon Tax 
  Steele ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1269 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Donations to Political Parties 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1270 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1270 
 Auditor’s Report and Public Accounts Committee Meeting 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1271 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1271 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1272 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1272 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1273 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1273 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1273 
 Rural Municipalities and Revenue Sharing 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1273 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1274 
 Budget Legislation 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1274 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1274 
MOTIONS 
 Leaves of Absence 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1274 
STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Ruling on a Point of Order 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1275 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1275 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Accelerated Well Cleanup Program 
  Steele .............................................................................................................................................................................. 1275, 1285 



 

  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1277, 1284 
  Kaeding .......................................................................................................................................................................... 1278, 1285 
  Belanger ......................................................................................................................................................................... 1280, 1286 
  Boyd ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1281 
  Rancourt ........................................................................................................................................................................ 1283, 1285 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1284 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1285 
  Parent ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1285 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1286 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1286 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 2 — Calls to Action in the Truth and Reconciliation Commission’s Report 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1286 

 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


