






















































Hansard: June 14, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 16A  TUESDAY, JUNE 14, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Hon. Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Hon. Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Merriman, Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 51; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Maurice Riou http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 503 
 June 14, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to this Assembly, it’s my pleasure to introduce in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker, some officials here from SUMA 
[Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association]. Today is 
SUMA Advocacy Day, and these officials have been meeting 
with a number of my colleagues on a variety of different issues. 
I understand the discussions have gone well. 
 
We have here the CEO [chief executive officer] of SUMA, 
Laurent Mougeot. We have the mayor of Torquay, Mike 
Strachan. We have Saskatoon city councillor Darren Hill and 
Prince Albert city councillor Lee Atkinson. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s great to have them here. They’re no strangers 
to this Assembly, but we welcome them once again, and we 
hope that they’re going to stick around for the proceedings 
today. And I’d ask all members to please give them a warm 
welcome. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, and on behalf of the rest of the members of the 
opposition, I want to welcome the SUMA representatives here 
too. I want to thank you for all the work that you do in 
supporting the urban municipalities. I’ve been talking to a lot of 
people that are representatives of different municipalities, and 
they say that they get a lot of support from SUMA, so I 
appreciate that. 
 
I also would like to take this time to welcome the Prince Albert 
city councillor, Lee Atkinson. Lee has been the ward 3 
councillor in my constituency since 2000. Mr. Speaker, having 
lived in ward 3 myself, I can confirm that Lee works very hard 
for his constituents. He can always be counted on to advocate 
for those who go to him with an issue involving the city. So I 
want to take this opportunity to welcome Lee to his Legislative 
Assembly and all the SUMA representatives. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to introduce to you and, through you, to all members of 
this Legislative Assembly Stephen Foster and Lee Brown. Mr. 
Speaker, Stephen Foster is the chief operating officer for Revera 
and oversees retirement living for Revera. Lee Brown is 
Revera’s regional director of operations for Saskatchewan. Just 
on a side note, Mr. Speaker, Stephen showed up here today and 
flew in just to have lunch and to be in our Legislative 

Assembly. So I think that’s pretty awesome. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the pleasure of having lunch with these 
gentlemen today where we discussed the recent ground 
breaking for their 216-suite retirement facility right here in 
Regina. There will be more details about this in a member’s 
statement to come. I would like all members to welcome 
Stephen and Lee to the Legislative Assembly and ask all 
members to join me in welcoming them. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, requesting leave for an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
recognize just a few people that are in the Assembly here today 
of various groups and the first being the two individuals that 
were just introduced by the minister. I’d like to join with the 
minister in welcoming Stephen Foster and Lee Brown with 
Revera. Thank you for your investment. We look forward to 
seeing it come to fruition. We wish you well with your time 
here and thanks for being in your Assembly. 
 
I’d also like to welcome the leadership of SUMA that’s here 
today. Certainly Laurent Mougeot. And SUMA plays a very 
important role within our province. I want to thank Mike 
Strachan, Darren Hill, and Lee Atkinson for being here also. It’s 
a good representation of SUMA’s membership when you have 
Torquay — a small community in the Southeast with abundant 
pheasant in and around it as well, Mr. Speaker, I should say — 
through to Saskatoon and then in Prince Alberta also here 
represented. So I thank those leaders within their communities 
and those leaders within SUMA for being here today also. And 
I ask members to welcome them as well. 
 
I’d also like to introduce two other guests that are also here. I’ll 
start with a very special leader within the province, Dwayne 
Lasas, vice-chief with Meadow Lake Tribal Council, former 
councillor with Waterhen First Nation — someone who’s 
incredibly active and an advocate within the arts, an incredible 
musician, an incredible hunter and fisher, has a wonderful 
family, has served as an addictions counsellor and a great 
support within the community. He also served as the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] candidate in Meadow Lake this last election. 
So I ask all members to welcome Dwayne Lasas, vice-chief of 
the MLTC [Meadow Lake Tribal Council] to his Assembly 
also. 
 
I might as well introduce everyone in the Chambers here today. 
Seated in the east gallery I see Brett Estey, a lifelong season 
ticket holder and avid Roughrider fan — someone who’s done a 
lot of work as it relates to cancer advocacy within our province, 
someone who’s worked within SAMA [Saskatchewan 
Assessment Management Agency] within our province, and 
someone who’s an all around good person and community 



504 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2016 

leader who ran as the candidate for the NDP in Regina 
Rochdale the last election. So I ask all members in this 
Assembly to welcome Brett Estey to his Assembly also. 
 
And before I sit down, I should reference Chantel Sebastian 
sitting in the west gallery, one exceptional teacher along with 
her students here today. It’s a pleasure to have Ms. Sebastian 
and her students here today. Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I ask all 
members to welcome all these folks to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce, sitting in the west gallery, a group of 25 
grade 5 students from the Harvest City Christian Academy. 
Give us a wave. Excellent. 
 
And accompanying the students today are their teachers Mrs. 
Justine Glover and Mrs. Bethann Ruecker. It’s always great to 
see them. We’ll have a little time this afternoon for them to 
stump me as per usual, and the Finance minister is looking for 
some ice cream for you. I ask all members to join me in 
welcoming these students and teachers from the Harvest to their 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. Thanks. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to join 
with the member for Regina Coronation Park and welcome 
Mrs. Glover and her grade 5 class to the Legislative Assembly 
today. I’ve known Mrs. Glover for a number of years now, as 
her husband Matthew has been working in my office for the 
past six years. 
 
Mrs. Glover is a math specialist and has been working very 
hard to help her students meet or exceed the goals set out in the 
education sector strategic plan of being at or above grade level 
in reading, writing, and in math. In fact, last month she 
organized a math fair in which parents were invited to 
participate in a variety of math activities and games. The 
students were having so much fun they didn’t realize they were 
doing math. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I’d be remiss if I didn’t mention that 
I’d sent her a Facebook request, and after about 15 months, last 
week she accepted my Facebook request. So to her, I would say 
I promise I won’t put stuff on her page. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d ask for leave 
for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me great pleasure to introduce to you and, through you, to 
the Assembly some very special visitors that are with us today 

in your gallery. Earlier today we announced a province-wide 
expansion of Family Matters, assisting families through 
separation and divorce, which is a program I’ll speak about in a 
little while, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have a few guests in the gallery who are Ministry of Justice 
employees and greatly involved with the Family Matters 
program. With us today, Mr. Speaker, Suneil Sarai is legal 
counsel in the Ministry of Justice family justice services branch 
and is also a Family Matters service provider. Give us a wave, 
thanks, Suneil. Suneil has worked with the Ministry of Justice 
for nine years, and in that time has proven to be an invaluable 
resource. His dedication to the Family Matters program as well 
as other services provided through the family justice services 
branch is truly remarkable, and other guests would say in the 
ministry that we are very, very lucky to have him 
 
With us today as well, Mr. Speaker, is Coralee Peterson who 
also joins us, who has worked in the Ministry of Justice for six 
years and is currently the program manager for the social work 
unit of the family justice services branch. There she is. Before 
this, Coralee was a Family Matters service provider who carried 
out family mediation. In every position she’s held with the 
ministry, Coralee has demonstrated her commitment in helping 
Saskatchewan families. 
 
Also here with us today is Robbi Behr — there she is — 
assistant director of the Ministry of Justice’s family services 
branch. Robbi is one of the many staff who has worked 
tirelessly to make the Family Matters program a success. 
However this is just one of Robbi’s many contributions to 
serving Saskatchewan citizens. She has been with the Ministry 
of Justice for 22 years and in that time has proven to be a 
valued and dedicated leader in the ministry. 
 
Lastly and certainly not least, Mr. Speaker, we have Lionel 
McNabb joining us. Lionel has been with the Ministry of 
Justice for 24 years and is currently the director of family 
justice services branch. Through Lionel’s direction, the family 
justice services branch helps countless Saskatchewan citizens 
on a daily basis. He is very important to the ministry, and I’m 
very pleased to have him join us today, and I want to thank him 
personally for all the support he’s given me and the ministry 
over his many years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m always proud to introduce employees of the 
Ministry of Justice. As you know, they do a great job and 
impressive work to help the citizens of Saskatchewan, so please 
join me in welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you and to all members of this Legislative Assembly, I’d like to 
join with the minister in welcoming the folks from Family 
Matters: Robbi Behr, Suneil Sarai, Coralee Peterson, and Lionel 
McNabb. And I can attest personally to the hard work that all 
you folks do as I, in my past life, had quite extensive 
involvement with the Family Matters program. And I want to 
send some special love out to Suneil Surai, a lawyer with the 
Family Law Information Centre. I know how many files you 
work on personally is absolutely astounding, and the minister is 



June 14, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 505 

correct in that the ministry is very, very lucky to have you — 
and all of you and all the very hard work that you do. So I ask 
that the members join me in welcoming them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, when I was on my feet, I 
was remiss in not introducing a good friend of mine who has 
already been introduced in the House, Darren Hill, a city 
councillor from Saskatoon. As many of you know, Darren is the 
executive director of JA, Junior Achievement of Saskatchewan, 
and he does a great job in educating young entrepreneurs who 
will ultimately take over some significant roles in the business 
community in the future. 
 
He’s also the city councillor for ward 1, as has already been 
mentioned. I had the pleasure of serving on city council with 
Darren for four years, four long years. But Darren’s here today 
as a member of SUMA, as has been mentioned by the minister 
already. He’ll be meeting with a number of ministers today on 
some important issues to SUMA and to the Government of 
Saskatchewan and the people. So I would again ask members of 
the legislature to welcome Darren to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Batoche. If he’s 
not going to be up, all right then, Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you, 
through you to all members of the Assembly, I have the 
privilege to introduce, seated in the west gallery, 25 grade 5 
students from Ethel Milliken Elementary School. They’re from 
my constituency, Regina Pasqua. Wave your hands — good, 
thanks. They are accompanied by their teacher, Ms. Chantel 
Sebastian. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are here to observe the proceedings in the 
Legislative Assembly today, and later on this afternoon I will be 
meeting with them, and I’m sure they are having quite a number 
of questions for me. And I would like to ask all the members to 
welcome them to their own Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
want to welcome our special guests as introduced by our leader, 
Mr. Dwayne Lasas. And I can tell you that Dwayne is a gifted 
musician. He’s a great friend and: 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
[13:45] 
 
And just a translation, Mr. Speaker, I explained to Mr. Lasas we 
can pretty much say anything in our Aboriginal language of 
Cree because most people don’t understand what we’re saying. 
So we agreed to conspire, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So once again I also want to point out in my closing comments 
that I’m sure glad Dwayne is here to take in the proceedings 
because it’s always highly valuable when our Aboriginal people 
come to their House and their home. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 
and to all the members of this Assembly, I’d like to introduce 
His Worship Mayor Mike Strachan who is sitting in your 
gallery today. Mike is the mayor of Torquay, and not only that, 
he works at the local coal mine which supplies coal to 
Boundary dam station 3, our clean coal facility that we’re 
running in Estevan. As well as that, he’s the southeast director 
with SUMA and, I might add, he has a great voice for the 
Estevan constituency and all of southeast Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ve had the privilege of knowing Mike since I was an officer in 
air cadets, and he was one of my cadets in the program. So I 
would like to ask all members to join me in welcoming him to 
our Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition to improve PTSD 
[post-traumatic stress disorder] coverage for Saskatchewan 
workers. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that 
post-traumatic stress disorder, or PTSD, can severely impact the 
lives of all people, and the delay in diagnosis and treatment for 
PTSD can be detrimental to recovery. The petitioners, Mr. 
Speaker, are asking the government for timely access to 
necessary services and supports for Saskatchewan workers who 
are exposed to traumatic events on the job and then end up with 
a diagnosis of PTSD. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 
request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
take the following action: to cause the Saskatchewan 
government to make the necessary changes to ensure that 
if Saskatchewan workers are exposed to traumatic events 
on the job and are then diagnosed with PTSD, it is 
presumed to be caused by the worker’s employment, and 
the worker will subsequently be covered under workers’ 
compensation and receive the same benefits as others with 
work-related injuries. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens from 
Saskatoon and Moose Jaw. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
from some individuals from Saskatoon, North Battleford, and 
Cut Knife. They would like to bring to our attention the 
following: The Surface Rights Acquisition and Compensation 
Act is an old and outdated piece of legislation that remains 
largely unchanged despite amendments over the years. It is in 
desperate need of modernization to reflect the current 
challenges that farmers and ranchers are facing today. So I’d 
like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Government of Saskatchewan to introduce legislation 



506 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2016 

that would modernize The Surface Rights Acquisition and 
Compensation Act, classify land valued as industrial rather 
than agricultural when oil and gas development takes 
place, removing pipelines and flow lines from the surface 
rights Act, and establish a new maximum in compensation 
to be paid for damages. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition in support of funding heritage languages here in 
Saskatchewan. And we know that, after 25 years, the 
Government of Saskatchewan is discontinuing all support for 
heritage language learning here in Saskatchewan. Since 1991, 
heritage language schools have depended on this modest 
funding from the Ministry of Education to help sustain their 
programs. As a result of the announcement by the Ministry of 
Education, many of these non—profit heritage language schools 
will be faced with the difficult decision of whether they can 
continue to operate. And we also know it’s increasingly 
important to work towards improving access to indigenous 
languages, many of which are in danger. Heritage language 
programs provide support, not only for immigrants, refugees, 
and their descendants, but also Aboriginal peoples and all 
Canadians who recognize the benefits of learning additional 
languages. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to reconsider this decision and restore funding for heritage 
language education in Saskatchewan heritage language 
schools. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition today are 
from the city of Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Construction Begins on Retirement Community in Regina 

 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had the privilege 
of introducing guests from Revera earlier and would like to talk 
about an exciting project they recently broke ground for in my 
constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this company provides high-quality retirement 
living for seniors across Canada and operates eight retirement 
communities right here in Saskatchewan. On May 10th I 
attended a ground breaking on the new Green Falls Landing 

site. When it opens in 2018, it will become the ninth community 
Revera operates in our province, and according to Revera 
people, they have said that it is a flagship facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was joined by Her Honour the Honourable 
Lieutenant Governor Vaughn Solomon Schofield and 
dignitaries from Revera and with the city of Regina. 
 
Currently one in seven Saskatchewan residents is 65 or older 
and that by 2036, seniors will comprise 23 to 25 per cent of the 
Canadian population. Seniors remain an active and vital group 
in our province, and as the Premier often references, they are 
the greatest generation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, private sector investments like this are helping 
make life better for all seniors in Saskatchewan. Revera is 
investing $75 million in this new 216-suite residence that will 
create around 300 jobs during construction and 150 permanent 
jobs once completed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of Revera and the thousands of private 
and public long-term care providers in the province, we are 
ensuring seniors can enjoy a great quality of life right here in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

North Central Community Association 
Celebrates 40th Anniversary 

 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s no secret that I 
take great pride in calling Regina’s North Central 
neighbourhood my home. It’s also no secret that the North 
Central neighbourhood is not without its issues, and certainly 
these issues have changed with the times. But one thing that has 
remained constant is the willingness of North Central 
neighbours to pitch in, to take on the challenges, and work to 
build a better North Central. 
 
Today I want to say a few words about the North Central 
Community Association having celebrated its 40th anniversary 
on June 4th. Along with the member from Regina Pasqua, it 
was my honour to be in attendance. It was an excellent day with 
a big block party. Hundreds of folks came out. And at night 
there was a banquet to honour community champions including 
the likes of Brenda Dubois, Jan Morier, Brandon Brooks, Rob 
Deglau, and one Clifford Robert Douglas McCall — my dad, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
A special word of congratulations to the community association 
executive, especially president Jessica Hanna and executive 
director Michael Parker and chief celebration organizer Arlene 
Bray and everyone on the organizing committee who did a 
tremendous job — very well done. 
 
These have been people that exemplify the fighting spirit of 
we’re all in this together coming out of North Central. The good 
folks of the North Central Community Association continue to 
make a positive difference, and I most sincerely thank them and 
commend them for it. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 



June 14, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 507 

Prince Albert Regional 4-H Show and Sale 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. “I pledge my 
head to clearer thinking, my heart to greater loyalty, my hands 
to larger service, and my health to better living for my club, my 
community, and my country.” 
 
Following this pledge and the motto, “learn to do by doing,” my 
local 4-H region did just that. 4-H Canada is made up of over 
25,000 members and over 7,000 volunteers across our nation. 
 
Yesterday the Prince Albert regional 4-H show and sale took 
place at the exhibition grounds. Over 80 4-H members 
participated with 78 steers to be auctioned off to the general 
public. I was fortunate to be able to support the 4-H members 
by purchasing some of that AAA prime beef. The average sale 
price was $3.10 a pound, and the charity steer raised a total of 
27,000 for the Karen Pilon Organ Donor Awareness 
Foundation. 
 
I’d like to acknowledge Canwood, Weldon, West P.A. [Prince 
Albert], Wild Rose, and Torch River 4-H beef clubs, and all 
parents and volunteers for their dedication and contribution to 
this organization. I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
4-H on their successful event, as well as the parents and all 
these leaders of these clubs. This is something we can all get 
behind. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Riverside Community School Holds Aboriginal 
Arts Festival 

 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Riverside 
Aboriginal Arts Festival is a multidisciplinary arts festival 
hosted by Riverside Community public school in my 
constituency. Performances for the festival took place June 8th 
and 9th at the E.A. Rawlinson Centre for the Arts and the John 
V. Hicks Gallery. This event was sponsored by the 
Saskatchewan Arts Board. 
 
The show at E.A. Rawlinson Centre for the Arts featured the 
Riverside Jigging Club as the main feature of the program 
where traditional dances were performed. The show also 
featured “O Canada” sung in Cree. The Riverside choir 
performed a number of pieces and students recited poetry and 
spoken-word pieces. The grand finale was a fusion of 
traditional Métis jigging and modern hip-hop dances. 
 
The festival also featured an art exhibition at the John V. Hicks 
Gallery in downtown Prince Albert. The gallery contains work 
done by students throughout the school. Much of the artwork 
follows the theme of Aboriginal issues through time and they 
range from the concrete to the abstract. The students’ work was 
put on display June 1st and will run until June 23rd. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 
congratulating the staff and students at Riverside Community 
School who helped to make this year’s Aboriginal Arts Festival 
a success. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association’s 
103rd Annual General Meeting 

 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday and today, ranchers from across the province are 
gathered here in Regina for the Saskatchewan Stock Growers 
Association’s 103rd annual general meeting. The event, hosted 
at the Conexus Arts Centre, includes two full days of 
presentations, market information, and best practices, as well as 
an opportunity for producers to network. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last night they held a banquet where they handed 
out some awards to members of the SSGA [Saskatchewan 
Stock Growers Association] who have demonstrated excellence. 
Outgoing SSGA president Doug Gillespie was honoured for his 
service, and Miles and Sheri Anderson of Fir Mountain won the 
TESA, The Environmental Stewardship Award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the final award went to someone who we all know 
well in the Assembly, former minister of Agriculture and MLA 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] from my constituency of 
Melville-Saltcoats, Bob Bjornerud. Bob was awarded a lifetime 
membership to the SSGA for commitment and service to the 
agriculture sector and to the hard-working ranchers and 
producers of this province. 
 
While Bob was an MLA he served as Ag critic and was our 
government’s first Ag minister. But, Mr. Speaker, what set him 
apart was not only the roles that he fulfilled but that he was 
always a strong advocate for what was best for family farms 
and ranches. Mr. Speaker, I ask members to join me in 
congratulating Bob, Doug Gillespie, and Miles and Sheri 
Anderson on their well-deserved recognition. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 

Caroline Robins Community School Celebrates 50 Years 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On June 1st, 
Caroline Robins Community School celebrated 50 years of 
learning and community in Saskatoon Westview. Mr. Speaker, 
the celebration included tours of the school, a brief program, a 
barbecue supper, and a social for former staff and students. This 
evening also featured family entertainment including face 
painting, a pet zoo, and a photo booth. 
 
An interesting point about this school, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
Minister of Education actually helped his father build this 
school. Now if the school is celebrating its 50th anniversary, I 
assume the Minster was in his 30s at the time. 
 
A few days before the celebration, Mr. Speaker, I had the 
opportunity to visit the school to mark this anniversary. During 
my visit, I met the school’s principal and vice-principal, and I 
had the opportunity to tour the school. The school has recently 
completed some upgrades which includes new classrooms and 
outdoor learning spaces for kindergarten and pre-K 
[pre-kindergarten] classes, as well as a new music room. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a community school, Caroline Robins 



508 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2016 

contributes to the well-being of the community by serving as a 
hub for community activities and organizations. I ask all 
members to join me in celebrating Caroline Robins Community 
School’s five decades as a pillar of the Westview community. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Finally, I am excited to introduce the member 
from Batoche. 
 

National Blood Donor Week 
 
Mr. Kirsch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
recognize today as national blood donors day and June 13th to 
18th as National Blood Donor Week. We set aside this time 
each year to celebrate the thousands of blood donors across 
Canada and the thousands of lives saved through our national 
blood system. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government recognizes blood donors and the 
vital role they play in the health care system. Surgeries and 
treatments for diseases such as cancer would simply not be 
possible without blood donors. We appreciate them very much 
and commend them on their selfless gift of life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the need for blood affects many of us. In fact half 
of all Canadians will either need blood at some point in their 
lives or know someone who does. Right now less than 4 per 
cent of eligible Canadians support 100 per cent of the country’s 
blood system. We are counting on more people to join the 
movement and consider donating blood for the first time. This 
year more than 100,000 new blood donors will be required 
across Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during this very important week, I want to thank 
every Saskatchewan blood donor, and I want to encourage my 
colleagues and all of Saskatchewan’s citizens to donate blood 
and give the gift of life. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Carbon Capture and Storage Facility 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement and financial fiascos are getting hard to keep 
up with. Turn after turn after turn, they’ve blown money on 
failed projects favouring foreign contractors and consultants 
over Saskatchewan workers and businesses, land deals with 
supporters that are now being investigated. And every time we 
think we’ve seen the peak of questionable deals or the bottom 
of boondoggles, there’s more. 
 
Now with their carbon kind-of capture, I guess, we’re seeing 
that the waste has gone beyond what they thought was even 
possible. Mr. Speaker, the debt the Sask Party has piled on 
SaskPower and Sask people has gotten so big it’s actually about 
to break the law. So instead of stopping the bleeding, they’re 
changing the law and increasing the maximum debt SaskPower 
can take on by 25 per cent to $10 billion. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that the Sask Party’s failure on carbon 
capture has taken a lot more of Saskatchewan’s cash than it has 
carbon, Mr. Speaker. When will the Sask Party stop making 
Saskatchewan people pay for their failures? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, this technology that’s being 
used at BD3 [Boundary dam 3] is world-leading technology. 
It’s an effort to mitigate CO2 down at Estevan area of the 
province, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had international guests from 
around the world.  
 
Most recently we’ve had the environment minister from Ottawa 
tour the facility down there, and she had some interesting things 
to say about it. She said, in terms of the technology, there is the 
opportunity for $50 trillion worth of technology transfer in 
China alone. They’re going to need clean energy and solutions, 
so “[I think] it’s a real opportunity . . . When you have carbon 
capture and storage, that’s certainly an innovative solution — a 
made-in-Canada solution.” So looking at how we can improve 
it here and how it’s a real opportunity for Canada to move 
forward. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, that’s just one example of many 
things that people from around the world have said about BD3. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, with due respect, that 
minister should have been punted as a minister a long time ago 
— scandal plagued, Mr. Speaker, and is making now 
Saskatchewan people pay the price. 
 
You know, we see this is a government that actually broke their 
owned balanced budget law. So what do we see? They’re 
scrapping it, Mr. Speaker, pretending actually that they meant 
to do this all along. And since they are ready to break another 
law, as far as debt around SaskPower, they’re changing that law 
also, Mr. Speaker. And all the way along they’re undermining 
the bottom line of SaskPower and really making a dangerously 
high level of debt within this very important Crown 
corporation. 
 
You know, members opposite can shake their heads or they can 
argue otherwise, but the reality is that for, you know, whether 
it’s hedge fund managers or whether it’s bondholders, Mr. 
Speaker, this is good news. But for Saskatchewan people, 
Saskatchewan businesses, for ratepayers across Saskatchewan, 
it means one thing. Well, two things, Mr. Speaker: two rate 
increases, big rate increases in just one year. When will this 
government stop passing the cost of its mismanagement on to 
Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, in 2007, late 2007 when we 
took over government here in the province of Saskatchewan, 
SaskPower had about $1 billion worth of infrastructure needs at 
that point in time. Since that time we’ve seen the amount of 
customers of SaskPower grow dramatically here in the province 
of Saskatchewan, about 60,000 new customers. About 82,000 
more new customers are expected to come online here in the 



June 14, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 509 

future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SaskPower is investing about $1 billion on an annual basis to 
meet the needs of Saskatchewan people and businesses into the 
future of our province, Mr. Speaker. That’s a far cry from what 
was invested by the members opposite when they would invest 
about $300 million a year, not even enough to keep up with the 
infrastructure needs which alone are simply about $400 million 
a year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the fact of the matter is that SaskPower is doing a great job 
on behalf of the province of Saskatchewan to meet the needs of 
a growing province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Carbon Capture and Storage Agreement  
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, it’s been almost a decade. It’s 
time for this government to take responsibility for the 
mismanagement that they foisted on the people of 
Saskatchewan. Yesterday, yesterday, they’re getting desperate. 
They called in SaskPower’s president and CEO to answer 
questions that the minister wouldn’t. He confirmed that 
SaskPower has intentionally backed the plant off. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the whole reason we were told they went 
with Cenovus was because they were supposed to take all of the 
carbon. Now according to the SaskPower president, they’ll only 
take somewhere between “50 and 99 percent.” That’s one heck 
of a range. And apparently SaskPower will start looking for 
another off taker in “the next year or two.” In the meantime, 
CO2 that could be captured will be released. So what was the 
point of the billions they spent on this thing, Mr. Speaker? 
 
From the start the Sask Party has let the interests of Cenovus 
and SNC-Lavalin come ahead of the needs and expectations of 
Saskatchewan people. So, Mr. Speaker, how can the Sask Party 
justify taking a plant they’ve thrown billions of dollars at and 
intentionally make it work at less than its best? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, Cenovus continues to 
purchase CO2 from BD3. And BD3 continues to be operating 
very well capturing, we expect, about 800 000 tonnes of CO2 
this year. That’s the equivalent of about 200,000 vehicles in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
It was something that the member, at one time, from Nutana 
supported, but apparently she’s jumped off base with respect to 
that. She’s most recently, of course, has signed on to the Leap 
Manifesto. And as everyone in the province of Saskatchewan 
knows, Mr. Speaker, she would close down the coal industry. 
The guests from places like Torquay should be aware of that. 
She would close down the coal industry. She’d shut down the 
oil and gas industry here in Saskatchewan. She’d take away 
GMOs [genetically modified organism] here for agriculture 
here in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. If they were 
ever allowed to be the government of this province, Mr. 
Speaker, it would devastate the economy of our province. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wish the 
member opposite would get his facts straight, but in addition to 
that, I wish they would try hard to stop painting a rosy picture. 
There’s only one way to describe the situation at Boundary 
dam, and that is bad. Delays, failures, and problems have piled 
up from the start. SaskPower has had to pay millions of dollars 
in fines, and this Crown corporation that belongs to all the 
people of Saskatchewan is tied up in tens of million dollars 
worth of lawsuits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskPower was about to be on the hook for a $92 
million penalty for Cenovus, but Cenovus agreed to renegotiate 
in exchange for dropping the amount of carbon dioxide they 
have to accept. Cenovus agreed to walk away from the $92 
million but, Mr. Speaker, no corporation walks away from that 
kind of money without getting something better in return. 
 
The SaskPower president, he said he wasn’t around when that 
deal was signed. But you know who was? That minister. So he 
has avoided talking about this penalty, but now will he tell us 
how much the cut in Cenovus quotas will cost the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, in 2015, SaskPower made a 
profit of about $2 million from the sale of CO2. In ’16, this 
current year, there’s expected to be a profit of about $16 million 
to the people of Saskatchewan through SaskPower, Mr. 
Speaker. Not a loss, but a gain of $16 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is normal for Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, to negotiate 
their own contracts. Ministers do not negotiate their own 
contracts. Ministers do not renegotiate the contracts with 
respect to these kinds of things, Mr. Speaker. And the fact that 
there was a $91 million penalty at one point in time is a little bit 
moot, Mr. Speaker, because it is no longer there. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday in the scrum, the head 
of SaskPower indicated that the minister was briefed on the 
renegotiation of the deal. And the question that I think we have 
to put to the people of Saskatchewan here and to this minister 
is, okay, we know that Cenovus is looking after their 
shareholders, but is this minister looking after the ratepayers of 
SaskPower? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the member 
opposite makes it sound like this was something that just 
happened yesterday, Mr. Speaker. The fact of the matter is we 
had extensive discussions with respect to this back in January at 
the Crown Corporations Committee meetings that she attended 
and spoke on behalf of the opposition at that point in time, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I would say to the people of Saskatchewan that SaskPower’s 



510 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2016 

doing a great job in ensuring that the power needs of this 
province are met going forward. About 82,000 more people are 
going to be tied into the system in the future, Mr. Speaker, here 
in the province of Saskatchewan — a far cry from when 
members opposite used to operate the province of 
Saskatchewan when we had a shrinking economy, when we 
said goodbye to the young people of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
We will never go back to those dark days. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, we keep hearing about the Sask 
Party’s choices when it comes to helping out oil companies or 
business friends with land surrounding the GTH [Global 
Transportation Hub], but they’re not making choices that 
benefit our kids in the classroom. 
 
Last night the Education minister admitted, “Each and every . . . 
year until this year, we have fully funded the cost of the 
collective bargaining agreement.” Mr. Speaker, this government 
helped negotiate the deal with teachers, and this government 
approved a 1.9 per cent increase. 
 
The minister himself admitted that the point five per cent that 
boards will receive is “less than what that upward pressure 
would be.” Mr. Speaker, he outright admitted that they 
shortchanged school boards, teachers, our kids with this budget, 
and somehow they still try to claim that this budget was about 
maintaining the services that people rely on. 
 
To the minister: since it was clearly known that education was 
getting shortchanged, how does this government still manage to 
claim that they are setting our kids up for success? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, once again we have to 
stand in the House and correct things that are said by the 
members opposite. Yesterday the member for Regina Lakeview 
referenced a June 11th StarPhoenix article talking about 
imposing cuts on school divisions. She quoted me as saying, 
“We certainly have the right to do it. We have the ability to do 
things like that.” And, Mr. Speaker, she stopped there. Had she 
continued, the next sentence of the quote in The StarPhoenix 
goes on to say, “So I don’t hold it out as a threat or anything. I 
say to the divisions, ‘Work with us,’ and they’ve been good in 
the past.” 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would ask the member again opposite to 
please stop torqueing and twisting the quotes. And I would ask 
her, Mr. Speaker, and give her the opportunity to stand in the 
House and correct what she said earlier so that the record is 
complete and accurate. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I will let the quote that the minister 
just read in stand, but I don’t think it changes the meaning of 
the quote or the veiled threat to school boards. 

Again the minister himself last night said, “This was the first 
year that we have not fully funded those increases.” The Sask 
Party signed the CBA [collective bargaining agreement], the 
minister acknowledged that the teachers bargained in good 
faith. School boards and teachers assumed that the government 
did too. They assumed that if the provincial government signed 
on to this agreement, then they would fund it. 
 
But you know what happens when you assume, Mr. Speaker. 
You . . . Well with the Sask Party, you get shortchanged and 
you get asked to make up for their cuts. How is it that the Sask. 
Party keeps finding money for their carbon capture boondoggle, 
but are asking students to pay the price for the government 
backing down on their own signature? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, in the last year to year and 
a half we’ve seen the resource revenue fall off like we have 
never seen before. No analyst in the world predicted the 
catastrophic collapse of oil prices in the world. Mr. Speaker, we 
are going to work through that as best we possibly can. We are 
going to look to our health regions and we’re going to look to 
our school divisions to work with us, find savings, find 
economies, and to make sure that the resources are committed 
where they belong: to the front lines so that students can 
continue to be educated as well as they possibly can. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ll make no apologies for asking the 
school divisions to look for economies, to look for savings, 
looking for them to share resources, looking for them to 
consider consolidation, looking for them to do a variety of other 
things that will save money so that we can continue to commit 
where money needs to be saved, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
[14:15] 
 

Support for Post-Secondary Institutions 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s record on 
transformation of post-secondary institutions shows less than 
desirable outcomes, but this is a government that allows neither 
fact nor failure to get in the way of plowing ahead. So after the 
release of the long-awaited budget, they hit the so-called 
transform button again and now want to make cuts to make up 
for their own mismanagement. 
 
The former Advanced Education minister, now Finance 
minister, muses about merging university programming. 
Obviously this has the universities concerned. The faculties at 
the universities of Saskatchewan and Regina already work 
collaboratively on many of their programs. Thomas Chase, 
University of Regina vice-president, academic, said the Sask 
Party’s suggested changes would be “tremendously disruptive.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, to whom will the current minister listen: his 
predecessor, whose new job is to cut wherever possible, or to 
the experts in the educational institutions whose priority is 
doing their job and educating our future in this province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 



June 14, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 511 

Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As we 
go through the next number of weeks, months, Mr. Speaker, we 
look forward to the collaborative conversation that we’ll have 
with our post-secondary institutions across the partner . . . our 
post-secondary partners, Mr. Speaker, that offer the 
high-quality education that the people of Saskatchewan have 
come to know and to expect here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker.  
 
And we’re going to have conversations around accessibility of 
our institutions, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to ask questions 
alongside our institutions with respect to responsiveness of our 
institutions to the people that attend them and to the 
communities across the province, Mr. Speaker, have 
conversations with respect to sustainability of our institutions 
now and into the future, accountability of our institutions, Mr. 
Speaker, again to those that are investing in their education and 
to the people of Saskatchewan that invest and invest so heavily 
in post-secondary education, all the while, Mr. Speaker, 
ensuring that we can retain, as I said, the quality of education 
that the people of Saskatchewan have come to know and expect 
from each of our post-secondary partners here in the province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the changes being bandied about 
by the Sask Party don’t end with universities. Both the Finance 
and Advanced Education ministers are discussing significant 
changes to how regional colleges serve students, you know, 
regional colleges being our edge in terms of accessibility.  
 
Regional colleges use just 4 per cent of the close to $660 
million programming budget for advanced education. As Ivan 
Yackel, president and CEO of Humboldt-based Carlton Trail 
College said, “If you’re looking for significant savings, I’m not 
sure that’s where you would find them. Particularly not when 
you look at the kind of work that we’re doing.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, regional colleges deliver educational opportunities 
to rural residents and provide important job training to support 
rural communities. What transformational change does the 
minister have in mind for Saskatchewan’s regional colleges? To 
what extent will these cuts help fill the growing Sask Party 
deficit, and has the minister considered the long term effects of 
undermining our regional college system? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
thank the member opposite for the question, Mr. Speaker. With 
respect to our regional college system, they’ve done a great job 
throughout rural Saskatchewan and many of our communities 
including, Mr. Speaker, those First Nations communities and 
engagement in things like adult basic education, Mr. Speaker, 
some pre-employment training, some of the free trades training 
that happens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our regional colleges have done a great job with 
regards to accessibility, Mr. Speaker. But we are also going to, 
as I said, have that collaborative conversation, not just with our 

universities, not just with our technical institutes, Mr. Speaker, 
but all of our post-secondary partners, including regional 
colleges, when it comes to responsiveness, Mr. Speaker, when it 
comes to sustainability, accountability, and quality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is unlike what has happened in years previous, 
Mr. Speaker, when the members opposite, a day before the 
2007 election, Mr. Speaker, released a paper with a number — 
after 16 years of government — with a number of requests that 
they would do when it comes to post-secondary institutions, 
such as a $1,000 reduction in tuition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s this government that delivered on that with the 
Saskatchewan Advantage Scholarship, Mr. Speaker. They asked 
for increased student financial assistance. We delivered on that, 
Mr. Speaker, with things like the advantage grant for education 
savings, the graduate retention program. And we’ll continue to 
support our post-secondary education here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, this is the minister and a 
government that last budget gave an increase to the university, 
and then long about mid-year came around and asked for half of 
it back. 
 
In terms of what’s happening in the regional college sector and 
again across the post-secondary education sector in general, in 
terms of transformational change, this is an agenda that was 
precisely nowhere in the election campaign, Mr. Speaker. So I 
guess my question to the minister is this. We’re finding out 
more about what the transformation change agenda, so-called, 
means for the post-secondary education sector, but I guess I’d 
ask him this: can he point to me one place where talked about 
transformational change in the election campaign when they 
went to the people of Saskatchewan and asked for their 
support? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, the Government of 
Saskatchewan with our post-secondary institutions, our 
post-secondary partners across the province have always talked 
about things like accessibility, Mr. Speaker, responsiveness, and 
sustainability now and into the future. And we’re going to 
continue to have those discussions, Mr. Speaker, in light of 
fiscal financial challenges that we have: a billion-dollar revenue 
hole, Mr. Speaker, if you will. 
 
I’ll tell you what we won’t do, Mr. Speaker. What we won’t do 
is make policy decisions that result in tuition increases across 
the board like the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, over their 16 
years of government: a 175 per cent at the University of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker; the University of Regina, up 144 
per cent. Sask Polytech or SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology] at the time increased 336 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re going to continue to work with our post-secondary 
institutions, Mr. Speaker, to find out and to ensure that we can 
continue to sustain the quality of the education we have now 



512 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2016 

and into the future for our children and our children’s children. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Domestic Violence Reduction Strategy 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, far from taking positive action 
on the poverty reduction strategy, the Sask Party’s cuts to 
poverty programs throughout the province are significant. We 
know that investing in poverty prevention can play an important 
role in saving women and families from violent situations. But, 
Mr. Speaker, if that’s not reason enough for the Sask Party to 
invest, let me tell them that it saves money too. 
 
A recent report put together by Regina’s Circle Project 
association calculated that the financial cost of a single instance 
of domestic violence in Saskatchewan is more than $100,000. 
The Regina Police Service agrees with these numbers and state 
that it is a “pretty compelling figure.” Policing is often the 
default sector for a lack of capacity in other areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since none of the other more obvious — to us at 
least — reasons for investing in poverty reduction have 
motivated the Sask Party to do anything but cut, will they at 
least commit to prevention programs based on the fact that they 
are economically sound? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I reject the premise of the member’s question. We 
have made some significant investments in domestic violence 
reduction strategies, Mr. Speaker. Just last year we changed The 
Victims of Domestic Violence Act, Mr. Speaker, to enhance the 
ability of police and justice system to engage in more protective 
measures, more protective measures for victims, Mr. Speaker, 
by expanding definitions and providing additional tools, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’ve also made some significant investments, Mr. Speaker, in 
domestic violence outreach programs, Mr. Speaker, in domestic 
violence shelters over the term that we’ve been in government 
including, as of yesterday, the opening of the first domestic 
violence shelter in Saskatchewan in many, many years, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So we’re proud of the record that we have. Much more work to 
do, Mr. Speaker; we acknowledge that. But we’ll continue to 
work on this programming, Mr. Speaker, to make Saskatchewan 
a safer place for every member of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s clear that those solutions 
aren’t sufficient and we need to be doing more things right now. 
Saskatchewan has the highest rates of domestic violence 
amongst all provinces. It’s actually more than double the 
national rate. More services are needed, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 
clear, as a province, we can and must do better. 
 

Of course we know that there are significant benefits to funding 
prevention. The Sask Party says they won’t implement a plan to 
prevent and reduce interpersonal violence and domestic abuse 
until “the province’s fiscal capacity allows.” How can they 
continue to refuse to be proactive? Mr. Speaker, how can the 
Sask Party tie this important work to the price of oil? And how 
many more victims before this government takes real action? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I find that question to be 
remarkable, to be honest with you. I mean, just last week, over 
the last period of time, last week we announced some further 
information with respect to our domestic violence death review 
which is currently ongoing, Mr. Speaker. We’re about to 
announce the names of those people that are going to be 
participating in that review, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We acknowledge that we have the highest domestic violence 
rates in the country, Mr. Speaker, and we’re not proud of that. 
But we have instituted some programs over the last number of 
years, Mr. Speaker, to get directly at that. And part of the 
domestic violence death review is part of that strategy, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
As a result of the work that they’re going to do, we’ll expect a 
review in the fall, an interim report with some 
recommendations, with the final report in the fall of next year, 
Mr. Speaker, which will point out some ways that we can 
further utilize the resources that we have, other programming 
that might be acceptable that might end up reducing the 
incidents of domestic violence in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
But to suggest that this government has done nothing on this 
file, Mr. Speaker, is ridiculous. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Decrease in Foster Homes 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, foster families were honoured 
at a gala this weekend. But the minister is not showing them 
any honour day to day. Between 2011 and 2015, the number of 
foster homes in Saskatchewan dropped from more than 600 to 
fewer than 500. At the end of 2015, 251 children were in a 
home that was overcapacity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you don’t like that statistic, they can take it up 
with the Children’s Advocate. Me, I don’t like the policies that 
made that number a reality for 251 Saskatchewan children, so 
I’m taking it up with the minister. 
 
Under the Sask Party, funding for early childhood intervention 
programs is stagnant. There are northern foster families that 
can’t access services at all. They’re mismanaging the files so 
badly — with poor supports, late and unpredictable payments, 
and the list goes on — that families are leaving the program. 
When will the minister start caring for these children and 
support the families who want to help? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 



June 14, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 513 

isn’t correct. We have fewer foster families in our province than 
we have in the past. That is not unlike every other province in 
our country, or every state in the US [United States] either, as 
many countries are struggling with getting foster families. It is a 
societal change, Mr. Speaker. As families, we are choosing to 
have less children. We have more two-parent working families. 
There’s a number of reasons why it’s becoming a struggle 
across our nation to gain foster families. 
 
However a statistic that perhaps the member opposite also 
should not like is the fact that when the NDP were in 
government there was 21 children in one foster home, Mr. 
Speaker. We still have some homes that have more children. 
Some of those is from lack of capacity, some of those are 
sibling groups, Mr. Speaker. I’ve always said publicly that we 
will have, or we will try to keep sibling groups together 
wherever possible. 
 
What we have done is putting supports in those homes, Mr. 
Speaker, that have more than four children, which is unlike 
what the members opposite did when they had a chance to have 
this file. So, Mr. Speaker, we will always be working on this 
along with our partner in the Foster Family Association, but we 
do not want to go back to the stats that were under that . . . 
[inaudible]. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Attorney General. 
 

Family Matters Program 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s my pleasure to recognize the province-wide expansion of a 
successful program that’s been helping to minimize the effect of 
separation and divorce on family members, especially children, 
that are now being offered throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
Family Matters, assisting families through separation and 
divorce, is a successful program delivered by the Ministry of 
Justice, with nearly $1.3 million in financial support from the 
Law Foundation of Saskatchewan. The program provides early 
intervention solutions to help citizens navigate through this 
difficult transition in their lives. Previously the program was 
only available in Saskatoon, Prince Albert, Regina, and Moose 
Jaw. Earlier today, Mr. Speaker, we announced the program is 
now available to all Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Family Matters offers families in transition access to an early, 
affordable, and informal opportunity to resolve issues outside 
the courtroom. There’s a lot of information on separation and 
divorce, making it difficult for people to identify what is 
applicable to their specific needs. Family Matters has 
consolidated all these resources so that when citizens contact 
the program, a service provider can tell them what types of help 
are available for their particular situation. This support and 
guidance, combined with early intervention, can have a positive 
effect on couples going through this transition. Stress is 
alleviated on all family members, which, Mr. Speaker, is 
especially important for children. 
 
[14:30] 
 

From parenting plans to custody arrangements to property 
division — Family Matters can provide assistance on a number 
of topics related to separation and divorce. The issue of 
separation and divorce will always exist, Mr. Speaker, and it’s 
important that we address the needs of those involved. Since the 
launch of the Family Matters program in November of 2014, 
the program has received nearly 1,300 inquiries. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s a powerful number which clearly indicates the need for 
the type of assistance Family Matters provides. Traditionally, 
separating and divorced couples have used the courts to resolve 
matters, and this continues to be an option. However it is 
preferable to resolve these issues through an early intervention 
rather than traditional and costly court processes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to improving access 
to justice for all Saskatchewan citizens, and Family Matters is 
one very important example of that. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, and I would like to first thank 
the minister for providing me with a copy of his statement in 
advance. 
 
As I said earlier, the folks at Family Matters do very good 
work, and I can attest to their good work personally. And the 
Family Matters program is an important program and is quite 
good in theory, and it’s very important to be innovative 
especially in the area of family law. In Saskatchewan, as we all 
know, there’s some serious gaps in access to justice in that area. 
 
As the minister stated, the funding for this program is 
exclusively provided by the Law Foundation, a third party 
organization. It’s $1.3 million, Mr. Speaker, which is a 
significant amount of money, especially at a time when interest 
rates are lower. And in an ideal world, Mr. Speaker, 
government wouldn’t be competing with community-based 
organizations for this important money, so we’ll be monitoring 
that, as well as who exclusively this program is assisting. 
Ideally this program will be assisting those who are in highest 
need in our community, those who are of low income, those 
who don’t qualify for legal aid, and those who theoretically 
cannot afford a lawyer, which is what would make sense for 
providing this type of service. 
 
So as I said, it’s very important to be innovative in this area. 
I’m happy to see that they’re being innovative, and we as an 
opposition will continue to monitor the work of this program. 
Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Automobile Accident Insurance 
(Benefits) Amendment Act, 2016 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move that Bill No. 32, the automobile accident 
insurance amendment Act, 2016 be now introduced and read a 
first time. 
 



514 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2016 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Premier that 
Bill No. 32, the automotive accident insurance (benefits) 
amendment Act, 2016 be now introduced and read a first time. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 33 — The Child and Family Services 
Amendment Act, 2016 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 33, 
The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2016 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Social 
Services that Bill No. 33, The Child and Family Services 
Amendment Act, 2016 be now introduced and read a first time. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 34 — The Provincial Lands Act, 2016 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 34, The Provincial Lands Act, 2016 be now introduced 
and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It is moved by the Agriculture minister that 
Bill No. 34, The Provincial Lands Act, 2016 be now introduced 
and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 35 — The Small Claims Act, 2016 
Loi de 2016 sur les petites créances 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 35, The 
Small Claims Act, 2016 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Attorney General 
that Bill No. 35, The Small Claims Act, 2016 be now introduced 
and read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 36 — The Small Claims Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2016 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 36, The 
Small Claims Consequential Amendments Act, 2016 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Attorney General 
that Bill No. 36, The Small Claims Consequential Amendments 
Act, 2016 be introduced and read the first time. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read the second time? I 
recognize the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 



June 14, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 515 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Standing Committee on Privileges 
 
Mr. Forbes: — I’m instructed by the Standing Committee on 
Privileges to present the committee’s first report. I move: 
 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on 
Privileges be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Chair: 
 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on 
Privileges be now concurred in. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — On division. 
 
The Speaker: — On division. I recognize the member from 
Moose Jaw Wakamow. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 3, The 
Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment 
Act, 2016 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in the 
Committee of the Whole? 
 
I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
this bill be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Education has requested 
leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill 
No. 3 and that this bill be now read the third time. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Minister may proceed with the third 
reading. I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 3 — The Teachers Superannuation and Disability 
Benefits Amendment Act, 2016 

 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Education that Bill No. 3, The Teachers Superannuation and 
Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2016 be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 17 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2016 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to move 
second reading of Bill No. 17 — An Act to amend The Power 
Corporation Act henceforth known as The Power Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskPower has the responsibility to provide safe, 
clean, reliable power to the people of Saskatchewan and 
industry within our province. SaskPower and our government 
believe these amendments to the Act will enhance SaskPower’s 
ability to do so. SaskPower’s borrowing limit was last increased 
in 2013 from $5 billion to $8 billion, and under SaskPower’s 
current business plan they expect to exceed the current limit by 
the end of 2018. 
 
SaskPower continues to make substantial capital expenditures 
to replace aging infrastructure and to meet the province’s 
energy requirements to support a growing Saskatchewan. 
SaskPower has added 60,000 new customers and increased 
production by nearly 800 megawatts since 2007. In the next 10 
years, SaskPower projects 82,000 more new customers here in 
the province with over 2 000 megawatts of production required 
for that time period. 
 
Also as members know, SaskPower is in the process of moving 
to 50 per cent renewable capacity by 2030 including 1 600 
megawatts of new wind power and capacity to reduce emissions 
by over 40 per cent below the 2005 levels. 



516 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2016 

Overall, the corporation is expecting to spend an average of $1 
billion a year to grow and maintain our system. Increasing the 
borrowing limit to $10 billion is projected to be sufficient for 
SaskPower’s needs through 2021 with borrowing forecast to 
begin falling by 2023. 
 
It is well known that in the North American market, utilities are 
all having to undertake significant borrowings to support large 
capital plans to renew and expand infrastructure. These changes 
and investments are required due to the regulatory regimes, 
movements towards renewables, and changes in the way 
individuals consume electricity. Taking these factors into 
consideration, SaskPower has established a target debt ratio of 
between 60 per cent and 75 per cent. A debt ratio in this range 
is comparable to other corporations in the industry. 
 
It is important to note that SaskPower’s debt does not affect the 
province’s credit limit because it is considered self-supporting 
by credit rating agencies. 
 
The remaining amendments are primarily of a housekeeping 
nature and do not expand on the current powers currently 
maintained under the Act. Some will add gender-neutral 
language to the Act. Some will clarify existing language, and 
others will increase readability by deleting redundant plural 
forms of certain words. 
 
The proposed amendments are intended to strike a balance 
between the needs of the corporation and the people of 
Saskatchewan as a whole for an efficient, reliable, and safe 
power system. Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second 
reading of The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of the Economy has moved 
second reading of The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 
2016. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
member from Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to be 
the first opposition member to respond to Bill No. 17, The 
Power Corporation Amendment Act. Mr. Speaker, we’ve had an 
opportunity to take a look at the bill, and hearing the minister’s 
comments upon second reading always helps to flesh things out 
just a little bit. But we’ll need to take some time to look at this 
further. 
 
But the one thing this bill does, the simple thing, was around 
gender-neutral language to more gender-specific language. 
That’s the smaller, more housekeeping details of the bill, which 
again I’ve talked about this in the House, that language is 
important. The language that we use sends a message to both 
men and women, and I think moving to gender-specific 
language is very important. 
 
But the big part of this bill, Mr. Speaker, is increasing 
SaskPower’s borrowing capacity by $2 billion, Mr. Speaker, 
because in large measure of this government’s decisions to 
basically foist upon SaskPower the carbon capture boondoggle 
and SaskPower . . . the smart meter fiasco which ultimately has 
a huge impact on Saskatchewan residents and what they pay for 
power, Mr. Speaker. Alone this year, there will be two rate 
increases which will have an impact on many families, Mr. 
Speaker. 

So I do know that, as time goes on, we’ll have further 
comments on this bill, but with that I’d like to move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn debate on 
The Power Corporation Amendment Act. Is the Assembly 
willing to adjourn debate? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 19 — The Film and Video Classification Act, 2016 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of The Film and Video 
Classification Act, 2016. This legislation repeals The Film and 
Video Classification Act and replaces it with new legislation. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation will do the following. It will allow 
the administration of the industry to be performed by an 
official, the director of film classification, and not by a board, 
and allow registration of exhibitors and distributors to continue 
in perpetuity provided that annual reports are provided by 
registrants. Mr. Speaker, these measures are consistent with 
other programs administered by the Financial and Consumer 
Affairs Authority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is unique because it has an 
agreement with British Columbia film classification office to 
classify most films to be shown in our province. British 
Columbia collects our fee and remits half to us. This works very 
well and makes the decision to have a director instead of a 
board all the more logical. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is also an opportunity to address other issues 
within the Act. For example, the director is given the discretion 
to limit classification to a specific exhibitor, time, or location. 
As well the new Act will be more logically organized. 
Consultations respecting the legislation with exhibitors, 
distributors, industry association, and other jurisdictions 
revealed no issues with the proposal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the legislation also updates The Film and Video 
Classification Amendment Act, 2006. That legislation was 
passed to enable a classification of video games and consequent 
restrictions on access to video games by underage children and 
teens. 
 
The primary objective of classification, Mr. Speaker, is to assist 
viewers in making informed choices. Equipped with this 
information, parents, guardians, and film patrons can 
knowledgably exercise individual responsibility and discretion 
in selecting films for themselves and their children. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I am pleased with that and pleased to move second 
reading of The Film and Video Classification Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The Attorney General has moved second 
reading of Bill No. 19, The Film and Video Classification Act, 



June 14, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 517 

2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? I 
recognize the member from Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
be the first opposition member to put a few remarks on the 
record with respect to Bill No. 19, The Film and Video 
Classification Act. Mr. Speaker, this is a new Act replacing a 
previous Act, so there will be . . . we’ll need to take some time, 
Mr. Speaker, to take a look at the former Act and this one side 
by side and compare some of the differences. I know the 
minister has pointed out some of the things in the bill, and it’s 
always good to have the minister’s comments to give you a 
little bit of perspective. 
 
As a parent, Mr. Speaker, film classification and video 
classification is a very important thing. I have an eight-year-old 
and an 18-year-old. And I know as a parent you try to be 
vigilant, and classification systems allow you the opportunity to 
know if something is appropriate or not appropriate for your 
child. And I think leaving that . . . knowing what you may find 
in a particular video game or in a particular movie or TV show, 
Mr. Speaker, is helpful. And then in the context of a family, 
how you go about parenting, it’s good to have that individual 
responsibility and up to individual parents’ discretion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that it will be important. The minister 
talked about consultation and said that there were no issues that 
were found, but I think in our discussions, including in 
committee, it’ll be important for us to know with whom the 
government consulted and to get some feedback as to what 
exactly was said, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And also I think it’s important to reach out to folks who remain 
here in the film industry here in Saskatchewan, although those 
numbers are much fewer than they were just a few years ago 
when this government cut the film employment tax credit, but 
also as well in the art communities to make sure that this Act 
strikes the balance between protecting that freedom of 
expression, while having appropriate controls on film and 
movies and videos, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I look forward to the opportunity that we’ll have as an 
opposition of looking at the two Acts and seeing how they 
compare to one another, finding out a little bit more about the 
consultation process, Mr. Speaker, and just digging a little bit 
more deeply into this bill. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment of 
debate on Bill No. 19, The Film and Video Classification Act, 
2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 26 — The Patient Choice Medical Imaging Act 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 26, The Patient 
Choice Medical Imaging Act. Providing timely and quality 

diagnostic imaging services to Saskatchewan patients is a high 
priority for the government. We’re also interested in removing 
legislative barriers and adding choice for residents right here in 
Saskatchewan where there’s an opportunity to improve patient 
access and satisfaction with health services. That’s why we’ve 
launched the private-pay MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] 
services in Saskatchewan in February and why we’re expanding 
private-pay services to include computerized tomography, CT 
scans. 
 
This new Act will provide the option for patients to directly pay 
for MRI and CT services at licensed private facilities in the 
province. The Act sets out quality standards and requirements 
of facilities. Regulations will define specific categories of 
licence that enable a facility to accept private payment for 
services. 
 
Two categories of licence have been defined. Category I is for 
the publicly funded MRI and CT service delivery, where a 
facility provides services under a contract with a regional health 
authority, the minister. or another public funding source. 
Category II enables a facility to accept private payment for MRI 
and CT service delivery. Payment can be received from an 
individual or an organization such as Workers’ Compensation 
Board, and a private facility can apply for both one or both 
categories of licence. 
 
As part of the category II licence, the Act also outlines the 
unique requirement that for every privately purchased scan the 
licensed facility must also provide a second scan of similar 
complexity to an individual on the public wait-list at no cost to 
that individual or the health system. Essentially, for every 
patient who receives a private MRI or CT scan, two patients 
will be removed from the public list: the patient who received 
the private-pay scan as well as the second patient on the public 
wait-list. In order to facilitate this legislative change, the 
existing MRI facilities licensing Act and regulations will be 
repealed at the same time as a new patient choice medical 
imaging Act and regulations are created. 
 
It will also allow for other medical imaging modalities to be 
added in the future through changes to regulations. This will 
streamline administration and provide greater flexibility going 
forward. However, at this time the government has no plans to 
make these changes and will publicly state any plans to do so in 
the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, reducing wait times and giving patients more 
choice over their own health care decisions is a high priority for 
the people of Saskatchewan. It is also a high priority for our 
government. We’ve been focused on increasing capacity for 
diagnostic imaging, and MRI scans in particular, for some time. 
We know that among specialized medical imaging services, 
patients wait longer for MRIs than any other service. Demand 
for an MRI has doubled from 15,700 patients in 2007 to over 
33,000 last year. 
 
To respond to that demand, our government has more than 
doubled the number of MRI units in the province since 2007. 
That represents an increase in capacity of about 115 per cent. 
We currently have seven MRI units in hospitals across 
Saskatchewan, including four units in Saskatoon and two in 
Regina. The first MRI located outside of those two centres 



518 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2016 

officially began operation at the Dr. F.H. Wigmore Regional 
Hospital in February. 
 
Extending MRI service into the new regional hospital in Moose 
Jaw was an important step toward meeting increased demand 
and ensuring that patients can be diagnosed and treated sooner 
and closer to home. There’s also a mobile MRI unit that visits 
Lloydminster. 
 
The Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region has also entered into a 
contract with one private firm to provide community-based 
MRI service in two locations in Regina through the publicly 
funded and administered system. As part of the 2016-17 budget, 
$2.1 million has been provided to the Saskatoon Health Region 
to engage with providers in the delivery of community-based 
MRI services. This will further increase the number of MRIs in 
the province and provide more access to timely medical 
imaging exams for the residents of central and northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It is anticipated that a community-based MRI provider in 
Saskatoon would also apply for a category II licence to provide 
patients in Saskatoon with the opportunity to choose to pay for 
their private MRI scan closer to home. 
 
As I noted earlier, despite increased capacity for MRI services 
in the public system, demand has outpaced that capacity. Mr. 
Speaker, our government is focused on patient satisfaction. 
We’re making improvements, but we knew that we could do 
better. That’s why at the end of February this year our 
government introduced the ability for patients to choose to pay 
for a private MRI in our province. At that time there were 
approximately 7,197 patients waiting for MRI services at 
Saskatchewan hospitals in Moose Jaw, Regina, and Saskatoon. 
 
There are currently two licensed facilities that are providing 
patient MRI services in Regina, and these services are already 
benefiting the people of this province. Between February 29th 
and April 30th, 77 patients have chosen to pay privately for 
their MRI scan. Private facilities have also provided 181 scans 
under the category II licensed organizations such as WCB 
[Workers’ Compensation Board]. That means in the two months 
that private-pay MRI services have been available, 258 patients 
have benefited from private-pay services. It also means that 
another 258 patients from the public system will receive an 
MRI at no additional cost to the health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the addition of private-pay MRIs to complement 
publicly funded exams is already freeing up capacity within the 
health system and helping to reduce overall wait times. The 
Patient Choice Medical Imaging Act will expand these benefits 
to patients wishing to pay for a CT scan.  
 
Currently CT services are provided in the public system at 
provincial and regional or district hospital sites in Regina, 
Saskatoon, Lloydminster, Moose Jaw, North Battleford, Prince 
Albert, Swift Current, Yorkton, and now in Estevan. Mr. 
Speaker, our government contributed $600,000 toward the 
replacement of the CT scanner in Yorkton which recently began 
operation in April. This new technology is improving the 
quality and safety of diagnostic services for patients in 
east-central Saskatchewan. 
 

Along with CT units in health facilities, there is also one 
community-based provider of CT scans in Regina. Demand for 
CT services at all of these sites has increased. In the 2014-15 
fiscal year about 98,000 patients received a CT scan in our 
province. Last year that rose by 2.6 per cent to about 101,000 
patients. From the end of March 2015 to the end of February 
2016 the number of patients waiting for CT services increased 
from approximately 2,900 to 3,800, and between December 
2015 and February 2016 nine out of ten patients in 
Saskatchewan had their CT scans in 56 days or fewer. 
 
Providing patients with the choice to privately pay for MRI and 
CT scans will allow Saskatchewan people to access that service 
right here in their own province, while also providing additional 
capacity within the public system. 
 
Currently there are several other jurisdictions across Canada 
where patients can choose to pay for specialized medical 
imaging services. British Columbia and Alberta have had 
private MRI and CT clinics since 1993. Quebec has been 
offering private MRI services since 1997, and Nova Scotia 
since 2002. 
 
Concerns have been raised about the possibility of staff moving 
from the public system to the private system. In Saskatchewan 
we are committed to keeping the public system strong while 
increasing options for patients. For each licence application, 
regional health authorities will be required to report on the 
expected impact of the private facility on the public system 
operations. Furthermore, facilities applying for a licence must 
also submit a human resource plan that outlines how its staffing 
plan will not negatively impact the health region in which it 
plans to operate. This will ensure that the addition of private 
services do not have a detrimental effect on the public system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our model provides options for Saskatchewan 
people closer to home without the added costs of travelling to 
another province for quicker access to an MRI or CT scan. We 
believe that residents shouldn’t be forced to leave the province 
to exercise the ability to purchase a service that many of our 
fellow Canadians have access to. At the same time as providing 
choice at home, there is also a benefit to the public system. The 
money provided for a private MRI service will stay in the 
province and will also have the effect of pulling someone off 
the public wait-list at no expense to the taxpayer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the regulations under the proposed new Act are 
similar to those under the current MRI facilities licensing Act. It 
provides Saskatchewan people with the option to directly pay a 
private facility for a medical imaging scan and ensures that 
licensed facility also provides a second scan of similar 
complexity to an individual on the public wait-list at no cost to 
that individual or the health system. The licensed provider sets 
the fee schedule for the initial private scan and ensures the 
second scan is provided at no cost to the patient on the public 
wait-list. 
 
[15:00] 
 
As with all other medical imaging services, regardless of 
whether the services are publicly or privately funded, a 
physician referral will be required to ensure appropriateness of 
the scan. Inappropriate care includes overuse, underuse, misuse, 



June 14, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 519 

and variation in diagnostic testing and treatment options offered 
to patients. This can lead to negative patient outcomes and incur 
unnecessary costs to the health care system. Mr. Speaker, by 
requiring a physician referral for all MRI and CT scans in our 
province, it ensures the appropriate use of medical imaging so 
that we can make the best use of our existing capacity. The 
Ministry of Health is also working with physicians on other 
projects aimed at ensuring the appropriateness of medical 
imaging. Quality and patient safety is also a top priority for the 
government. All licensed medical imaging facilities must meet 
the same rigorous operating requirements, and each facility 
must also maintain accreditation standards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government will consult on the development 
of regulations with stakeholders who have a direct interest in 
MRI and CT services in Saskatchewan. This includes our 
regional health authorities, the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons of Saskatchewan, the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association, and current MRI and CT scan providers in our 
province. This will build on the consultations that occurred in 
the fall of 2015 related to private-pay MRI services. That 
feedback provides a solid foundation for expanding private-pay 
MRI services to CT scans. Once The Patient Choice Medical 
Imaging Act and corresponding regulations are brought into 
force, private-pay services will be expanded to include MRI and 
CT scans, with the opportunity to add other medical imaging 
modalities in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to moving forward 
with innovative patient-first solutions that enhance access to 
services and result in improved patient satisfaction. Expanding 
private-pay services will increase capacity, help reduce wait 
times, and provide a benefit to the public system by providing a 
second MRI and CT scan to a patient on the public wait-list at 
no cost to the health system. With that, Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to move second reading of The Patient Choice Medical 
Imaging Act. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Health has moved second 
reading of Bill No. 26, the patient choice medical imagery Act. 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to stand up and give the initial comments on behalf of 
the official opposition on Bill No. 26, The Patient Choice 
Medical Imaging Act. 
 
And I should point out, Mr. Speaker, as the minister alluded to, 
that it was really important that the people of Saskatchewan 
paid attention to a lot of the changes that the minister is 
proposing. And quite frankly — to be as abrupt and 
straightforward as I can — as the intent of this particular bill, is 
it repeals the government’s MRI facilities licencing Act that 
was introduced last session and replaces that Act with a new 
law that includes MRIs and CT scans. And under this bill 
patients will be able to pay for an MRI or a CT scan out of their 
own pocket, and the clinic will need to provide a second scan to 
the public waiting list at no cost to the taxpayer. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s what’s being proposed. The Sask 
Party refers to it as a two-for-one deal. And the people of 
Saskatchewan are basically saying, well what does that mean? 

Well what that means, Mr. Speaker, is that a person with the 
ability to pay for a CT scan or an MRI can do so out of their 
own pocket with their credit card. If they’re well to do, then 
they can certainly pay for these services ahead of anyone else. 
The only condition is that somebody on the public wait list also 
be taken in, so they have actually two people that are being 
looked at in terms of the actual priority when it comes to the 
MRI or CT scan service. 
 
So if I had the resources to get a private MRI done as an 
individual, and I jumped the line or the queue in terms of being 
next on the list, Mr. Speaker, if I can afford to do that, then 
what would happen is I would do this, but the clinic that I am 
going to see, the MRI clinic or the CT scan clinic, what they 
would have to do as a result of seeing me is that they would 
have to see somebody on that list as well at no charge for that 
person. 
 
Now at the outset, Mr. Speaker, the bill itself is actually talking 
about defining the medical imaging services as it includes 
MRIs, CT scans, and any other prescribed services. That’s what 
the bill basically says. This gives the Premier and cabinet a 
back door to add any other medical imaging services such as 
scope procedures or X-rays. And with this two-for-one patient 
system that is being proposed in this particular bill, some people 
might say that makes sense. 
 
And I would say very quickly, Mr. Speaker, that you got to be 
very careful that you assess the impact of some of these 
proposals very, very carefully. Because some people would 
argue the counterpoint, saying that obviously if you have more 
money then you would have quicker access to an MRI or to a 
CT scan, Mr. Speaker. And what that does, it obviously allows 
that person to jump the queue, but then the trade-off, as the 
minister alluded to, was the fact that somebody on the list that 
couldn’t afford it would also get it done, so it’s really a 
two-for-one procedure and it really helps those on the list, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But you’ve got to be careful on two fronts, very quickly I would 
add, Mr. Speaker. First of all, when you look at the new feature 
of this bill, when it talks about medical imaging services, what 
exactly does that mean? What it does, the bill does, it allows the 
cabinet and the Premier to decide other procedures. And this is 
what we caution people in the province, is to pay very closely to 
some of these bills because there are certain languages being 
used and certain leeway being afforded to cabinet to determine 
what other procedures that they will allow under this 
two-for-one scenario as being proposed by this particular bill. 
 
So it’s important that we pay attention to the process. It’s 
important that we pay attention to the language. And I’ll point 
out to people, the two-for-one deal, some people might think 
that that makes sense, Mr. Speaker. What I will say to them, the 
two, three areas that you ought to be concerned about and pay a 
bit more attention to those issues because it does have an effect 
on our publicly administered health care system. 
 
The first is that it allows people to jump the lineup. So if you 
have more money, you obviously get to the MRI or you get the 
CT scan done ahead of anybody else that may be ahead of you 
on the list, if you have the cash. Well, Mr. Speaker, what that 
means is obviously that they get the service sooner, and as a 



520 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2016 

result of that they also get diagnosed sooner. And as a result of 
the earlier diagnosis, Mr. Speaker, one would say that they also 
get the treatment necessary to deal with any medical issues that 
might arise from the CT scan or from an MRI, and that’s where 
the area that is of some concern to a lot of organizations out 
there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the other fact is that, as you have a lot more of these 
private clinics pop up, then obviously there should be a process 
to make sure it doesn’t come at the detriment of our publicly 
funded health care system. Because obviously a private clinic 
that can take money from people that are well to do, Mr. 
Speaker, may be able to afford . . . Nurses or X-ray technicians 
or CT scan personnel, they might be able to pay them more. 
And as a result, as you draw some of these staff members out of 
the publicly funded health care system, it does create a problem 
for the public health care system in itself. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of different issues and angles that 
we’ve got to pay very close attention to as a result, or as it is 
summarized by the minister in terms of what the intent of this 
particular bill. And I’ll very quickly summarize them, Mr. 
Speaker. First of all, the language in the bill that again refers to 
“medical imaging services.” Mr. Speaker, we need more 
definition as to what that means. Obviously the cabinet and the 
Premier have the determination to rules and regulations as to 
how they would provide those particular services. The language 
is in there and the wording should be there attached to that 
particular language. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, as a result of this, at the outset some 
people might say they make sense to do the two-for-one deal. 
But, Mr. Speaker, what you’ve got to worry about is those that 
are jumping the queue, are leaving others behind in the queue 
while they obviously get the service sooner, they get the 
diagnosis sooner. And if there’s any health problems that they 
find out as a result of a CT scan, and thereby they get treated 
sooner than the average person on that line, that’s another 
significant challenge. 
 
And of course the third particular aspect that we’ve got to pay 
very close attention to, Mr. Speaker, is the draw of our 
professional health care service providers within the publicly 
funded health care system. As more and more of these private 
systems set up, Mr. Speaker, they will start to begin to draw 
some of the professional people that work in various 
departments in our public health care system, and there isn’t 
that particular assessment being done and attached to this bill to 
determine if there is a real problem with that possibility. 
 
And finally I will say, Mr. Speaker, it’s one of those things. 
Where you have a two-for-one deal, you ought to be very 
careful in the time frame. When does this deal end? Is it going 
to be in perpetuity in terms of offering the two-for-one forever? 
Is it going to end next year? Is it going to end six months from 
now? We don’t know those details. And obviously when you 
look at some of the salesmanship of product where people say, 
well we’ll offer you this deal, and it’s a great deal, and all of a 
sudden you enter into the deal and you find out that the deal 
ended midnight the day before. Well this is the same kind of 
scenario that people ought to be worried about, that how long is 
this two-for-one deal going to last. And these are some of the 
questions that we have attached to this particular bill, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 
So as we learn the details, as the minister describes the bill, 
these are some of the immediate reactions and questions we 
have. And our people that are following the particular bill, in 
particular our health care critic, will be paying very close 
attention to this bill because there are some serious issues that 
we need to address. And, Mr. Speaker, those issues of course 
are open to the public, and those that have any information or 
advice for us on this particular bill, we would encourage them 
to contact our office and we will certainly engage them and get 
their perspective because this is about our health care system. 
 
And every change that the Sask Party undertakes in the health 
care system ought to be scrutinized wholly, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s one of the biggest challenges that we have as an 
opposition. And that’s why we ask the public for their 
assistance, and certainly their comments and advice on issues of 
this sort, and certainly of issues of this magnitude. 
 
So on that point, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 26, The Patient Choice Medical Imaging Act. I so 
move. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 26. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Extension of Compassionate 
Care Act, 2016 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education 
and the Minister Responsible for Labour Relations and 
Workplace Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 
great pleasure to move second reading of Bill 28, The Extension 
of Compassionate Care Act, 2016. The amendment of The 
Saskatchewan Employment Act respecting compassionate care 
leave is the result of changes made to federal legislation. On 
January 3rd, 2016, the federal government amended the 
Employment Insurance Act, allowing employees to collect up to 
26 weeks of benefits after observing a two-week cooling-off 
period. 
 
Saskatchewan’s current legislation no longer aligns with this. 
Currently, Mr. Speaker, employees in Saskatchewan are entitled 
to eight weeks of job-protected leave which, until recently, was 
in alignment with the federal legislation. During the election, 
we promised to increase compassionate care benefits and this 
proposal fulfills that promise. With these amendments, 
Saskatchewan employees will have job-protected leave up to 28 
weeks. We will be one of the first jurisdictions to increase this 
leave. 
 
Mr. Speaker, family is important. People are living longer, 
which is a good thing, but it also creates new challenges. Many 
working people feel the squeeze of caring for children, aging 
parents or grandparents, and loved ones with a disability. 



June 14, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 521 

Sometimes they need to step away from a career just for a short 
period of time, to honour those family commitments. Family is 
the bedrock of society. Family is there to support, to assist, to 
advocate, and to care. This government is here to support 
families. Extending compassionate care benefits is one more 
way we’re meeting that commitment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill 28 will also amend part IV of the Act. The 
change will give authority to the registrar of the Labour 
Relations Board to select adjudicators to hear an appeal, rather 
than the board. When The Saskatchewan Employment Act was 
drafted, these provisions were not included, and it has resulted 
in some confusion. By amending these provisions we will 
provide clarification. We will also address the concerns of the 
Provincial Ombudsman who noted interested parties need better 
information on appeal processes. These amendments will 
provide clarification. They will also expedite the appeal 
process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are committed to keeping Saskatchewan 
strong. These new provisions will ensure employers and 
employees continue to benefit from modern labour legislation. 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this bill. 
Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Education, Minister 
Responsible for Labour Relations and Workplace Safety has 
moved that Bill No. 28, The Extension of Compassionate Care 
Act, 2016 be now read a second time. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again I’m pleased to stand up and give initial comments on the 
Bill No. 28, The Extension of Compassionate Care Act, 2016. 
And to summarize for those that might be listening, this 
particular bill allows employees to take up to 28 weeks off work 
in order to care for a family member who is at significant risk of 
death as a result of their health. And, Mr. Speaker, it also 
introduces a bunch of amendments, technical in nature, that 
gives a number of powers to the registrar from the Labour 
Relations Board including, and I would identify those two 
points, the ability to select the adjudicator for a wage 
assessment, the responsibility to set the date and time of 
hearings before the Labour Relations Board and to serve papers 
upon the interested parties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what this is, is obviously when people hear the 
notion that the government is looking at a bill that recognizes 
compassionate care and allows people that are working, family 
members that are working, up to 28 weeks away from their job 
to look after their loved ones, now, Mr. Speaker, at the face 
value it is certainly something that a lot of families would be 
supportive of. I have that same situation in my particular family 
where my younger sister has been trying to take leave from her 
work to care for my mother, who had a stroke. She obviously 
needs to have that day-to-day attention. And, Mr. Speaker, she 
looked at that opportunity and, you know, and which is actually 
really a powerful position on her part where she was willing to 
leave work for that time frame and to help with my mother. 
 
But the problem we have, Mr. Speaker, is that there are so many 

rules and regulations attached to that. Like we have the intent to 
try and recognize compassionate leave, but as you look at the 
bill itself, Mr. Speaker, it talks about the adjudicator process; it 
talks about regulation. These regulations have not yet been 
released. It talks about the final section of the bill that allows 
cabinet to make wide-reaching regulations regarding the duties 
of the adjudicator, the rules for appealing decisions of the 
board, or any other rules regarding hearings and appeals. 
 
Now what that is, Mr. Speaker, to me . . . I’m saying, I’m 
telling the people out there that on one hand people generally 
like the idea of having some time off granted to some family 
member as a result of somebody in their family being quite ill. 
But then we have the government come along making all kinds 
of rules, not only on the adjudication process but who is 
eligible, not being forward and coming clean with some of 
those rules and regulations. Mr. Speaker, it confuses people. So 
either you’re going to do the compassionate leave or you’re not 
going to do it. Don’t announce it and then put a whole bunch of 
conditions and rules and regulations and processes behind it to 
hamper the original intent. 
 
So that’s what’s the most important message I would have as 
result of this particular bill, is that we’re going to pay very close 
attention to this because at the outset, if the bill is there intended 
to help those families that want to take care of their loved ones 
who are quite ill, Mr. Speaker, I think everybody in 
Saskatchewan would look at that and say, well that’s a good 
idea. But if the people of Saskatchewan saw the amount of 
regulations or obstacles that might be put in front of this bill to 
discourage that activity, then I think the average person in 
Saskatchewan would say, well what’s the use of putting this bill 
forward if you’re going to pile on a bunch of regulations and 
rules and processes to discourage that particular expression of 
love and support for a family member that’s quite ill by 
someone who wishes to leave their place of work? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s really important we pay very close 
attention, especially the fact that the history of some of the 
changes that the Saskatchewan Party government has 
undertaken in the last several years as it pertains to workers and 
to working with the labour movement, Mr. Speaker. They have 
gone to war with many of the working men and women in this 
family. We have seen layoff after layoff in recent weeks, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So for my perspective, I do not trust the Saskatchewan Party 
when they talk about putting in processes in place, putting in 
processes in place when they talk about compassion and care, 
Mr. Speaker, because behind that compassionate care bill, 
there’s 50 rules and 50 regulations all designed to discourage 
family members from undertaking the compassionate leave 
that’s identified in this particular bill. 
 
And that’s why we’ve got to pay close attention to everything 
that that government does when it comes to workers, when it 
comes to people that have contributed and have sacrificed their 
lives in the employment to the Saskatchewan people, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s why it’s important that we pay close 
attention to what they’re doing on any bill, especially when it 
comes to protecting the rights of working men and women of 
this particular province. 
 



522 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2016 

So on that point, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 28, The Extension of Compassionate Care Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 28, the expansion of 
compassionate care Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 29 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 
2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur les juges de paix 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2016. Mr. 
Speaker, this Act provides for the appointment of justices of the 
peace and sets out different categories of justices of the peace as 
well as their respective powers and responsibilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Act was last amended in 2013 to establish an 
independent commission process for the determination of 
salaries for justices of the peace. The Saskatchewan Justice of 
the Peace Association has requested some amendments to 
improve and clarify the commission’s process. Making these 
changes will now allow the commission to make some 
additional recommendations in its next report in December of 
2018 that it would not be able to make under the current Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments that I am proposing will create a 
new assistant supervising Justice of the Peace position. The 
sitting Justice of the Peace will be appointed to this new 
position to provide additional administrative support for the 
supervising Justice of the Peace. The determination of the 
salary for this new position and the existing supervising Justice 
of the Peace position will also be moved to the independent 
commission process. Currently that amount is set in the 
regulations made by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments will also allow a Justice of the 
Peace who has been suspended to receive his or her salary 
subject to any conditions imposed by the chief judge. This new 
provision is consistent with the payment of salaries to 
provincial court judges who have been suspended under The 
Provincial Court Act. Mr. Speaker, this bill will also establish 
the process when seeking clarification from the commission of 
recommendations in a report. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, this bill will make changes related to The 
Traffic Safety Court of Saskatchewan Act, 1988. There has not 
been a traffic justice appointed under that Act since April of 
2006, and I propose in the Act we repeal this part of these 
amendments. The powers formerly accorded to traffic justices 
under that Act, which includes powers requiring attendance at 
driver improvement programs, will now be made applicable to 
all senior justices of the peace in Saskatchewan. These changes 
will be more reflective of the current court practices and will 
help to streamline court operations. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Justice of the Peace Association 
has been consulted on an ongoing basis during the development 
of this bill and is supportive of these amendments. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading 
of The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is 
the motion by the Minister of Justice that Bill No. 29 — The 
Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 
recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I think 
what’s important on this particular bill, Mr. Speaker, as the 
minister has briefly explained, it repeals The Traffic Safety 
Court of Saskatchewan Act and creates a regime where traffic 
safety issues can be resolved outside of the courts. Now, Mr. 
Speaker, it allows, once you’re outside of the courts, who would 
be hearing some of these particular problems, that it relates to 
the traffic safety. 
 
Obviously as you pointed out, they’d be creating an assistant 
supervisor Justice of the Peace who will take over the 
supervising Justice of the Peace in his or her absence to assist 
with him or her in his or her duties. So, Mr. Speaker, it also 
creates a new category of Justice of the Peace, senior Justice of 
the Peace, and this senior Justice of the Peace could then 
impose fines or order a driver to take driver’s training for traffic 
offences. Now, Mr. Speaker, what’s really important here is that 
we’ve got to understand there’s two or three things I think 
people are generally thinking on the opposition side. 
 
We’re certainly all . . . It’s always important for us to make sure 
that our justice system works as efficiently and effectively as 
possible because obviously we have to make sure that we are 
modernizing everything, using the proper tools in the right way, 
that we can indeed have speedy justice for the people of 
Saskatchewan. So bringing technology options forward, 
defining the roles of some of the cases that might be clogging 
up the justice system so they’re dealt with more effectively, 
more efficiently, Mr. Speaker . . . it’s all about utilizing the 
dollars as best we can to ensure that our justice system 
maintains its integrity, but more so also provides very efficient 
and effective service, thus creating, I think, a value-for-money 
audit, if you will, for the people of Saskatchewan, who are the 
taxpayers, who are paying for those particular costs. 
 
So I think as I looked at this particular one and saying, well are 
we taking it outside the court and that senior justices of the 
peace, who we will be paying will begin to determine and play 
a greater role in resolving some of these traffic violation issues 
and thus leaving the main court system not burdened by some 
of the traffic safety issues. 
 
So there may be some savings as a result of this. It may be 
efficiently improving the delivery of justice. We’re not certain 
of that. We have to ascertain that by having various discussions 
with various groups and organizations, and this is the reason 
why we take the time to hear the bill and also take the time to 
reach out to different organizations to get their valued input. 
 
So finally I’ll say this, Mr. Speaker. Creating a senior Justice of 



June 14, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 523 

the Peace, we have to make sure that when they’re looking and 
evaluating the processes around traffic violations, for somebody 
to go before a senior Justice of the Peace, we have to ensure that 
there are rules and regulations prescribed as to what the Justice 
of the Peace, the senior Justice of the Peace can impose, what 
powers that they might have conferred upon them, and what 
appeal processes may be in place for those that are appearing 
before these senior justices of the peace as it relates to traffic 
violations. 
 
So all those questions need to be answered, Mr. Speaker. And 
we also have to talk about the pay of these senior justices of the 
peace. What pay range are we looking at? How will they be 
selected? How about regional matters in terms of ensuring that 
we have the senior justices of the peace all throughout the 
province? These are compelling critical points that we need to 
find out before we’re able to give the bill any further passage in 
this particular Assembly, and certainly that’s a role that we will 
embrace and will continue undertaking as the official 
opposition. 
 
So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I will defer this to our critic, and 
the critic will take more time to understand the bill and the 
ramifications attached to it. So on that note, I move that we 
adjourn Bill No. 29, The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 
2016. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 29. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Freedom of Information and 
Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I rise today to move second reading of The 
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment 
Act, 2016. 
 
Members of this Assembly know that The Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Act is the cornerstone 
legislation in ensuring open government and protecting 
individual privacy. And not long after his appointment, I asked 
the Information and Privacy Commissioner to identify the 
priority changes he would like to see in FOIP [The Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Act]. 
 
In his annual report issued last summer, he identified a series of 
amendments for priority consideration. The Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 is 
being introduced to respond to the proposed amendments by the 
commissioner. These amendments include a duty to assist the 
applicants for information, a duty to protect personal 
information, extension of LAFOIP [The Local Authority 
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act] to 
police services, creation of a new offence for snooping, and 
extension of the privacy requirements under the Act to MLA 

offices and to cabinet ministers’ offices. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are the changes that will significantly update 
Saskatchewan’s legislation. By applying privacy protection to 
MLA offices, FOIP in our province will be the first legislation 
in Canada to include this requirement. 
 
Amendments are also being made to provide for a number of 
other things, Mr. Speaker: introduction of mandatory breach 
notification where personal information has been leaked that 
places individuals at serious personal risk; broadening the 
grounds for review by the commissioner to include reviewing 
complaints regarding fees, transfers of access application, and 
improper handling of personal information; allowing the 
rejection of frivolous or vexatious access requests; recognition 
of electronic access requests and responses; updating the list of 
existing exemptions from disclosure; authorizing the 
commissioner to disclose personal information to privacy 
commissioners in other provinces to facilitate investigations or 
reviews regarding government institutions in more than one 
jurisdiction; and increasing the penalties for offences. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve consulted with the commissioner to 
identify these priority changes, and we appreciate his 
leadership, energy, and expertise in promoting these changes. 
While the large majority of the recommended changes are being 
made, there are recommendations by the commissioner that 
have not been included in this package. We will continue to 
collaborate with him and consult with stakeholders on most of 
the outstanding recommendations. For example, some of the 
recommendations may be addressed through changes to practice 
rather than amendments to the Act. 
 
[15:30] 
 
However rather than wait for further consultations, additional 
recommendations, or further reports, it was time to get these 
priority changes done. Mr. Speaker, we will be working closely 
with police services and other stakeholders regarding these 
changes, including the development of the necessary 
regulations before the Act comes into force. 
 
This government remains committed to protecting personal 
information while providing access to information held by 
government institutions. The bill and the changes to be made to 
The Local Authority Freedom of Information and Protection of 
Privacy Act will go a long way toward resetting the careful 
balance in our modern electronic age. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with that, I am pleased to move second reading of 
The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy 
Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 
that Bill No. 30, The Freedom of Information and Protection of 
Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
particular bill is straightforward as the minister basically gave 
us a rundown of what the bill is all about, Bill No. 30, The 
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment 



524 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2016 

Act, 2016. There is a complementary bill that’s soon to follow 
that we’ll also add certain comments to as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think the important thing that we picked up in terms of the 
comments and the general intent of this particular bill, it’s really 
around the notion of the language, the duty to protect personal 
information. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as MLAs, all of us in this particular 
Assembly and across the country, we have access to a lot of 
private information that different people come and share with 
us. And it’s always very, very important that they have that trust 
and faith and confidence that when they do disclose private, 
personal information, that it doesn’t go anywhere. 
 
And obviously in the offices that we have, the physical offices 
you have, you have a lot of storage areas. You have filing 
cabinets, and there’s a lot of private information in these 
particular cabinets that you have to really protect. So having an 
office that is secure, filing cabinets that are locked, and doing 
your very best to ensure that you protect private information, 
that is the cornerstone of the trust that people have in us as 
publicly elected officials, and it’s something that we ought to 
make sure that we undertake on a continual and daily basis. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you also look at some of the reciprocal 
protection that you might get as you, as an MLA, inquire about 
certain constituents. You often run into the argument that some 
organization or some department or some official might say, 
well we can’t disclose that information to you. It’s private and 
confidential information. Unless and until you get the written 
permission of the person you’re inquiring about, we can’t share 
that information with you. These are some of the responses that 
we often get and rightfully so. 
 
I think confidentially people do confide in different government 
agencies and different staff members, bureaucracies. They’ll 
make inquiries that affect their personal information being sent 
to them. And they certainly want to do all they can to safeguard 
that information. And when the officials or the people that get 
the information, when they get inquiries from MLAs, they 
obviously want to protect their law and their effort to protect 
that confidential information. So they’ll often say, can you get 
written permission from this individual to allow us to share 
information with you? And I think that’s a really good 
treatment in terms of the integrity attached to protecting 
freedom of information. And so you run into that as the MLA. 
 
There are times, Mr. Speaker, as you look at the freedom of 
information Act, when we ask questions about any particular 
issue that affects or plagues the Saskatchewan Party 
government. We find out that the cost of getting information 
from them sometimes runs $200,000 plus, you know. And we 
get information from them, you know, on a particular 
document. Then we pay for that information. And then we get 
it, and 99 per cent of the report is blacked out, you know. So 
what we see, what we see, Mr. Speaker, is we see the 
government saying, oh it’s important to protect private 
information, at the same time ensure that public interests are 
maintained. But, Mr. Speaker, they don’t practice what they 
preach because the moment we ask for that information — 
which is very public information; it’s not private information — 
the provincial government really starts to put barriers in front of 

not only the opposition but the media as well. 
 
So sometimes, it’s very difficult to take any advice when we 
approach the current government because they, a lot of times, 
don’t give us the information that the public has a right to know 
on some very important matters, if they come along on bills of 
this sort. And I’ll always say that it is important that we have 
access to information for the public, but the same time, there’s a 
fine line to protect personal, private information. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we want to make sure that we look at this 
particular bill and we ask the question to the people of 
Saskatchewan. I think it’s important that as MLAs you protect 
that information. I often tell constituents that come to see me 
that it is their business, it is their private information, that they 
have to have the trust and faith and confidence that information 
they’re sharing with me as the MLA, that we’ll not betray that 
trust. And we do our very best to protect that information. And 
most times, Mr. Speaker, I’d much rather shred some of that 
information that we get in the office because then you know it’s 
not out there. 
 
But a lot of times to follow up with your casework, to follow up 
with some of the issues, you have to file some of that 
information. And we do our best. We have our filing system 
locked. We have our offices locked. We have the building 
secure. Unless somebody really makes an effort to break in 
there and start getting a bunch of information, Mr. Speaker, 
then it’s, you know, it’s obviously a break-in, and that’s 
something that you can’t control as the MLA. But you have to 
make and take every measure. 
 
And that’s again unlike what happened a few years ago. I can 
remember a colleague of mine going through a dumpster and 
finding a bunch of medical information that some company 
threw out in the dumpster and that was very available to the, 
you know, to the public. So, Mr. Speaker, again, you know, you 
look at what the current government does and you begin to 
shake your head in terms of how they’re . . . They can talk 
about protection of private information, but a lot of times we 
see huge gaps, and them protecting their own political interests 
or providing the venue to dump private health records in a 
dumpster for the public to have a look at. And, Mr. Speaker, 
that’s not what people expect when you talk about duty to 
protect personal information. 
 
So on that note, we have a lot more questions to ask on this bill, 
and we would now move adjournment on Bill 30, The Freedom 
of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016. 
I so move. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill 30. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 31 — The Local Authority Freedom of Information 
and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice. 



June 14, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 525 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise 
today to move second reading of The Local Authority Freedom 
of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
As I noted in my earlier comments regarding FOIP, several of 
the recommendations from the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner apply equally to The Local Authority Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016. 
These include: a duty to assist applicants for information, a duty 
to protect personal information, extension of the definition of 
the local authority to include police services, and creation of a 
new offence for snooping. 
 
Amendments are also being made to provide for the 
introduction of mandatory breach notification when personal 
information has been leaked that places an individual at serious 
personal risk; broadening the grounds for a review by the 
commissioner to include reviewing complaints regarding fees, 
transfers of access, applications, and improper handling of 
personal information; along with the rejection of frivolous and 
vexatious access requests; recognition of electronic access 
requests and responses; and increasing the penalties for 
offences. 
 
For the most part, these changes are parallel to the changes 
being made to FOIP. The amendments will keep the access and 
privacy requirements between the Acts equal, whether 
information is held by a government institution or a local 
authority such as a municipality or a university. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the major changes in this bill is the 
extension of the application to municipal police services under 
The Police Act, 1990. The chief of police services will serve as 
the head for that local authority and will be required to comply 
with the access and privacy procedures under the Act. Our 
municipal police services are already both accountable to the 
public in their conduct, and tremendously discreet in the 
handling of personal information. That being said, they also 
recognize that Saskatchewan will be one of the last provinces to 
take this step. We are confident this step will not impair police 
operations. We will be working closely with police services and 
other stakeholders regarding these changes and the development 
of necessary regulations before the Act comes into force. 
 
As previously stated, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government — 
and I am sure our local authorities throughout the province — 
are committed to protecting personal information while 
providing appropriate access to information. The changes to be 
made to The Local Authority Freedom of Information and 
Protection of Privacy Act will maintain this careful balance in 
the modern electronic age. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that I am pleased to move second reading 
of The Local Authority Freedom of Information and Protection 
of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 
that Bill No. 31, The Local Authority Freedom of Information 
and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 
recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As we 

begin to respond to some of these bills, you all seem to look my 
direction assuming that I’m going to be the first to speak to 
some of these bills. So I’m pleased to stand up and do so, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I just want to point out that Bill 31, it’s really important that 
you look at the local authority, as the government looks at the 
role of government. When you look at the federal government, 
you look at the provincial government and also the local 
government, whether it be the RMs [rural municipality] or 
whether it’s the town council or the city council, the mayor and 
all their affiliates — how would The Local Authority Freedom 
of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, how 
would that affect them and impact their role? 
 
Well I think as the result of the provincial legislation, that a lot 
of these local councils, whether they be RMs or town councils 
or city councils, well they’re an extension of government, and 
they are part of the governance structure of the province as a 
whole. So any of their affiliates, whether it be their police 
departments or other affiliates, that they also be subjected to 
this whole notion that protection of information is very, very 
important. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as a result of them becoming an extension of 
the provincial government, then obviously some of the points 
when we talk about the integrity of keeping information private 
is really, really important. Certainly we need to set the standard 
and the bar in that regard and that everything from the process 
of snooping to the fact that given the modern technological 
opportunity to be able to hack into a computer, as an example, 
to retrieve information, these are ongoing challenges that many 
organizations and businesses and corporations face every single 
day. 
 
And it’s always a work-in-progress, Mr. Speaker, to try and 
protect people’s private information. As you or many people 
out there would know, even some of the largest banks in the 
country often have to protect a lot of private information as they 
put firewall upon firewall to protect hacking. And obviously 
given the fact that they have a greater risk from the financial 
perspective, their measures of protection are enhanced. 
 
And so you look at some of the challenges overall, faced with 
snooping, with hacking, and trying to retrieve valuable 
information from a number of clients. This is an ongoing battle. 
It’s an ongoing challenge in that every level of government, 
whether it be provincial or federal or local government, Mr. 
Speaker, they have to really — or any extension of the local 
government — they have to undertake some of the effort as 
well. 
 
So it’s important to note that this particular duty to protect 
private and personal information extends to not only the 
provincial MLAs or the provincial departments that operate in 
the province, but it also applies to local communities, local 
authorities. And that goes for the reeve and RM councils, to the 
mayor and the village councils, to the mayor and their town or 
city councils. All of the organizations attached to those 
particular forms of government ought to be called to account to 
ensure that they are protecting that private information, and that 
we’re all in this together to ensure that the integrity of people 
sharing information with us is shared right across the board 



526 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2016 

with as many organizations as possible. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, again it’s a complementary bill to the previous 
bill, Bill 30. It just expands the responsibility to local 
governments as well. And I don’t think people of Saskatchewan 
would certainly object to the fact that, as we undertake effort to 
protect information and to protect people’s confidential 
information, that we’re all in this together and all the parties 
that are engaged should be given the proper rules and 
regulations and supports to ensure that the integrity is 
maintained. 
 
[15:45] 
 
So on that note, our Justice critic will be looking at this bill with 
her very capable eyes, ensuring that there isn’t any parts of the 
bill that need to be strengthened or parts of the bill that are 
weak. And certainly on that point, Mr. Speaker, a lot of us that 
are in the business of protecting private information will 
certainly be paying close attention to what her analysis and her 
take and her advice on this particular bill is. 
 
So until we get to that point, Mr. Speaker, I move that we 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 31, The Local Authority Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016. I 
so move. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 31. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 1 — The Crown Corporations Public Ownership 
Amendment Act, 2016 

 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
rise today to move second reading of Bill No. 1, The Crown 
Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
In 2015, the government concluded significant consultations on 
the future of liquor retailing in this province. Through this 
process, we saw more than 6,000 people completing a survey 
and more than 3,000 people posting additional comments, not to 
mention the many, many stakeholders that I was able to meet 
with. We heard loud and clear that people were ready for 
change. 
 
Since then, the government announced that we would convert a 
number of SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority] stores that currently do not meet the target of 
efficiency to private retailers. We also identified some 
communities where additional private retail opportunities could 
be created. The Crown Corporations Public Ownership 
Amendment Act is one step in the process of bringing about 
those changes. This bill removes Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority from the list of Crowns subject to the Act. 
By doing this, we will simplify and expedite the process for 
expanding the private retail system of alcohol in this province. 

Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Deputy Premier has moved that 
Bill No. 1, The Crown Corporations Public Ownership 
Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 
1, The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 
2016. And, Mr. Speaker, all I can say to the people of 
Saskatchewan is that . . . well, well, well. There’s been quite, 
quite, quite a change, quite a change, Mr. Speaker, prior to the 
election and certainly the last six or seven years where the 
Saskatchewan Party quite frankly told the people of 
Saskatchewan that they weren’t interested in opening up the 
sale of our Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. And here we are, 
2016, the first bill. Bill No. 1 talks about the corporate public 
ownership amendment Act, 2016 now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the points that the minister spoke about, the 
Deputy Premier when he spoke about, well that’s what we 
campaigned on. Mr. Speaker, they didn’t campaign on that. 
They didn’t campaign on that, Mr. Speaker. They campaigned 
on the fact that they were going to keep these Crown 
corporations publicly owned, Mr. Speaker. But here we have by 
stealth, Mr. Speaker, they’re slowly eroding the value of our 
Crown corporations. They are actually making our Crown 
corporations become weaker and weaker through debt so 
they’re able to justify selling off some of these Crown 
corporations. 
 
Now I’m going to tell the people in Saskatchewanland this 
particular point. When we talked about the privatization, the 
sell-off of Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker, what happened 
was with SLGA, this particular bill as I pointed out earlier, it 
removes the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority from 
The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act and allows the 
government to sell 40 liquor stores, Mr. Speaker. But it’s not 
just 40 liquor stores, Mr. Speaker, they’re selling. It takes all of 
SLGA out of The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act. 
They’re taking the entire SLGA out of the public ownership 
Act, Mr. Speaker, so that Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority is no longer protected by The Crown Corporations 
Public Ownership Act. 
 
And why didn’t they have the courage to tell the people of 
Saskatchewan that? It’s all about how you frame the debate, 
Mr. Speaker. Prior to the last election, Mr. Speaker, I listened 
with great amusement when the Premier gets up and said, we 
will not spend a single dime building liquor stores in the 
province of Saskatchewan. That’s what the Premier said, Mr. 
Speaker. But what he didn’t tell the people of Saskatchewan is, 
I am going . . . as a result of that, I’m going to sell the liquor 
stores to my friends, my corporate friends. And secondly, any 
profit from liquor is heading down east. It’s heading down east, 
Mr. Speaker, to large chains that are not going to increase 
employment in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what the Premier didn’t even talk about and 
the Deputy Premier didn’t talk about was the fact that in SLGA, 
they make hundreds of millions of dollars in profits for the 



June 14, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 527 

people of Saskatchewan. And the Premier didn’t mention that. 
What did he do? He said not a single dime will be going 
towards building new liquor stores, Mr. Speaker. That wasn’t 
the issue, Mr. Speaker. That wasn’t the issue at all. 
 
The Premier was disingenuous in the sense of telling the people 
of Saskatchewan really what was at stake here, Mr. Speaker. 
What was at stake, Mr. Speaker? It’s not just the employment 
opportunity attached to the SLGA employees and the taxes that 
they pay in the province but, Mr. Speaker, it was about the 
profit of tax to SLGA. It was going back into Saskatchewan 
coffers. It was actually reducing the strain and pressures on the 
Saskatchewan taxpayers because, Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers 
didn’t want to see an increase in their taxes, and rightfully so. 
 
So as a result of that, Mr. Speaker, what the Saskatchewan 
Party is now doing is they’re telling the people of 
Saskatchewan, well look over here; we’re not spending a dime, 
a single dime, on building new liquor stores. But what they’re 
not saying is, we’re selling a valuable asset that generates profit 
for the people of Saskatchewan. It generates profit for the 
people of Saskatchewan, thereby keeping your taxes low 
because we’re getting revenues from another source. They 
didn’t say that, Mr. Speaker. They certainly didn’t say that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And now today we see Bill No. 1, The Crown Corporations 
Public Ownership Amendment Act coming forward, saying that 
we’re now going to forgo, we’re now going to forgo the billions 
of dollars generated by SLGA. We’re going to sell everything 
within SLGA. And the people of Saskatchewan, well we didn’t 
tell them that before the election because it was important we 
not share that information because they would not have liked 
what we had planned. So we’ll get them to . . . We’ll distract 
them with another statement. And that’s why I tell the people of 
Saskatchewan that the Saskatchewan Party had these intentions 
all along. They had these intentions all along, and they betrayed 
the trust of the people of Saskatchewan as it comes to protecting 
the interests of our publicly owned Crown corporations. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I speak to a lot of people in my constituency 
and throughout the province and the vast majority, even the 
right wing people in our province, they like, they like, Mr. 
Speaker, the comfort and they like the assurance of and 
certainly the stability of public ownership of our Crown 
corporations, Mr. Speaker. Even the most fervent right winger 
that I bump into in my travels, they like the idea of publicly 
owned Crown corporations because they understand, Mr. 
Speaker, they understand that it’s a stability thing. There’s a 
comfort level amongst many of the right wing thinkers in our 
province that owning our own Power Corporation, owning our 
own insurance company, owning our own telephone company, 
and yes, even owning our own casinos. And liquor stores do 
generate a lot of money for the people of Saskatchewan. That 
money that’s being generated, Mr. Speaker, comes back into the 
province. It’s part of what our budget has been based on and 
relies on over the years in the past, and certainly used in the 
future. 
 
Now what happens now, Mr. Speaker, as they forgo those 
revenues, as they forgo those revenues, as they sell off these 
Crowns and they forgo those revenues, Mr. Speaker, sooner 
than later they have to go back to the taxpayers and say, well 

we sold off the farm and we’re now in debt. We’ve got to come 
back to you guys as taxpayers. You’ve got to pay more just for 
us to keep our head above water. And, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t 
campaign on that at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And today now we see, today now we see how, through this 
bill, they have hampered the stores within SLGA. They have 
really cornered them, Mr. Speaker, and really disabled a lot of 
these publicly owned stores to really do what the private sector 
has been allowed to do, and that is to bring in new products, to 
have their even basic things like having more advertising. They 
have hampered publicly owned liquor stores and really 
protected the private liquor stores so that the profits can go 
further . . . [inaudible] . . . it doesn’t affect or help 
Saskatchewan people when it comes to employment. And, Mr. 
Speaker, here we are. 
 
Here we are, Mr. Speaker. They are now in full gear to begin 
the process of selling off our Crown corporations, something 
they said they would never do when they were just starting to 
form government, Mr. Speaker. And a mere eight years later, 
evidence mounts, mounts, and mounts that they did have this 
plan all along. And it’s very unfortunate and it’s very unfair that 
the Saskatchewan Party betrayed that trust, Mr. Speaker, 
because here’s another example of how this government quite 
frankly do not respect the people of Saskatchewan when they 
say, you leave our Crown corporations publicly owned because 
those publicly owned entities create profit. Those profits begin 
to subsidize our operations in health care and education, thereby 
lessening the strain on individual taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s why, when I’m sitting there and I listen to some of 
their language around the budget, the two and a half billion 
dollars that they’ve been in the hole the last couple of years, 
Mr. Speaker, and when they say the phrase, no new taxes, but in 
the meantime through P3 [public-private partnership] debt and 
borrowed money and other debts that they have, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re surrounded by debt. And yet all they can say is, no new 
taxes. 
 
Well we have a little update and a news flash for the 
Saskatchewan Party. Sooner than later, all the assets that you’re 
selling and all the debt that you’re putting us in through P3s or 
through your mismanagement or through your waste, 
somebody’s got to pay the tab. Somebody’s got to pay the bill. 
And that somebody’s going to be the taxpayers. 
 
But do you know what? They won’t have the courage to tell the 
taxpayers that down the road, and that’s why I think, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re punting that debt down the road because the 
people of Saskatchewan, they think they can hoodwink them 
again. 
 
But the bottom line is, I tell the people of Saskatchewan this: is 
that they’re putting the province deep in debt. They’re selling 
off the Crown corporations that are generating profit. They’re 
putting us further into a complicated debt scheme through the 
P3s. And that’s why the taxpayers of Saskatchewan, I warn you 
today, 2016, that the so-called Saskatchewan Party that’s 
announcing no new tax increases, there are tax increases 
coming. They’re coming to you and your neighbour sooner than 
you think, primarily because they’re selling off 
money-generating opportunities like SLGA. They’re putting us 



528 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2016 

in debt, Mr. Speaker, and after a while they’ll soon realize that 
as you sell off profitable companies like SLGA, there’s only 
one person you can go back to, and that’s the taxpayers of 
Saskatchewan. And I say, shame on the Saskatchewan Party 
because this is their first step in doing an attack on SaskTel, 
SaskPower, SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance], and 
the list goes on. 
 
On that notion, Mr. Speaker, we have a heck of a lot more to 
say on this particular bill, and many of my colleagues are going 
to do that as we begin to unravel and unfold the Sask Party’s 
ill-conceived, idealistic effort to try to sell off our Crowns, 
which is a shame on them and certainly a warning to the people 
of Saskatchewan. Watch out, because they’re after all our 
Crowns. 
 
On that notion, Mr. Speaker, I move we adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 1, The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment 
Act, 2016. And it’s a shameful day for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved adjournment on Bill 
No. 1, The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment 
Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 21 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 21 — The 
Growth and Financial Security Repeal Act be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to get 
up and get into this debate on An Act to repeal The Growth and 
Financial Security Act. And I just want to say right off the bat, I 
think my colleague from Nutana did a fantastic job laying out 
the context of this bill. It’s a relatively simple one, just three 
sections and really says, The Growth and Financial Security Act 
is repealed. 
 
[16:00] 
 
But for the folks over there, it must be quite a day, as my 
colleague said. What had started so brightly in 2007 and ’08, 
when they set the stage of what The Growth and Financial 
Security Act would be for the people of Saskatchewan in the 
Throne Speech and what it would mean, and here we are today 
repealing it. And of course the minister will say, well it’s just 
because it refers to the General Revenue Fund and therefore 
we’ve got to get rid of it. But he gets rid of it all. Completely. 
Every single part of it. 

Now he says that we will be seeing in the near future some new 
legislation that will provide more transparency, more 
accountability. But we will wait and see what that really looks 
like. He says he wants to consult with the auditor and other 
academics about this but, Mr. Speaker, we are dubious about 
what really will come out of this. We are not sure that we will 
be in a better place as a province. We’ve seen this government 
go through almost a decade of record revenue, record revenue. 
And where are we at now but swimming in debt? 
 
And we’ve talked about it here and we had an opportunity, but 
that government over there failed to live up to its own 
commitment in The Growth and Financial Security Act that it 
had put into place in 2008 when things were just going . . . 
starting to really . . . Well actually it was going really well, had 
been going well for a year and it looked like we could really do 
some amazing things. 
 
We saw the revenues in the provincial treasury go higher than 
we’d ever seen them before. You know, our revenues were 
somewhere in the $8 billion range and over the course of time it 
hit up to the $14 billion range. We’d never seen those kind of 
numbers, and still we see them, and this government . . . 
[inaudible] . . . I don’t know when we’ve ever seen that kind of 
numbers, revenue, in the past years. And whatever the number 
is, we’ve got to say that we’ve never seen the good fortune 
we’ve had in the province. 
 
And the opportunity we had with The Growth and Financial 
Security Act that had put out there, you know . . . And it’s 
interesting when you have a new government like we did in 
2008. And now we’re getting a bit of a tired one that gets out on 
the campaign trail and makes as few commitments as possible, 
and even the ones they do, like they . . . And I’ll talk a little bit 
about this in a little while, that they’re committing to a new 
fund once oil hits $75 a barrel. And we’ll see if that really 
happens. 
 
I mean oil may hit $75 a barrel. We hope that. That would be 
good news for us here in Saskatchewan. But whether they will 
actually live up to the commitments that they set in this past 
campaign. I think they’re probably hoping that people forget 
that because, you know, when you look at the old bill — and 
we’ll take a minute and just take a look at it — it was really in 
many ways . . . It talked about a requirement for a four-year 
financial plan. And who could argue with that? This is 
something that good governments should be doing. Here we 
have a government that has switched over to summary financial 
systems, and you would think — and that was a few years ago 
— that by now they would be able to have a four-year financial 
plan. 
 
And what that four-year . . . And it also talks about a four-year 
public debt management plan. And of course this is one of the 
things that the auditor has talked about and really stressed that 
in fact we really do have a plan to manage our debt. And we see 
something that’s missing, particularly in this bill. It’s just a 
simple bill, but it doesn’t have the other part that goes with it. 
What will come to really replace this piece of legislation, 
growth and financial security? I think that’s really, really 
critical. 
 
And I had talked about the change in accounting policies, and 



June 14, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 529 

what would be done there and the requirement to offset 
balances in the next fiscal year if expenses exceed revenues. All 
of this is part of what the legislation talked about. And of course 
the government of the day was very, very keen, and that was the 
Sask Party. It did talk about the use of annual surpluses in the 
General Revenue Fund. So here we have that General Revenue 
Fund, summary financial statements. But will the government 
continue with this? And why not work with amending the 
legislation so we continue to go with this goal? Because it says: 
 

How surpluses in the general revenue fund [were] to be 
used 

If there is a pre-transfer surplus for any fiscal year, the 
minister shall: 
 

transfer 50% of the amount of the pre-transfer surplus 
to the Growth and Financial Security Fund . . . and 
 
allocate 50% of the amount of the pre-transfer surplus 
to the Debt Retirement Fund . . . 

 
So all those are two good ideas, but what’s going to happen to 
that? Will we see that in the new legislation that’s coming 
forward? We really hope that there is a plan of what we do with 
surpluses and that the fact that . . . In fact we hope that there are 
surpluses, but of course we wait, we wait and see what happens 
with that. 
 
But I do want to say that, you know, when we look at this, that 
we have some real concerns that the government will not do 
this. And of course they did go out on the doorstep and they 
made a commitment that if oil did hit $75 a barrel that it would 
in fact create this fund. Will that happen? We’re not sure. And 
we know that this is something that there has been a lot of talk 
about.  
 
We had in fact the Premier just a few short years ago asked Dr. 
MacKinnon, or Mr. MacKinnon — Peter MacKinnon, the 
former president of the University of Saskatchewan — to do 
some research on a sovereign wealth fund that we could create 
here in this province. And so he spent some time taking a look 
around the world to take a look at what other states, other 
countries have done. And he really did some really outstanding 
work. 
 
But at the end of the day, again it was a real missed opportunity 
because we know we went through the 10 years of increasing 
revenue, and there were a couple of years in there where potash 
went down but oil still stayed strong. But this is the challenge 
that a government always has. In fact writers have written about 
this, that in Saskatchewan we have to plan for those times when 
one of the resources or a few of the resources may actually take 
a tumble in price. We have to be prepared for that. It’s a known 
fact that if oil or potash or uranium and natural gas is going up, 
that in fact they may also come down. So we have to be 
prepared in our planning and recognizing that, especially when 
you have record high prices, that you might actually see some 
days where the price is going to be going down. 
 
And in fact their own budget documents we’ve been able to 
take a look at — and I know the Minister of Education often 
gets up and says, nobody foretold us that the price of oil would 
be going down — but it’s been going down for several months 

now, just not the last six months. In fact it’s been a while that 
it’s been going down. And of course this is the issue that we 
have with the minister, that in fact if we had the budget before 
the election, we could have had a much better discussion on the 
doorstep about what the government was really planning to do.  
 
In fact they were making promises on the doorstep of what they 
would do with $75 a barrel oil instead of the cuts that we see 
here today that we are debating. And they didn’t make a 
mention at all about this kind of legislation at all. It’s like many 
people would think that they were going to be continuing this 
and the continuing of this kind of work, but instead here we see 
just the deep, deep knife in this legislation, that when they 
repeal The Growth and Financial Security Act, it’s done and it’s 
over. And so there is no more commitments at this point in time 
to balanced budget legislation, no more commitments to any 
kind of savings account, no more commitment to really 
financial security here in this province. And so we really 
wonder where is this government going? And you know, I often 
quote and I really appreciate the fact that we have writers in this 
province who have the long view, and this is the problem we 
have with this government. 
 
And I’d be wrapping up in just few minutes, but this is one of 
the last things I want to put on record, that Bruce Johnstone just 
wrote an excellent column about a perfect time to dust off the 
Sask futures fund. And this was on June 4th where he really 
talks about, you know, that we really need to be able to look 
into the future and really establish some sort of savings account 
so we’re not at the mercy of these prices of commodities that go 
up and will come down. We are an exporting province, and we 
know that for sure. But he says, and I quote, he talks about, he’s 
referring to the minister. And I’ll quote: 
 

He also repeated Premier Brad Wall’s campaign promise 
that if and when oil goes back to $75 US a barrel, every 
dollar above that would be allowed to accumulate to $500 
million in the Growth and Financial Security Fund (GFSF) 
— the old rainy day fund. When the government debt is 
paid off, the government will take that money and put it 
towards a heritage fund. 
 
These are all valid points, but they miss the main point. 
And that is, we will never get off this roller-coaster ride of 
resource revenues rising and falling with the commodity 
cycle as long as we persist in spending all of our resource 
wealth as it comes in, rather than putting some of it away 
for future generations. 

 
And so, Mr. Speaker, with that I do say we look forward to the 
next piece of legislation that comes. The minister has alluded to 
it, but we don’t know if it really will appear. But we really think 
it’s important because the significance of the bill or the piece of 
legislation that they’re repealing, when he talks about having a 
debt plan and having some four-year plan and thinking about 
how are we putting some money away, those are all critical, 
critical pieces in the new legislation. So I’m hoping it’s strong 
legislation, and I’m hoping that we see it soon so we can have 
that discussion. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to take my seat and I’m 
going to adjourn Bill No. 21, An Act to repeal The Growth and 
Financial Security Act. Thank you much. 



530 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2016 

The Speaker: — The member has adjourned debate on Bill No. 
21, The Growth and Financial Security Repeal Act. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 22 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Doherty that Bill No. 22 — The 
Income Tax Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to offer my initial few comments on this particular bill. I think 
what’s really important, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that this would 
be my first opportunity to speak about The Income Tax 
Amendment Act, 2016. And I just want to summarize for the 
folks that might be listening that are really, quite frankly, 
worried about some of the aspects of this particular bill or may 
want further information. It could be either/or, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But one of the things I think is really important that, as I look 
around Saskatchewan, I noticed over the last number of years 
that a lot of young families really struggled with the opportunity 
for home ownership. We know in some of the growing cities 
and some of the growing communities, that at one time you can 
buy a nice, decent home for 100 and 125,000, well those days 
are gone, Mr. Speaker. And as you travel around Saskatoon, 
you will certainly see that a lot of these homes have really 
increased in value, so thereby making the home ownership 
opportunity for young families, young people, that it makes it 
much more difficult and much more out of reach. 
 
And the idea of home ownership for many young families 
starting off, Mr. Speaker, was really apparent over the last 
several years as we saw young families getting to work and 
beginning the process of arranging mortgages. And as they 
arrange mortgages, Mr. Speaker, they thought it was an 
opportune time, as jobs were plentiful and Saskatchewan 
enjoyed the economy that we’ve enjoyed the last 8 or 9 years, 
10 years. And now, Mr. Speaker, we see that some of them are 
losing those mortgage-paying jobs, as witnessed by the good 
workers at the Buffalo Narrows correctional centre, not by a 
downturn in potash prices, Mr. Speaker, but by a rather cold 
and callous government. 
 
And one of the things that is really, really important to point 
out, Mr. Speaker, as you look at this Act to amend The Income 
Tax Act, it really puts a lot of young families at another 
disadvantage if you look at this particular process. 
 
[16:15] 
 
The Act itself eliminates the active families benefit where 
certain families would get a tax credit for engaging and 
enrolling their children in a wide variety of sports or cultural 
programming or other events that were eligible. The other part 
that really begins to, you know, to add more burden to the 

families is it makes those who use their graduate retention plan 
tax credit to put a $10,000 down payment on a home ineligible 
for the first-time homebuyers tax credit. So they withdrew that 
support mechanism for young families that were looking at 
buying their first home, and using the graduate retention plan 
tax credit to be able to afford that down payment. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while other parts of the Act are mostly 
housekeeping, the three that I want to spend a bit of time on 
includes the graduate retention plan tax credit, where they’re 
taking a $10,000 opportunity afforded young families, they’re 
taking that away. They’re taking away the active families 
benefit tax program. They’re also making changes to the 
manufacturing and processing exporter hire incentive, that 
there’s a bunch of changes in terms of actual net increase in 
jobs before the credits will be awarded. 
 
These are some of the things that you have to really assess, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of the overall net benefit to the people of 
Saskatchewan, whether these programs are working. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this government took no time to try and understand 
that. They simply put these processes, these new rules in place. 
And here we are debating this particular bill, Bill No. 22, on a 
late Tuesday afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that I would point out when we 
talk about young families — and I’ve seen a lot of the young 
families out there suffering from some of the challenges of 
owning homes — first of all, the affordability factor. The 
affordability factor, you know, a lot of young families just 
couldn’t get enough money for a down payment. They just had 
very tough challenges ahead of them in terms of being able to 
afford these homes. And as the price ranges escape their grasp 
more and more each year, Mr. Speaker, the young families 
became more and more discouraged. 
 
Now we’re seeing that the Sask Party’s adding to that 
discouragement by taking away some of the tax credits that they 
could have used towards a down payment for a home. And 
that’s a shame, and I’ll tell you why it’s a shame, Mr. Speaker. 
What we find happening is that as the prices for homes 
increased, a lot of young families couldn’t be eligible for home 
ownership, so they used some of these programs. And what the 
Saskatchewan Party government basically done was slap their 
hands away from this opportunity, saying you can’t utilize that 
tax credit anymore so get your hands off there. So they’ve got a 
severe hand slapping by the Saskatchewan Party government on 
utilizing the graduate retention plan tax credit to, you know, to 
their advantage. 
 
So it’s one thing to not be able to afford a new home, Mr. 
Speaker, but to have a government that would once again 
callously turn their back on you just when the time that you 
need it the most, Mr. Speaker, that they would do that. And why 
would they do that, Mr. Speaker, despite having record revenue, 
is they had mismanaged the great opportunity that they 
inherited. They had nothing to do with inheriting a booming 
economy and a growing population and $110-a-barrel oil. They 
just sat there and spent money and wasted money. And now 
many — seven or eight years later — many families are being 
impacted by their mismanagement and waste, Mr. Speaker, by 
taking away some crucial programs like the graduate retention 
plan tax credit, Mr. Speaker. That hurt a lot of young families. 



June 14, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 531 

It may not affect some of them, Mr. Speaker, but it hurt a lot of 
young families, and the Saskatchewan Party should be ashamed 
of themselves in the sense of how they mismanaged our 
provincial economy. They mismanaged our provincial finances. 
And now the young families trying to afford a home are paying 
the price for their mismanagement and their lack of skill in 
being a government. And, Mr. Speaker, they have failed this 
province miserably, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other point I would make is that as you notice these young 
families that are able to get into a down payment, Mr. Speaker, 
that are able to afford a home, Mr. Speaker, they are able to 
afford a home, Mr. Speaker, what a lot of the companies and I 
think the banks as well, they done what they call a market 
adjustment. And this is really a weird thing, Mr. Speaker, 
because many of these young families, they got a mortgage, and 
they paid 400,000 for a home. And then several years later, the 
market adjustment concept come along and now they’re paying 
$400,000 in their mortgage for a house that may be only worth 
300,000. 
 
So how much more can these young families take, Mr. 
Speaker? Just from overall the incredible increase in prices for 
homes, Mr. Speaker, the incredible increases in prices for 
homes, and then the fact that they’re struggling to get the down 
payment, this government slammed that door shut as a result of 
this particular bill. And, Mr. Speaker, now along comes this 
market adjustment plan in which they’re paying a $400,000 
mortgage on a home that might be only worth 300,000. 
 
So these are some of the challenges that we see with this 
particular bill  . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . And the member 
from Regina Walsh Acres is chirping from his chair, Mr. 
Speaker, because obviously he has enough income to afford a 
mortgage, Mr. Speaker. A lot of young families don’t enjoy that 
$95,000 annual fee, Mr. Speaker. So he continues, he continues 
to chirp from his chair. But little does he realize that there are a 
lot of young families that don’t enjoy the support that he enjoys 
today. He enjoys the support of being an MLA in this 
Assembly. And he’s chirping from his chair, Mr. Speaker, 
because he has no care, no regard for a lot of these young 
families that needed the graduation retention plan tax credit for 
a down payment. And he’s sitting there callously smiling and 
joking and making light of the fact that these young families 
needed these supports, Mr. Speaker. They needed these 
supports. But it doesn’t matter to that member because, quite 
frankly, Mr. Speaker, they don’t care about those young 
families struggling to make ends meet. 
 
And as a result of some of The Income tax Act, the amendments 
that we’re doing today, the amendments we’re doing today is 
attached to the budget. And the reason why they’re making all 
these cuts is that they have mismanaged the affairs of 
Saskatchewan finances miserably, Mr. Speaker. And now the 
young families and the young people in this province got to pay 
for their mismanagement, got to pay for their waste, Mr. 
Speaker, and this is the reason why some of these bills are 
coming forward now. 
 
They are getting tired of the Saskatchewan Party, and we sense 
that every single day, Mr. Speaker. But they’ve got to have 
patience. They’ve got to have patience because four years is 
still a ways away, Mr. Speaker. But let it be known that the 

young people and families in this particular community do not 
agree with the fact that the mismanagement of the 
Saskatchewan Party resulted in a number of cuts that hurt the 
young families’ opportunities to own homes. 
 
So between the support mechanisms being eroded by the 
Saskatchewan Party, between the market adjustment theory that 
has been thrown in their face, and the fact that the prices of 
housing has skyrocketed under the Saskatchewan Party, nobody 
seems to represent, nobody seems to represent those young 
people and to support them in their effort to achieve home 
ownership. 
 
And they’re all chirping over there, Mr. Speaker. They’re all 
chirping. And the reason why they’re chirping, Mr. Speaker, is 
they don’t see the impact on young families as they go to get a 
mortgage, of how they’ve got to pay through the nose for prices 
of houses that have skyrocketed and supports that have been 
eroded by them. And now, Mr. Speaker, the final icing on the 
cake, Mr. Speaker, the market adjustment plan where it shows 
those that were lucky enough to get the mortgage, lucky enough 
to get the mortgage, Mr. Speaker, they do not now have the 
value of their home that they originally thought would hold up 
forever. And, Mr. Speaker, this is what is hurting a lot of young 
Saskatchewan families, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say shame on the Saskatchewan Party as you’re 
withdrawing more and more of these supports from young 
families, as you’re withdrawing more and more of these 
supports from young families at the same time selling off 
profitable Crown corporations, Mr. Speaker. All that is a recipe 
for financial ruin for the future of Saskatchewan. And I think 
the taxpayers will know, the taxpayers will eventually realize 
that the Saskatchewan Party have compromised them, and as a 
result of that, in future years not sooner than later the tax man is 
going to come calling. 
 
And I can guarantee you one thing, Mr. Speaker, it won’t be the 
Saskatchewan Party being held to account because they’ll be 
long gone, Mr. Speaker. There’s going to be a new government 
coming along and having to explain to people that they sold the 
Crowns. They destroyed the basis of our financial foundation 
by selling off the Crowns. They put us deep in debt. They 
compromised our future due to things like P3s, Mr. Speaker. 
And today now they have destroyed a lot of the support 
mechanisms as a result of this bill that would support young 
families in owning their homes. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is a crying shame. That is a crying 
shame, and I say to the people of Saskatchewan, don’t forget 
this. Don’t forget this because they’re doing this today and even 
though four years is a ways out, Mr. Speaker, I think the people 
of Saskatchewan will have a message to the Saskatchewan 
Party as they’re tired, and they’re sick and tired of your 
mismanagement. And you should’ve had the courage to tell the 
people these issues prior to the election and you chose not to. 
And sometimes people in Saskatchewan won’t forget and, Mr. 
Speaker, they don’t forget, and I would encourage them not to. 
 
So on that note, I look at this as another assault on young 
families finally owning their own home. And I’d say our 
colleagues have a lot to say about this bill. They have a lot say 
about this bill. So on that note, I will move that we adjourn 



532 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2016 

debate on Bill No. 22, An Act to amend the Income Tax Act. I so 
move. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has adjourned 
debate on Bill No. 22, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2016. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 23 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 23 — The 
Liquor Retail Modernization Act/Loi de modernisation du 
commerce des boissons alcoolisées be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And as 
always, it’s an honour to be able to rise here the Assembly 
today and speak to the bills that are being tabled by the 
government. This particular one is a modernization of liquor 
retailing, and it’s a fairly extensive bill with a number of 
changes that are being made to the liquor retail Act, or sorry, 
it’s The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act and they’re 
making some changes to it, quite a number of changes. And as 
the name of the bill suggests, it’s really in relation to the 
retailing of liquor and some modernization that the 
government’s attempting to do in that bill. 
 
We didn’t get a lot of comment from the deputy minister in 
terms of the content of the bill in his second reading speech. 
Fairly terse comments but basically he’s pointing out that there 
is an uneven playing field right now in the liquor retailing 
system and that only certain types of retailers are allowed to 
make decisions about their hours of operation, prices, and 
availability of chilled products, and this is in detriment of 
consumers. 
 
So there’s a whole host of changes that are being made. I think 
throughout the changes you will note that the definition of 
franchise is being removed altogether. It’s being repealed, and 
the explanation that’s provided for that is that franchises are 
now going to be brought into the same definition of any other 
retailer. 
 
So I always think about the fact that my grandfather had the 
liquor franchise in my hometown when I grew up, and I know it 
was kind of strange because he was the local pharmacist. So he 
had a drug store and he sold all the booze in town too, which 
was kind of a good way for him to earn a little income. And it 
kind of fit, you know. Whatever your needs were, whenever 
you wanted to do your shopping there, that was a good thing for 
the pharmacy itself, the Lafleche pharmacy at a Rexall store. 
 
Now that no longer is with the Lafleche pharmacy. It’s been 
moved over to the local Co-op, so it’s always a bit of a surprise 
to me to walk into the Co-op at home and be able to pick up a 
bottle of wine to go with your supper. 
 

So it makes sense. Modernization makes sense, and I think the 
attempts that are being done in this bill generally appear to have 
some positive changes. And certainly modernization is 
something that we’ve been calling for for some time now in 
relation to liquor franchising, so franchising and other ways that 
liquor is being retailed. So this does deal with some of the 
things we’ve been calling for and I think generally it will be 
well received. But there’s a lot of technical things in here that 
also are being changed, and I’ll point out a few of those as I 
make my comments today. 
 
As I indicated, there’s a couple definitions that are being 
removed from section 2. First of all, exhibition casino operator 
is being removed. There’s no longer a need for that definition, 
and obviously the word franchise is being removed throughout 
the entire Act, The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act. So the 
explanation for removing the definition for exhibition casino 
operator is to reflect the current policy that the agency or 
authority already has . . . Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority already has, and that is that operators are not granted 
licenses to operate full casinos. So an exhibition casino is 
different than a full casino. 
 
And because the Criminal Code does already authorize 
exhibition associations to operate table games, of course 
wanting an amendment to The Gaming Regulations, 2007 will 
give that additional clarity about the gaming operations that can 
be provided by exhibition associations. 
 
[16:30] 
 
So that’s just cleaning up a piece in relation to gaming 
regulations or the regulation of gaming, and this is going to be 
done through a regulatory change so that definition is no longer 
required in the bill. 
 
Section 14 is also being amended. Mostly it appears that the 
changes are just to remove the reference to franchise. As I’ve 
indicated earlier, under the new liquor retail model, franchises, 
they’re just changing the name of them to retail stores. Much 
like other retail stores, they’re being treated in a similar fashion 
and therefore there’s no need for that reference to franchise. 
And I think franchises were part of the evolution of liquor sales 
in Saskatchewan. Obviously the authority wasn’t in a position 
to open up stores in all the small communities. I forget how 
many. I think there’s dozens of franchises throughout the 
province, but in essence they are retail as well. Obviously 
they’re selling liquor. So I think franchise is the old reference in 
terms of how things were done, and it’s just being brought into 
the definition of retail as we understand it today. 
 
And I think also the explanation points out that the word 
franchise suggests a relationship. When you think of getting a 
Kentucky Fried Chicken franchise or a McDonalds franchise, 
you are in a relationship with that company. In this case 
according to the explanation, SLGA is going to assume a 
regulatory role over the franchises, not a typical franchise 
relationship. So the relationship is changing and therefore the 
definition itself needs to be removed from the bill. 
 
Section 19, there’s a minor change to section 19 that’s being 
made. This is explained by saying that SLGA has the authority 
to establish a minimum price, and as you know, Mr. Speaker, 



June 14, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 533 

that’s keystone to the way our liquor retailing system is set up is 
that SLGA can set the prices. Currently the bill only says the 
price, but the change here is being made to say that the 
minimum price. So SLGA currently could also set a maximum 
price under the current law. But by identifying solely the 
minimum price, that means SLGA is limiting how it can define 
the prices to the minimum and not to a maximum price — 
although I don’t think SLGA has ever limited what a maximum 
is, because obviously retailers are in a competitive business and 
they want to be able to make money. So they’re not going to 
maximize prices unless they have that rare bottle that no one 
else can get, then they can maximize it. But I don’t think there’s 
any written need to regulate it and that’s obviously why it’s 
never been explicitly put into the legislation. 
 
There is another change in here. Section 19.3 of the current Act 
is being repealed and then replaced with a new clause. And the 
purpose of this clause was to allow SLGA to implement a bid 
process to issue full off-sale endorsements in communities 
where one became available. So that was the old way. Now 
with the changes to the liquor retail industry, full off-sale 
outlets will be transitioned to retail store permits and no 
additional full off-sale licences will be issued. 
 
So full off-sale licence, if you’re wondering, Mr. Speaker, I can 
give you the definition of that right now because I am curious 
myself. It’s not currently defined in the definitions 
unfortunately. It’s probably in the main body of the bill 
somewhere, but obviously off-sale is something else that’s an 
essential feature of growing up in rural Saskatchewan. And I 
assume that the hotel in my hometown was an off-sale outlet. I 
think full off-sale may expand the types of products that could 
be sold there. At any rate, they’re going to be all transitioned 
now to a retail store permit. 
 
So there won’t be a difference between the local franchise in the 
Lafleche Co-op and the local full off-sale permit that has been 
issued to the . . . I forget the name of the new hotel in Lafleche. 
The old one burned down. The Flying Goose, it used to be. But 
anyways, the Flying Goose Inn, I think it was. Anyways they’re 
both going to be called retail store permits and that just seems 
to make sense. We’re going to . . . They’re selling alcohol and 
they’re selling alcohol. So it makes sense that this 
modernization is going to happen, and certainly we’ve been 
calling for that kind of modernization as we go through the 
changes to this legislation 
 
We also have a change to section 20.1 which now . . . I’m just 
going to look at the explanation. Oh yes, there was some 
language in 20.1 regarding subsidiaries and the explanation here 
is just clarifying the language. So it’s simply a clarification of 
language. 
 
The next Act, or sorry, the next section that’s being amended is 
26(2)(h) and it’s a reference to the exhibition casino operator 
which no longer is required, as I described earlier. 
 
Also section 26, sorry, section 31 is being amended just for a 
numbering reason, so that’s a minor change. 
 
And we go to section 35(4), and I have to find the page. Again 
it’s a reference to exhibition casino operators, so that’s a fairly 
straightforward change. 

Section 47.1 is being changed. Again reference to a franchise is 
being taken out and I believe the same in section 48 and 49. So 
those are a number of changes that are being made there. And 
also section 47.1 as amended “will allow SLGA to enter into 
agreements with those retail store permittees that wish to issue 
special occasion permits for family and community events.” 
And I know I’ve applied through a lot of the charity work I’ve 
done and non-profit work that I’ve done, have had to deal with 
special occasion permits on a number of special occasions, and 
it’s been quite frustrating, especially for the outdoor special 
occasion permits. The requirement and the type of application is 
way more complicated than an indoor application. So it looks 
like these are going to be streamlined a little bit. 
 
And not only that; you don’t have to go anymore to the head 
office in SLGA for approval for some of those special occasion 
permits. And I think many people are really going to appreciate 
this opportunity to apply for a permit at any retail store outlet. 
So if you’re applying for a wedding or for a charity ball or for a 
baseball tournament or whatever the occasion may be on a 
special occasion permit, you can now just go to a retail outlet 
that is selling SLGA liquor and you’ll be able to apply for that. 
So that makes a lot of sense, and I think it’s along the lines that 
we were calling for in terms of modernization of the sale of 
alcohol in Saskatchewan. 
 
Sections 48 and 49 are amended and they’re combining “the 
municipal notice requirements for permitted premises and retail 
stores, making the same requirements apply . . .” And again, I 
know in my experience you used to have to get permission from 
the municipality first before you could apply for the licence. 
Again a lot of extra work for often volunteer organizations. And 
I think the policy behind these requirements is probably no 
longer as cogent as it was at the time it was implemented. And 
so it’s going to make things a lot easier. 
 
And you know, oftentimes in rural situations the municipality 
only meets once a month, and then you have to wait for the next 
municipal meeting before you can apply for your liquor licence, 
sometimes three or four months in advance to apply for the 
licence, starting from the beginning getting the municipal 
approval. If you miss your deadline, you’re kind of out of luck, 
and I know that from experience. However municipalities have 
been very forgiving and have found ways to help accommodate 
those kinds of volunteer I guess oversights that, if you don’t do 
this on a regular basis, it’s quite complicated. 
 
There’s also a new requirement in section 48 now to require 
that SLGA give notice to a First Nations “reserve, the Northern 
Administration District, a provincial park, a resort area, or a 
national park if a permit is being considered . . .” So that is 
adding to the existing list, I believe, and I think what this does 
is it actually formalizes an existing practice. So that tends to 
make a lot of sense. 
 
Section 57 is also being, 57(1) is being repealed. And the reason 
for that is to allow SLGA “to determine the form and 
information that are required as part of the application process 
for a liquor permit consistent with the approach taken for 
gaming registrations.” So this will give SLGA the required 
flexibility to ensure the appropriate information be collected on 
which to make decisions respecting different types of permits. 
 



534 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2016 

Mr. Speaker, I think there are a number of other changes. I 
think one that’s really particularly interesting though, I do want 
to talk about, is the amended section 61. And I’m just going to 
grab that. The existing section 61 talks about restricting permits 
if the owner has a, what do they call it, an inducement, so that 
the owner themselves would be able to benefit a contingent 
interest in the chattels or equipment. And here the new one just 
says: 
 

. . . no permit shall be issued: 
 

respecting any premises in which a manufacturer, or any 
of its directors, officers, shareholders, employees or 
agents, has acquired any direct, indirect, or contingent 
interest in the ownership or management of the business 
to which the application relates or in its property, 
chattels or equipment; or 
 
in any other circumstances prescribed in the 
regulations”. 
 

So again the addition of a regulatory authority is something 
that’s new and as always, Mr. Speaker, I’m always concerned 
when we see the removal of authorities from the legislation into 
the regulations because obviously there’s no oversight by this 
Assembly and those changes are being done through Executive 
Council. So it’s obviously less scrutiny and less ability for 
comment from the public when these changes are being made. 
 
There are many, many other changes in this bill and I won’t 
touch on all of them at this point. I know we have to keep 
moving along here. But at this point I think, I know there was 
one more that I starred. Oh yes, section 129. I do want to talk a 
little about section 129 and again I think it’s very appropriate 
and helpful changes that will definitely make life a little bit 
easier for consumers, and I think that is the goal of this. 
 
Section 129 is “Prohibitions affecting permittees” and it says 
here in the explanation that it “. . . reflects a change in policy 
that will allow all retail stores to sell to any other commercial 
permittee. Currently, permittees, franchises and private stores 
must all purchase their beverage alcohol from either an SLGA 
store or its warehouse.” And I know that, for example, any time 
I get a special occasion permit, I have to actually do the 
purchasing from the SLGA store rather than any retail outlets. 
So this is going to make life a lot simpler I think for many 
people who are getting the special occasion permits. So it’s a 
good change; it’s a positive change. I think it’s one that will be 
appreciated a lot by individuals who are getting special 
occasion permits and I think for other commercial permittees as 
well. If you run out of a certain kind of beer on Friday night, 
and you know that down the street in Saskatoon, someone else 
has a lot of that beer for sale in their store, you can go pay the 
retail price if you want and make sure your customers have 
access to that particular beverage. 
 
So I think it sort of streamlines and makes things make a little 
bit more sense. At any rate, Mr. Speaker, there’s a number of 
other changes in here. A lot of them relate to the definition of 
franchise, but those are kind of the highlights for me in terms of 
the changes that are being made. Again as I’ve said, we have 
called for this modernization and we think it’s appropriate to 
modernize. And so in terms of this particular bill, I think these 

changes will be welcomed by many consumers. And at this 
point, I will adjourn debate on Bill No. 23. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 
adjourned debate on Bill No. 23, The Liquor Retail 
Modernization Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 24 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 24 — The 
Liquor Retail Modernization Consequential Amendments Act, 
2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
again I’m honoured to be able to rise in the Assembly to speak 
to this bill. This is a very . . . As the long title suggests — the 
title is almost as long as the bill itself — that it’s just there to 
make consequential amendments to other bills as a result of Bill 
23. So Bill 24 is dealing with another piece of legislation called 
The Liquor Consumption Tax Act and there’s a number of 
amendments being made, three or four anyways, in terms of the 
definitions that are being changed in The Alcohol and Gaming 
Regulation Act, 1997 by Bill No. 23, The Liquor Retail 
Modernization Act. 
 
So in this case there’s three or four definitions that have been 
changed, based on the changes, and a couple of clerical 
changes, for example by striking out “Her Majesty the Queen” 
and substituting “the Crown in right of Saskatchewan” in 
clause, section 4, I guess, of the bill. So no more Queen; it’s just 
the Crown. And I think these kinds of cleanups have been 
happening over many years, so this is one that may have got 
missed in a previous cleanup. And so the language is being 
amended to reflect that. 
 
So again it’s a very minor bill. There’s minor changes being 
made to reflect the changes being made in Bill 23. And so at 
this point, I would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 24, The 
Liquor Retail Modernization Consequential Amendments Act, 
2016. 
 
[16:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 24, The Liquor Retail 
Modernization Consequential Amendments Act, 2016. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
 



June 14, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 535 

Bill No. 25 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Docherty that Bill No. 25 — The 
Wakamow Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2016 be now 
read a second time.] 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise into the debate on Bill No. 25, An Act to amend 
The Wakamow Valley Authority Act. And it’s one that, you 
know, growing up near Moose Jaw, I have pleasant memories 
of going down into Moose Jaw where my grandmother was and 
going down to the Kentucky Fried Chicken store that was down 
by the Moose Jaw River . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, 
and I think everybody went to the Kentucky Fried Chicken 
store down by the river in Moose Jaw, and that was a great 
place. And we’d have our little picnics, and that was my first 
exposure. And of course many people would remember the 
Moose Jaw zoo as well, and that was down in that corner as 
well. So this area really brings home memories for me, and I 
know for many people here in the province, probably across 
Canada, Moose Jaw has a special place. 
 
So when this was created in 1981, this was a vision right across 
the province. We had Meewasin and we had the park here and 
several parks that were created as a valley authority or some 
sort of thing larger than an urban park. And I know that people 
in the association of urban parks and conservation areas were 
always a little leery about being called an urban park because 
they felt people would not understand what they truly were. It 
was too easy to get them mixed up with other urban parks that 
we have like the Ashworth Holmes Park. That’s close to my 
home in Saskatoon that had just a great Art in the Park event 
this weekend. 
 
Wascana and Meewasin, Wakamow are not like that. They do 
have festivals. They do have great social events, but they’re 
larger than that. There’s that whole issue around the 
conservation area.  
 
And what’s interesting, and I think that many of us do think of 
that area as we come on Manitoba Street from here into Moose 
Jaw and that little nook where Moose Jaw River winds through 
a green area, we think of that as Wakamow park, but it’s 
actually much larger than that. I think if you were to take a 
look, I think if you google on your maps, Wakamow Valley 
map, you can see all the green areas that’s south where the 
Moose Jaw River winds through Moose Jaw and then goes 
towards Bushell Park, all the parts that have been conserved by 
the Wakamow Valley or under the Wakamow Valley Authority. 
 
And so this is actually a sad day in Saskatchewan’s history in 
terms of conservation near urban living. And I think of the story 
— and I’m probably more familiar with the Meewasin Valley 
Authority in Saskatoon — of the pressures that were happening 
along the riverbanks in the 1970s. They decided they had to 
have a bigger answer. And the same in Regina when they 
created Wascana; they had to have a bigger answer. They had to 
have a vision that was more than just 5 years or 10 years. And I 
know Meewasin has a 100-year vision and what does that 

mean? And I know Wascana has just released their plan. I’m 
not familiar with it. 
 
But what happens is you have to have a bigger, bigger plan 
because as our cities grow, as our cities grow — and we hope 
that they do grow — that there are pressures on those areas that 
are very fragile in terms of conservation. And I know the 
Finance minister would say, pave them over. Pave them over; 
that’s what he would do. He would sell them to the highest 
price right up to the riverbank, and he wouldn’t care. He 
wouldn’t care about the flooding that would happen, you know. 
And this is a big issue we have in Saskatchewan, especially our 
little streams that gives the odd flood. And I know the member 
from Weyburn is very familiar with this, and Estevan, how 
creeks that appear very small and harmless can actually be 
pretty dangerous if we get a heavy rainfall or a heavy snowfall. 
And so these are the kind of issues we deal with. 
 
And I know in Saskatoon we deal with, we have all the issues 
about building to the 1 to 100 flood plain, or the 1 to 500 flood 
plain. But we also deal with the Saskatchewan River slumping, 
and that’s a big, big deal.  
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, you know the Minister of Finance, you 
know, talks about choices. And we do talk about choices. But 
one of the things that is pretty valuable to our heritage here in 
Saskatchewan is our conservation heritage, and these parks 
come at a very, very good price in terms of how we should be 
investing in them. And I know the minister in his remarks talks 
about how they have given the municipalities record revenue 
through the sales tax plan. That’s a good plan, and we think 
that’s a good plan but, man, this government has spent it many 
times over on behalf of the municipalities, and in fact they 
should be supporting the urban parks in the conservation areas. 
We are really worried that this is really the tip of the iceberg, 
and what this really means in Moose Jaw and Weyburn and 
Prince Albert are the first ones to be hit. But really we need to 
make sure we protect those fragile areas within our cities, you 
know. 
 
And I can remember, I can remember the day that we gave core 
funding to the park in Weyburn, and how happy the city was 
about that because it was a recognition. It’s more than actually 
just the money. It’s the recognition that there’s good planning, 
that they thought this out. This is not just, like I say, a park with 
swings and a sandbox. This is really talking about long-term 
visionary thinking, and this is really, really important. And so 
Weyburn got it and Prince Albert got it. And I can remember 
when The Battlefords got it because they had done such good 
work about the North Saskatchewan coming through that region 
between North Battleford and Battleford and the plains there 
and what all of that meant. And of course some of it is a 
developed park, but much of it is wild and it is a conservation 
area. 
 
And the same is with Wakamow. And I’d like to know — I’d 
actually like to get the actual map from Wakamow — how 
much of it is conservation area and how much is developed as a 
park. And I know the member from Wakamow defended the 
cuts. He’s saying that you’ve got to make tough choices, and I 
get that. I get that. But these are the moments that define who 
we are, and this is the time when we say, hey we really value 
our urban spaces, and the conservation areas are part of that. 



536 Saskatchewan Hansard June 14, 2016 

And so when we have a bill like this before us, it’s a real, real 
setback. It’s a huge setback. And really I tell you this is the 
reason why . . . I see this happening up in Saskatoon when 
they’re talking about the northeast swale, and they’re talking 
about the impact that has on the development. There’s a real 
controversy for that. I see the city is struggling with that, and I 
see Meewasin struggling with it, but I think the Ministry of 
Environment could play a real leadership role in that because 
they have the skills. They have the technology. They have the 
expertise. 
 
And we should have the same sort of application of those skill 
sets across the province. Cities will have to deal with those 
challenges, and the province can say, as a provincial interest we 
will help you out. Cities will have to make the decision. That’s 
why there are plans. That’s why there are partnerships between 
the municipalities, between the cities and the province. For the 
province, what it brings to the table, they bring cash — about a 
third of the cost — but they also bring the expertise. They bring 
the expertise that no city probably should have, you know, 
because they just can’t have. 
 
And I know in the ministry when I was there, there was some 
very, very skilled people. And they may have retired, but I 
would bet there are new people there, and I think that’s where 
they should be. And this is what the province brings to the 
table. They bring the expertise that cities like Weyburn, Moose 
Jaw, The Battlefords, North Battleford, Prince Albert may not 
have. 
 
Now Saskatoon and Regina may argue that they have it. Maybe 
they do. Maybe they don’t. But I think there is a role for the 
province in our urban parks. And one of the key commitments 
. . . I don’t know if many people know this, what’s the common 
thread between these five parks are the rivers or the creeks that 
run through them: the Moose Jaw creek that runs through 
Wakamow and the one that runs through . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . What is it called? Okay, here we have a 
moment . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well hey, I’m not from 
Weyburn. Give me a break. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this is 
the worst heckling ever. But I know the North Saskatchewan 
and the Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I know the government, it’s about to collapse 
on this. They have been listening, and they understand now why 
it’s important to be full partners, full partners in these urban 
parks and conservation areas. It really speaks to what kind of 
province we are, to our commitment to a green future. And 
whether or not you can remember the name of a creek that runs 
through Weyburn, that’s not really what matters. I think it’s the 
Souris. Is it the Souris? . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The 
Souris, there we go. It came to me. There we go. All right. So 
anyways, I do have to tell you there’s some fine statues down 
there in that park. 
 
But actually, you know, really Weyburn, I have been to their 
urban park, and it is beautiful. You do the walk around, and it’s 
really a very nice park. They have a lot to be proud of, and so 
it’s not one that we should let go. 
 
So Weyburn, Moose Jaw, and The Battlefords, P.A., Saskatoon, 
Regina, you know, the common thread — I was getting off on a 
tangent there — is because they do have a creek or a river 

running through it. And we don’t have one in Yorkton, and 
probably Yorkton should get something for that. But this is 
something that’s pretty special in Saskatchewan. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, as I say, this is the tip of the iceberg. And 
I know people are worried in Saskatoon. They’re worried in 
Regina, and unfortunately P.A., and Battlefords. And in Moose 
Jaw, folks are the first ones to feel it. The folks in Moose Jaw 
have issued a press release, and they’re calling on people to 
write their MLAs. And I know some of the members from 
Moose Jaw are very quiet. They’re not hollering out like they 
usually do. But this is something they’re going to be hearing 
about over the weeks ahead. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know that we’ll all have a lot of questions 
about this. This really is, I see, a sad day. This is where the cuts 
are really happening, and we’re worried about where we may 
go with that. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know many people will want to 
speak on this, and there’s a lot to say about this. But it just . . . I 
can remember the folks on budget day who came here and were 
so happy from ASUPCA [Association of Saskatchewan Urban 
Parks and Conservation Agencies], hoping to hear some good 
news, but in fact they heard the worst news possible, and it was 
a real setback for them. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I adjourn the 
debate on Bill No. 25. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. In order to facilitate the work of committees, I move 
that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Before we put that motion on the floor, we do 
have a motion to adjourn the debate on Bill No. 25. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adjourn debate on Bill No. 25? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Now the next motion, I’ll recognize 
the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. 
In order to facilitate the work of committees later this day, I 
move that this Assembly do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly will resume 
tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Reiter ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 503 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 503 
  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 503 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 503 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 504 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 504 
  Wyant ................................................................................................................................................................................. 504, 505 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 504 
  Fiaz ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 505 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 505 
  Carr ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 505 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 505 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 506 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 506 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Construction Begins on Retirement Community in Regina 
  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 506 
 North Central Community Association Celebrates 40th Anniversary 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 506 
 Prince Albert Regional 4-H Show and Sale 
  Wilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 507 
 Riverside Community School Holds Aboriginal Arts Festival 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 507 
 Saskatchewan Stock Growers Association’s 103rd Annual General Meeting 
  Kaeding ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 507 
 Caroline Robins Community School Celebrates 50 Years 
  Buckingham .............................................................................................................................................................................. 507 
 National Blood Donor Week 
  Kirsch ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 508 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Carbon Capture and Storage Facility 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 508 
  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 508 
 Carbon Capture and Storage Agreement  
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 509 
  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 509 
 Funding for Education 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 510 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 510 
 Support for Post-Secondary Institutions 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 510 
  Moe ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 511 
 Domestic Violence Reduction Strategy 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 512 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 512 
 Decrease in Foster Homes 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 512 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 512 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Family Matters Program 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 513 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 513 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 32 — The Automobile Accident Insurance (Benefits) Amendment Act, 2016 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 513 
 Bill No. 33 — The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2016 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 514 
 Bill No. 34 — The Provincial Lands Act, 2016 
  Stewart ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 514 
 



 

 Bill No. 35 — The Small Claims Act, 2016/Loi de 2016 sur les petites créances 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 514 
 Bill No. 36 — The Small Claims Consequential Amendments Act, 2016 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 514 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Privileges 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 515 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................... 515 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 3 — The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2016 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 515 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 17 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2016 
  Boyd ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 515 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 516 
 Bill No. 19 — The Film and Video Classification Act, 2016 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 516 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 517 
 Bill No. 26 — The Patient Choice Medical Imaging Act 
  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 517 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 519 
 Bill No. 28 — The Extension of Compassionate Care Act, 2016 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 520 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 521 
 Bill No. 29 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur les juges de paix 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 522 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 522 
 Bill No. 30 — The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 523 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 523 
 Bill No. 31 — The Local Authority Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 525 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 525 
 Bill No. 1 — The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 2016 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 526 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 526 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 21 — The Growth and Financial Security Repeal Act 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 528 
 Bill No. 22 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2016 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 530 
 Bill No. 23 — The Liquor Retail Modernization Act/Loi de modernisation du commerce des boissons alcoolisées 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 532 
 Bill No. 24 — The Liquor Retail Modernization Consequential Amendments Act, 2016 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 534 
 Bill No. 25 — The Wakamow Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2016  
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 535 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


