






















































Hansard: May 17, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 1B  TUESDAY, MAY 17, 2016, 14:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Hon. Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Hon. Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Merriman, Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 51; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Maurice Riou http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 3 
 May 17, 2016 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 14:00.] 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, ladies 
and gentlemen, please remain standing for the entrance of the 
Lieutenant Governor and the Vice-Regal party. 
 
[Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber at 
14:03.] 
 
Her Honour: — Pray be seated. 
 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 
 
Mr. Speaker, Members of the Legislative Assembly, honoured 
guests,    people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Welcome to the opening of the First Session of the 28th 
Saskatchewan Legislature. 
 
Just a few weeks ago, the people of Saskatchewan chose the 
women and men who will have the tremendous honour and 
responsibility of serving in this Assembly. 
 
My government wants to begin the first session of this new 
Legislative Assembly by saying thank you. 
 
Thank you to all of the candidates who stood for election on 
April 4th. 
 
Our vibrant democracy is well-served by an active debate and 
contest of ideas between strong candidates from all parties. 
 
Thank you to the thousands of volunteers who worked on 
campaigns throughout the province – giving of their time and 
effort to make Saskatchewan a better place. 
 
Thank you to all the Elections Saskatchewan officials who 
administered a fair and impartial election process. 
 
But most of all, thank you to the people of Saskatchewan who 
took the time to consider all the options and make their choice. 
 
The 61 Members of this new Legislative Assembly are grateful 
for and humbled by the trust you have placed in them and will 
work hard every day to be deserving of that trust. 
 
My government also wants to thank the people of 
Saskatchewan for their heartfelt responses to the horrific events 
in La Loche and in Fort McMurray. 
 
Saskatchewan will continue to stand with those communities as 
they recover and heal from these tragedies. 
 
KEEPING SASKATCHEWAN STRONG 
 
On April 4th, my government was re-elected based on a 
campaign that made few specific promises, but instead made 
one simple yet significant commitment – to keep Saskatchewan 
strong. 
 
During this session, my government will keep its promises and 
it will honour its commitment to keep Saskatchewan strong in 

three key areas: 
 

- My government will keep our economy strong; 
 

- It will keep the province’s finances strong; and 
 

- It will keep Saskatchewan’s position in Canada 
strong by always standing up for Saskatchewan’s 
interests. 

 
KEEPING PROMISES 
 
During this session, my government will move forward on the 
campaign commitments it made to keep Saskatchewan strong 
and provide a better quality of life for all Saskatchewan people. 
 
Over the past eight years, my government has made record 
investments in highways and infrastructure, repairing and 
rebuilding over 10,000 kilometres of Saskatchewan roads. 
 
Still, there is more work to be done and more highways to be 
fixed. 
 
Starting this year and over the next three years, my government 
will fix more highways through a $70 million surge in highway 
repair and maintenance. 
 
This is part of a new Highways 2020 Plan to invest $2.7 billion in 
highways and transportation capital over the next four years. 
 
In addition to making our highways safer for everyone, this 
important investment in highways will create economic activity 
and jobs in the short-term and will strengthen our ability to 
move Saskatchewan goods to market in the long-term. 
 
My government will also continue to move forward on many 
other important infrastructure projects underway throughout the 
province – schools, hospitals, long-term care facilities, the 
Regina Bypass – using both traditional funding models and 
public-private partnerships or P3s to ensure Saskatchewan 
residents receive the best possible value for their tax dollars. 
 
These important infrastructure investments by ministries and 
Crowns will total $3.6 billion this year – a record investment 
that will help meet the needs of a growing province, facilitate 
our growth plan and create jobs and opportunity that will keep 
Saskatchewan strong. 
 
KEEPING OUR ECONOMY STRONG 
 
Saskatchewan has now enjoyed a decade of growth. 
 
From January 1, 2006 to January 1, 2016, Saskatchewan grew 
by 150,000 people or 15 per cent – the strongest sustained 
period of growth since the earliest days of our province. 
 
This is a dramatic turnaround from the previous decade of 
decline. 
 
From January 1, 1996 to January 1, 2006, Saskatchewan’s 
population dropped by nearly 24,000 people, as thousands left 
our province to pursue opportunities elsewhere. 



4 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2016 

My government is committed to ensuring Saskatchewan never 
returns to those days of decline and that this new era of growth 
continues. 
 
To that end, my government will consult with industry on the 
establishment of a new growth tax incentive. 
 
It will be the first innovation tax rate of its kind established in 
North America. 
 
This new “patent box” tax incentive is designed to create jobs 
and investment through an advantageous tax rate for the 
commercialization of patents and intellectual property right 
here in our province. 
 
My government is also committed to helping small, home-based 
food businesses grow in Saskatchewan. 
 
To that end, it will allow home-based food producers to sell 
high-quality, low-risk foods, prepared in the home, directly to 
consumers and retailers. 
 
These new initiatives build on many steps my government has 
already taken to encourage economic growth and 
diversification, including: 
 

- Lowering taxes for businesses, individuals, families, 
homeowners and farmers; 

 
- Reducing the burden of unnecessary regulation and red 

tape; 
 

- Working with Saskatchewan exporters to open and 
expand new markets for Saskatchewan products around 
the world; 

 
- Actively promoting Saskatchewan’s tourism industry; 

and 
 

- Investing in skills training to match Saskatchewan’s 
labour market needs, with a specific emphasis on First 
Nations and Metis education and skills training. 

 
Saskatchewan farmers, ranchers and agribusinesses are also 
keeping our economy strong. 
 
In 2015, Saskatchewan’s agri-food exports reached nearly $15.3 
billion, surpassing my government’s Growth Plan target of $15 
billion in exports by 2020. 
 
Over the past few years, the people and economies of 
Saskatchewan, Alberta and British Columbia have benefitted 
from our provinces working closely together to lower 
interprovincial trade barriers and harmonize regulations though 
the New West Partnership. 
 
My government congratulates the newly-elected government of 
Manitoba and looks forward to working with them on many 
important issues, including their campaign commitment to join 
the New West Partnership. 
 
Despite the significant challenges facing our resource sector, 
Saskatchewan’s strong and diversified economy continues to 

attract new investment. 
 
In just the last few weeks, a number of companies have 
announced major new investments and expansions in 
Saskatchewan: 
 

- Edgewood Forest Products at Carrot River held its grand 
opening of a $25 million saw mill expansion expected to 
employ 50 people; 

 
- Crescent Point Energy announced it will spend about 

$800 million of its projected $950 million capital budget 
for 2016 in Saskatchewan; 

 
- Husky Energy will invest more than $1 billion related to 

heavy oil thermal projects creating approximately 90 
fulltime jobs and 500 construction jobs; 

 
- Weil Group is building a $10 million helium facility 

near Mankota that will supply refined, industrial-grade 
helium to markets throughout North America; 

 
- RII North America has a $50 million enhanced oil 

recovery operation near Lloydminster that will raise 
average recovery rates from 5 to 45 per cent in some 
reservoirs; 

 
- The K + S Legacy Mine, a $4.1 billion project and the 

first new potash mine in Saskatchewan in more than 40 
years, is expected to begin production in late 2016; 

 
- BHP Billiton has invested $20 million to establish a 

Carbon Capture and Storage Knowledge Centre in 
Saskatchewan with SaskPower; and 

 
- Revera is building a $75 million, 216 suite retirement 

community in Regina, creating 300 jobs during 
construction and 150 permanent jobs when completed. 

 
These are just a few of the companies that will continue to 
demonstrate their ongoing confidence in Saskatchewan’s future 
by investing in new projects and creating new jobs. 
 
My government thanks them all for helping to keep 
Saskatchewan strong. 
 
These kinds of new opportunities have led to Saskatchewan’s 
strong population growth and more young people choosing to 
stay in Saskatchewan after graduation. 
 
In 2008, my government introduced the most aggressive youth 
retention program in Canada. 
 
Since then, 58,000 young people have benefitted from the 
Graduate Retention Program (GRP). 
 
My government is now improving the Graduate Retention 
Program to allow recipients to use up to $10,000 of their GRP 
benefits toward the down payment on their first home in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In this session, my government will also introduce a legislative 



May 17, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 5 

amendment to remove the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority from The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act. 
 
This change is part of a campaign commitment to convert 40 
government-owned liquor stores to private stores, add 12 new 
private liquor stores and create a level playing field for liquor 
retailers in order to provide more choice, more convenience and 
more competitive pricing for Saskatchewan consumers. 
 
A BETTER QUALITY OF LIFE 
 
My government believes that a strong economy ensures a better 
quality of life for all Saskatchewan people. 
 
Over the past eight years, a growing economy has enabled my 
government to make important improvements to health care – 
hiring more doctors and nurses, building new hospitals and 
long-term care homes and reducing surgical wait lists to the point 
that in 2015, Saskatchewan had the shortest wait times in Canada. 
 
Again, this is a complete reversal of the previous decade which 
saw Saskatchewan losing doctors and nurses, hospitals and 
long-term care facilities closing, and the longest surgical wait 
times in Canada. 
 
The dramatic turnaround from the longest to the shortest 
surgical wait times has been due in part to my government’s 
decision to allow private surgeries within the publicly-funded 
system. 
 
This was recently recognized in a report by former Finance 
Minister Janice MacKinnon who said: “By focusing reforms on 
practical solutions rather than ideological preferences, the 
Government of Saskatchewan has markedly reduced wait times 
in a fairly short period of time.” 
 
Patients in Saskatchewan are now able to pay privately for MRI 
scans using the “two for one” model the Saskatchewan 
Roughriders have used for many years. 
 
For every scan paid for privately, the clinic must provide one 
scan at no charge to a patient on the public list, thereby 
reducing the public wait list. 
 
My government will expand this innovative approach to include 
CT scans. 
 
In May 2014, my government launched an innovative remote 
presence technology pilot project to deliver better health care to 
Pelican Narrows in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
The project uses advanced robotic telemedicine to enable health 
care providers to connect with patients remotely and perform 
real-time assessment, diagnosis and patient management. 
 
My government will fulfill its commitment to provide an 
additional $500,000 a year to expand this innovative technology 
to other remote communities. 
 
We have all seen stories of families who suffered a tragic loss 
of a loved one, but through that loss, the lives of others were 
saved because the person who died had made the choice to 
become an organ donor. 

Sadly, there are still far too many Saskatchewan people waiting 
for an organ transplant that will save their lives, and some will 
not receive that call in time. 
 
Unfortunately, Canada’s rates of organ donation are quite low 
compared to many European countries and the United States. 
 
During this session, my government will ask the Standing 
Committee on Human Services to examine this issue, including 
looking at best practices in other countries with a higher rate of 
organ donation. 
 
The Committee will make recommendations on how to increase 
the organ donation rate in Saskatchewan. 
 
My government will also introduce changes to The 
Saskatchewan Employment Act to benefit those caring for a 
family member in the final stages of life, ensuring they will be 
eligible for a full 28 weeks of leave per year. 
 
My government will move forward on its campaign 
commitment to reduce health region administration by $7.5 
million a year and re-direct that savings toward improving 
seniors’ care by hiring more registered nurses, licensed 
practical nurses and continuing care aides in long-term care 
facilities. 
 
During this session, my government will also fulfill its 
commitment to help seniors remain in their own homes longer 
by allowing seniors with household incomes under $70,000 to 
defer the education portion of their property taxes, beginning in 
2017. 
 
My government is committed to providing more green energy in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
That is why it will extend the current net metering program for 
residential and commercial customers for another two years. 
 
It is also why my government has forged a new partnership 
with the First Nations Power Authority. 
 
That new partnership will see First Nations developing 40 
megawatts of clean energy generated from solar power and 
flare gas. 
 
This plan will ensure that First Nations in our province are 
active participants in the economic benefits associated with the 
construction of clean energy. 
 
It is a plan that will assist Saskatchewan in moving toward 
its target of having 50 per cent of electrical power needs 
generated by renewable sources by 2030. 
 
KEEPING OUR FINANCES STRONG 
 
Despite the challenges in our resource sector, Saskatchewan’s 
finances remain strong. 
 
Our budget deficit remains much smaller and more manageable 
than our neighboring provinces. 
 
Our debt to GDP ratio is the second lowest in Canada and we 



6 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2016 

continue to enjoy a triple-A credit rating. 
 
In two weeks, my government will present a budget that will 
keep Saskatchewan strong by keeping our provincial finances 
strong and by ensuring that the budget returns to balance by 
2017. 
 
The upcoming budget will also mark the beginning of a 
government–wide exercise of transformational change to 
ensure the sustainability of high quality public services 
delivered in the most effective, efficient way possible. 
 
STANDING UP FOR SASKATCHEWAN 
 
My government believes in a strong Saskatchewan within a 
strong and united Canada. 
 
But it is troubling that today, there are some in this country 
who, given the opportunity, would shut down major parts of 
Saskatchewan’s economy and put thousands of hard-working 
Saskatchewan people out of work, all in the name of some 
misguided dogma that has no basis in reality. 
 
There are those who are not comfortable with and even oppose 
much of what we produce in Saskatchewan and how we 
produce it – oil and gas, coal and uranium, livestock and grains. 
 
They would prefer that those sectors did not exist and that the 
thousands of jobs in those sectors did not exist. 
 
They look at those jobs like they are somehow harming the 
country and the world. 
 
To those people, my government has a message. 
 
You are wrong. 
 
You could not be more wrong. 
 
Saskatchewan feeds Canada and the world. 
 
Saskatchewan supplies energy to Canada and to the world. 
 
What we do here makes Canada a better place. 
 
What we do here makes the world a better place. 
 
My government will take every occasion to stand up for this 
province, to defend those vital sectors and to stand up for every 
one of those jobs. 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
For many years, many different leaders have used a metaphor 
taken from the Sermon on the Mount in Matthew 5:14 – the 
metaphor of the shining city on a hill. 
 
Those who have invoked this imagery, from John Winthrop to 
John F. Kennedy to Ronald Reagan, have used it to say that 
those of us who have been blessed by providence have the 
responsibility to serve as a beacon of hope, welcoming all to 
our shining city. 
 

Now of course, this is Saskatchewan. 
 
It’s hard to find a city on a hill. 
 
But today we have the freshly clad copper dome of this 
Legislature to serve as our symbol of that shining city. 
 
Let it be a reminder to all of us that we are blessed to live in the 
best province in the best country in the world. 
 
And for those of us who are particularly blessed with the 
honour of serving under this beautiful, shining dome, let it serve 
as a reminder that to whom much is given, much is expected. 
 
Let our new shining dome remind us of where we have been, 
where we are headed and that Saskatchewan should always be a 
beacon of hope whose best days are still ahead. 
 
I now leave you to the business of the session, knowing that you 
will favourably discharge your duties and responsibilities. 
 
May Divine Providence continue to bless our province and 
guide this Assembly in all of its deliberations. 
 
God Bless Saskatchewan. 
 
God Bless Canada. 
 
And God Save the Queen. 
 
The Speaker: — I invite Elder Betty McKenna to come 
forward. 
 
Ms. McKenna: — [Elder McKenna spoke for a time in 
Ojibwa.] 
 
It’s a beautiful day, O Great Spirit. I ask for a blessing from 
you, our heavenly Protector, to give all Saskatchewan people a 
blessing on this day, a blessing of prosperity and growth, a 
blessing of respect and honour, a blessing of love and 
forgiveness, a blessing of a safe community for every town, 
every reserve, every hamlet, every family farm, every village in 
this wonderful, vibrant province. 
 
O Great Spirit, I ask a blessing to the brave women and men 
who serve to keep us safe in these communities. 
 
And bless our leaders of our province, these leaders that are in 
this room that gather here and speak for us, that were elected by 
us. They do their best for us. We ask you, O Great Spirit, give 
them strength as they give us hope for a better life. 
 
Bless our leaders of this province, O Great Spirit, give them 
prayerful guidance in their daily lives. 
 
Bless our children and the youth of our province, that they may 
seek themselves to be strong leaders some day. 
 
[Elder McKenna continued in Ojibwa.] 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you, Elder McKenna. 
 
[Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 14:29.] 



May 17, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 7 

The Speaker: — We’ll begin with the traditional Assembly 
prayer. Please all stay standing. 
 

Present us, O Lord, in all our doings with thy most 
gracious favour and further us with thy continual help, that 
in all our works, begun, continued, and ended in thee, we 
may glorify thy holy name, and finally by thy mercy attain 
everlasting life. Amen. 

 
Please be seated. 
 
I recognize the Premier. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Pro Forma Bill 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move that a bill respecting the Administration of Oaths of 
Office be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — I move that a bill representing administration 
of oaths of office be now introduced and read the first time. It 
has been moved by the Hon. Premier that the said bill be now 
introduced and read for the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Sergeant-at-Arms 
 
The Speaker: — I’d like to present the Assembly our new 
Sergeant-at-Arms, Maurice Riou. 
 

Introduction of Pages 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that the Pages 
for this Session will be — as the name is read, please stand: 
Sydney McWilliams, Sabra Leier, Kristin Bend, Kennedy 
McBain, and Tayler Kosloski. 
 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that in order to 
prevent mistakes I have obtained a copy of the speech of Her 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor and I now lay it on the table. 
 
I recognize the Premier. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Speech from the Throne 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
move: 
 

That the speech of Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor be 

taken into consideration on Wednesday, May 18, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Premier: 
 

That the speech of Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor be 
taken into consideration on Wednesday, May 18, 2016. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Before putting the question to the 
adjournment motion I have a few announcements to make. 
 
I would like to thank all of our guests and members of the 
public for joining us today. I would like to recognize the 
students that are joining us from northern Saskatchewan. They 
are in Regina to take part in the youth mentorship program and 
we welcome them to our legislature. Give a wave. 
 
I want to thank the members of the judiciary and the Court of 
Appeal, the Court of Queen’s Bench, and Provincial Court for 
your attendance today. 
 
Thank you to Elder Betty McKenna for taking part in today’s 
ceremony. 
 
I would like to introduce the school groups that are with us 
today. In the west gallery we have Grade 8 students from Gull 
Lake School. Wave. And in the east gallery we have Grade 8 
students from École St. Pius X here in Regina. I would like to 
thank all of you along with your teachers, for attending today’s 
ceremony. 
 
Also we’d like to welcome the Campbell Collegiate chamber 
choir. They are seated in the west gallery and I will be calling 
on them to sing in a few minutes. 
 
I would like to thank the members of the following 
Saskatchewan-based regular and reserve forces units for 
providing us with the honour guard earlier this afternoon: 3rd 
Canadian Division HQ Saskatchewan Domestic Operations, 15 
Wing Moose Jaw, Royal Regina Rifles, Saskatchewan 
Dragoons, 38 Signal Regiment, 38 Service Battalion, 16 Field 
Ambulance, and HMCS Queen. 
 
As well, I would like to thank the 10 Field Regiment, the Royal 
Canadian Artillery for their 15-gun salute, and the Royal 
Canadian Artillery Band. 
 
I would also like to invite everyone to join Their Honours, the 
Premier, the Leader of the Opposition, and Members of the 
Legislative Assembly at the Speaker’s tea which will take place 
immediately following the Chamber ceremony. The tea will be 
in two locations — room 218 in the west wing and the library 
reading room in the east wing. 
 
It has been moved by the House Leader that the House do now 



8 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2016 

adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
I would now like to welcome the Campbell Collegiate chamber 
choir under the direction of Deidre Baird to sing two songs for 
us. Ladies and gentlemen, the Campbell Collegiate chamber 
choir. 
 
[The choir sang.] 
 
The Speaker: — On behalf of all that are present today, I 
would like to thank the choir for that beautiful performance. 
 
One final announcement. I ask that members and guests observe 
the following rules when departing the Chamber: the Speaker’s 
party; Her Honour’s party; the Premier and Provincial 
Secretary; Leader of the Opposition; judges of the Court of 
Appeal, Queen’s Bench, and Provincial Court; members of the 
cabinet and their spouses; other members of the Assembly and 
their spouses and guests; and then guests. 
 
This House stands adjourned until tomorrow, Wednesday, May 
18th, at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:47.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

SPEECH FROM THE THRONE .......................................................................................................................................................3 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Pro Forma Bill 
  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................................7 
ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 Introduction of Sergeant-at-Arms 
  The Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................7 
 Introduction of Pages 
  The Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................7 
TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 
  The Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................7 
MOTIONS 
 Speech from the Throne 
  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................................7 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


	KEEPING PROMISES
	KEEPING OUR ECONOMY STRONG
	KEEPING OUR FINANCES STRONG
	STANDING UP FOR SASKATCHEWAN
	CONCLUSION

