




















































Hansard: May 24, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 4A  TUESDAY, MAY 24, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Hon. Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Hon. Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Merriman, Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 51; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Maurice Riou http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 71 

 May 24, 2016 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Weyburn-Big 

Muddy. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to introduce individuals sitting in your gallery today 

representing the MS [multiple sclerosis] Society of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, this afternoon we are joined by 

Erin Kuan, the president of the MS Society of Canada for 

Saskatchewan and Manitoba divisions. As well, Mr. Speaker, 

Jessica MacPherson who is director of government relations 

and research support for the Saskatchewan division of MS 

Society. Brian Duck is past Chair of the MS Society and a 

current board member. 

 

Mr. Speaker, earlier, just moments ago Nicole Tiller, who is a 

Saskatchewan resident living with MS, pinned the carnation on 

me in honour of MS Awareness Month. And I know that all 

members are joining us in recognizing that here today. And so I 

would ask all members to join with me in welcoming our guests 

from the MS Society of Saskatchewan to their Legislative 

Assembly. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to join 

with the minister in welcoming these guests today, Ms. Erin 

Kuan, Ms. Jessica MacPherson, and Brian Duck to their 

legislature today, again in honour of MS Awareness Month. 

And just I would like to say thank you on behalf of the official 

opposition for all that you do for advocacy for those . . . for 

helping MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] better 

understand some of the challenges that those living with MS 

and their families face, so we can create better policy for the 

work that you do in supporting individuals who have a 

diagnosis of MS, and for all the work that you do around 

fundraising and to better support research. So thank you for all 

that you do for our people here in Saskatchewan and Manitoba 

and across Canada for better improving the lives of those living 

with MS. Thank you. And I’d ask all my colleagues to join with 

me as well in welcoming these guests to their legislature. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats. 

 

Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you and to 

all members of the Assembly I’d like to introduce the grade 7 

and 9 class from the Countryside Mennonite school in 

Saltcoats. We’ve got eight grade 7 and 9 students and as well 

their teacher, Mrs. Bonnie Penner; and chaperones Evan and 

Janelle Penner, Galen and Valerie Wohlgemuth, John and 

Candice Wohlgemuth, and Melinda Penner. And these are 

children and grandchildren of various industries in the area such 

as Castleton Industries, Penn-Truss, Railside Homes, Penner 

Insulating, Cut Arm Agro, Sunshine Landscaping — a very 

industrious bunch in our area. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of funding heritage 

languages here in Saskatchewan. And we are very disappointed 

to know that after 25 years, the Government of Saskatchewan is 

now discontinuing all supports for heritage language learning in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Since 1991 heritage language schools have depended on this 

modest funding from the Ministry of Education to help sustain 

their programs. Now as a result of the announcement by the 

Ministry of Education, many of these non-profit heritage 

language schools will be faced with the difficult decision of 

whether they can continue to operate. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s important to know that it’s increasingly 

important to work towards improving of access to indigenous 

languages, many of which are endangered. Heritage language 

programs provide support not only for immigrants, refugees, 

and their descendants but also for Aboriginal peoples and all 

Canadians who recognize the benefits of learning additional 

languages. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully 

request that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

take the following action: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 

to reconsider this decision and restore funding for heritage 

language education in Saskatchewan heritage language 

schools. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the people presenting this petition are from the 

city of Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 

 

Carbon Capture and Storage Technology 

 

Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, China is 

the world’s largest source of carbon emissions, and last week 

the International Energy Agency released a report explaining 

that retrofitting China’s coal-fired fleet is the best option for 

reducing their carbon emissions. 

 

Saskatchewan is home to the world’s first commercial-scale 

carbon capture facility retrofitted to coal-powered generating 

plants. We are the world leaders in this technology. Between 

January and April of 2016 alone, SaskPower has captured 



72 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2016 

299 000 tonnes of CO2. That’s the equivalent of taking about 

75,000 cars off the road. This spring we announced a 

partnership with BHP to develop a CCS [carbon capture and 

storage] knowledge centre to share our experience with 

companies and countries looking to address climate change. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the second largest emitter of greenhouse gases is 

the United States, and last week the Environmental Protection 

Agency agreed that using CCS is essential to continued coal 

power generation. Green Alliance highlights that CCS is the 

only technology available to decarbonize heavy industry to the 

extent needed to meet carbon targets. Duncan Kenyon from the 

Pembina Institute recognizes that “There are so many assets and 

such a vast infrastructure invested in fossil fuels, the short- and 

medium-term reality is that we need carbon capture.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members join me congratulating Sask 

Power on the world-leading technology in developing CCS. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

National Fiddling Day 

 

Ms. Sproule: — In 2015 Canada’s Parliament proclaimed the 

third Saturday in May of each year as the country’s National 

Fiddling Day to ensure that the historical and contemporary 

importance of the fiddle as well as its unique contribution to 

Canadian culture is not only recognized but made known to a 

broader audience. 

 

This past Saturday fiddlers from across the country filled my 

Facebook feed with photos and videos of their celebration of 

National Fiddling Day, and I was lucky enough to join with 

good friends to celebrate our wonderful Canadian fiddle culture 

just north of Prince Albert, playing tunes together for three 

hours. Malcolm McLeod also organized an event right here in 

Regina. 

 

Over the centuries, newcomers from many different cultures 

have come to Canada, sharing their own styles and their own 

interpretations of traditional fiddle music. The fiddle was 

introduced in Canada by the Jesuits in the 17th century. From 

those first days in New France entertaining the members of 

l’Ordre de Bon Temps, this humble yet complex instrument has 

been the catalyst for cultural development throughout our 

country. The early French settlers and the famed coureurs de 

bois took the fiddle with them to the North and to the West. 

Indeed it is representative of the Métis culture to this day. The 

Celtic settlers and explorers also brought their unique style of 

fiddling that can still be found in Cape Breton and the Ottawa 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our range of fiddling styles are as reflective of the 

people from whom we come and who we have become, but 

when it comes to fiddling there is no such thing as a language or 

cultural barrier. I ask all members to join with me to 

acknowledge the unique importance of the fiddle as a cultural 

icon and its celebration on National Fiddling Day. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moosomin. 

 

Multiple Sclerosis Awareness Month 

 

Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to rise 

in this Assembly today to mark MS Awareness Month. As you 

know, multiple sclerosis is a neurological disease that impairs 

and destroys nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord. The 

impact of MS in Saskatchewan reaches beyond the estimated 

3,500 people in this province living with MS. The effects of this 

degenerative disease touch families, friends, workplaces, and 

communities. 

 

Earlier this year, we received the recommendations from the 

Multiple Sclerosis advisory panel of Saskatchewan. The panel 

recommended ways to improve the care experience, support 

research and education, and enable Saskatchewan people living 

with MS to participate in clinical trials that focus on improving 

a person’s conditions or symptoms. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government has committed to the 

establishment of an MS patient registry. We have also 

committed to the creation of an advisory council on 

degenerative neurological diseases and will continue to consider 

the panel’s other recommendations. Our government is 

committed to improving the care and support of people affected 

by MS and to advance research in Saskatchewan. Finally, Mr. 

Speaker, I would like also to join in welcoming the dignitaries 

of the MS Society of Canada and thank them for all their hard 

work. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Biju and Thingyan Celebration 

 

Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 

May 7th I had the opportunity to attend the Biju/Thingyan 2016 

celebration hosted by the Chakma and Myanmar immigrant 

communities in Regina. The event was a joint endeavour 

between the two communities to belatedly celebrate Biju and 

Thingyan. 

 

Biju is traditionally a three-day-long festival celebrated by the 

Chakmas, an indigenous group of people in the Chittagong Hill 

Tracts. It is the largest carnival of all the indigenous peoples in 

the region. Thingyan is traditionally a four-day-long water 

festival that ushers in the Myanmar New Year. The festival is 

believed to rinse all bad luck, sins, and evil deeds of the past 

year. 

 

I was honoured to bring greetings at this event on behalf of the 

official opposition. Many other dignitaries were also in 

attendance, and we were treated to various cultural, dance, and 

musical performances, and some pretty amazing food. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking the 

leaders of the Chakma and Myanmar communities including 

Dr. Talukdar, who organized such a successful event, and also 

in thanking them for the valuable cultural contributions their 

communities make every day to our province’s multicultural 

fabric. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 

 



May 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 73 

Provincial Fossil Chosen 

 

Mr. Steele: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, over 

14,000 votes were cast, and Scotty the T. Rex is now our new 

provincial emblem. Scotty is a 65-million-year-old T. Rex 

skeleton. He was discovered on August the 16th, 1991 and was 

the first found in Saskatchewan. In June 1994, excavation began 

and more than 6,000 people visited the excavation site that year. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there were many great fossils to choose from, 

including Big Bert, the 92-million-year-old crocodile who took 

second. In addition to the voting, grade 7 classes from across 

the province were invited to learn about the fossils on the 

candidate list, choose from one they think would be the best 

representing Saskatchewan, and create a second video to argue 

their case. The videos entered into a contest and were posted 

online and helped promote the contest for Saskatchewan fossils. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to say that the grade 7 class from 

Alameda School submitted the winning video. On Thursday 

they came for a tour of their legislature and they earned the 

chance to join the Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport in the 

unveiling of Scotty at the Royal Saskatchewan Museum. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the Royal Saskatchewan 

Museum for their hard work, dedication to this project; the 

public for taking the time to vote; and the classes for their 

participation in the contest with great enthusiasm. Thank you, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 

 

Family First Radiothon in Moose Jaw 

 

Mr. Michelson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, it’s always a 

pleasure to talk about the generosity of the citizens of Moose 

Jaw, especially in regards to the 10th annual Family First 

Radiothon held earlier this month. The radiothon is a 

presentation of the Moose Jaw Health Foundation in support of 

the hospital. 

 

This year was unique as, for the first time, the radiothon was 

hosted in the entrance lobby of the Dr. F.H. Wigmore Regional 

Hospital which was opened last fall by our government. The 

36-hour live broadcast on CHAB radio was an opportunity for 

donors, hospital staff, and radiothon organizers as they watched 

the donations come in. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no question that the people and the 

businesses of Moose Jaw and area are incredibly generous. This 

was confirmed as the fundraising total of $150,000 was met and 

exceeded by almost $25,000. The annual radiothon has 

experienced phenomenal success as the total funds raised in the 

past 10 years has exceeded $3 million. This year, funds are 

going to support the life-saving equipment for Moose Jaw and 

the people of the Five Hills Health Region. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I invite all members of the Assembly to join me in 

congratulating the Moose Jaw Health Foundation and the 

organizers of this year’s radiothon, and to thank the people and 

businesses who once again reached deep and generously 

donated to assist and provide the health needs of our 

community. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina 

University. 

 

JDC West 2016 Business Competition 

 

Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past 

January, students from the University of Regina’s Paul Hill 

School of Business competed in the 2016 JDC [Jeux du 

Commerce] West business competition, which was hosted by 

the University of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this competition provides students with 

opportunities to achieve excellence in academics, community 

stewardship, and professional and personal growth. Participants 

worked for eight months prior to the competition, dedicating 

countless hours to preparing their cases, raising funds for 

charities, and volunteering in their home communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the competition’s theme for 2016 was Achieving 

Excellence, and the team from Regina Hill School of Business 

did just that by placing top three in the following categories. 

This list is very long and impressive: second place for Overall 

School of the Year; first place for Overall Academic School of 

the Year; first place in the taxation and not-for-profit 

competitions; second place in the human resources, business 

strategy, and accounting competitions; third place in the finance 

competition and most charity hours. 

 

JDC West participants from the University of Regina raised 

money for Hope’s Home and contributed more than 1,000 

volunteer hours in Regina and area. These are the kind of young 

leaders I’m proud to champion, Mr. Speaker. I ask all members 

to join me in thanking the 2016 Hill School of Business JDC 

West team for their many contributions to our community and 

congratulate them on their outstanding performance at the 

competition. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

SaskTel Risk Assessment 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we just had an election 

where the Premier hid the true state of our finances and his 

budget, and over and over again, he promised he wouldn’t 

privatize our Crowns. Well the truth is leaking out. The deficits 

are much, much bigger than pretended by the Premier and he’s 

now reviewing, doing a supposed review of SaskTel. Everyone 

knows, as one commentator put it, that the biggest risk to 

SaskTel is a cash-strapped, third-term Sask Party government. 

And the Premier has already put privatization on the table of 

this company that belongs to all Saskatchewan people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is the party and the Premier that is hiding the 

finances, that’s hiding the budget, that’s hiding the information 

with his GTH [Global Transportation Hub] land scandal. Does 

he really not understand why Saskatchewan people are just a 

little skeptical about how open and fair and honest his supposed 

assessment of SaskTel will be? 



74 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2016 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I thank 

the Leader of the Opposition for his question. I think it’s very 

important in the wake of the recent takeover of MTS [Manitoba 

Telecom Services], the proposal to take it over by Bell, that we 

ask the Crown corporation, SaskTel, to look at any risk that 

might exist to the Crown as a result of it now being the only 

small and regional Crown telephone company, frankly, in the 

country. 

 

I think that risk analysis may highlight a number of things. It 

may highlight there is no particular new risks to identify, that 

SaskTel can continue to operate as it has, providing good 

service to the people of this province and being the asset that it 

is for all of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 

There may be other elements that are identified in this analysis 

that we can react to to strengthen SaskTel. I think the bottom 

line is that Saskatchewan people will want to ensure that the 

jobs that are here because of SaskTel stay; that revenue to the 

province remains, Mr. Speaker; that this company, which has 

been invaluable in the life of the province, is protected from 

whatever risks that may exist with now it being the only, the 

only regional telco in the country, the only small one. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would note that as a result of CRTC [Canadian 

Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission] rulings 

from the previous federal government, with no apparent hopes 

of them being reversed, SaskTel is required to share all of the 

network that it has built through the taxpayers’ investment with 

other companies, with competitors. We need to do whatever we 

can to protect SaskTel not just for today, but for years into the 

future. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, everyone knows that the 

biggest risk to SaskTel and our Crowns is that cash-strapped 

government, Mr. Speaker. Everyone knows that. And now he’s 

talking just weeks after an election about a costly referendum. 

You know, if he wanted a mandate to privatize, he should have 

been honest to Saskatchewan people during the election. The 

fact is the Premier solemnly swore he would not privatize 

SaskTel. Now, just weeks later, he says privatization is on the 

table. 

 

The people of Saskatchewan know the real value of SaskTel. 

They know how much more affordable phones and mobile 

devices are here. They know how important it is to our 

economy, with thousands of jobs all across our province, with 

hundreds right here in Regina. They know that the more than 

$500 million SaskTel has paid in dividends over the last five 

years alone helps to fund things like classrooms and hospitals 

and lightens the load on taxpayers. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask again why wasn’t the Premier straight with 

Saskatchewan people about his plans on this front during the 

election? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was asked 

during the election campaign if our government would change 

the Crown protection Act, which obviously governs what 

governments can or can’t do with any of the Crowns, beyond 

what we’d campaigned on with respect to SLGA 

[Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority]. I said that we 

wouldn’t and we would keep that promise. That’s what we have 

done for the last eight years, Mr. Speaker, is worked hard to 

keep the promises that we’ve made. 

 

What happened post the election was the takeover in our 

neighbouring province, the province of Manitoba, of the only 

other small regional telephone company, Manitoba telephones, 

by Bell. Mr. Speaker, that obviously will impact on SaskTel 

here. We don’t know the degree to which it will impact on 

SaskTel. 

 

I think it’s completely reasonable that the board and the 

executives would hire some experts in the industry to provide a 

risk analysis and then report transparently back to the 

shareholders of SaskTel, Mr. Speaker, the people of 

Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, there will never be a change in the 

ownership structure of SaskTel without a mandate from the 

people of this province so long as we have the opportunity to 

serve in government, and I’m sure that would be the case for 

members opposite. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

SaskPower Rate Increases 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, it’s really hard to understand 

why they’re so chipper over there. I sure don’t remember them 

campaigning on raising SaskPower rates either. Mr. Speaker, 

for years this government and this Premier have mismanaged 

and bungled project after project, and the people of 

Saskatchewan have been stuck with the bill. 

 

We haven’t seen a budget from this government. We saw 

nothing in the Throne Speech by way of a vision for the future 

of this province. But on Friday we did see more costs being 

thrown on the backs of hard-working Saskatchewan families 

and the businesses who are so crucial to our great province. 

 

SaskPower says they need to raise rates 5 per cent this summer 

and then another 5 per cent just six months later. Mr. Speaker, 

will someone over there stand up and admit that Sask Party 

mismanagement is hurting the bottom lines of families 

throughout Saskatchewan? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 

SaskPower. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, due to aging infrastructure 

and record demands on power, about $1 billion a year is being 

spent on the grid in Saskatchewan, the power system in our 

province. Rates are based on future needs for the people of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

SaskPower has added about 60,000 new customers since 2007. 

About 82,000 more are projected over the next 10 years, Mr. 

Speaker, with plans to add over 2000 megawatts of power. As a 

result of all of that, Mr. Speaker, there’s a need to raise rates 



May 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 75 

here in the province of Saskatchewan by 5 per cent in July and 

another 5 per cent in January of next year. But even with that, 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan still enjoys the third-largest basket 

of utilities here in the country. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, do I need to remind the minister 

about the so-called smart meters? The Sask Party was warned 

not to use them. They plowed ahead anyways, and then they 

ended up setting some homes on fire. Then the Sask Party 

burned through even more money by handing over another $23 

million to the manufacturer of those meters. And you didn’t talk 

about this, Mr. Speaker: there’s also their carbon capture fiasco 

that cost $1.5 billion, and it has had many, many costly 

setbacks. Things have gotten so bad, even with rate hikes 

SaskPower’s debt is still going up. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got to wonder, is Sask Party taking 

notes from Ontario’s Kathleen Wynne? Is this mismanagement 

of SaskPower all a part of a plan to try to privatize it, or have 

they just mismanaged SaskPower so badly and chose to hide 

these rate hikes from Saskatchewan people during the election? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 

SaskPower. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, with respect to the smart 

meters, $24 million was received back to the people of 

Saskatchewan in cash refund, $18 million was received in terms 

of future purchases, $5 million was received in terms of 

research and development on a new meter. 

 

After all, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite makes it sound like 

no one in the world is using those meters, Mr. Speaker. But just 

recently in Medicine Hat, Alberta, they have about 80,000 of 

those meters installed with no recorded incidents, Mr. Speaker. 

Before we would ever go back to try on a smart meter here in 

Saskatchewan, we’d want to try them under Saskatchewan 

conditions, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that they can meet the 

rigorous environmental- and weather-related activities that we 

have here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Nutana. 

 

Ms. Sproule: — That darn winter, Mr. Speaker. Things have 

gotten so bad that even with the rate hikes, SaskPower’s debt 

still continues to rise. Saskatchewan people are burdened not 

only by the increasing power bills, but also the Sask Party keeps 

racking up the debt. Since 2011, five years ago, the debt has 

more than doubled. That’s an additional $4.1 billion. 

 

Currently, SaskPower’s debt is equal to three-quarters of what 

the company is worth. SaskPower officials have told us that this 

is the maximum debt threshold that the company can handle, 

and yet the Sask Party is putting our public company in huge 

risk. 

 

To the minister: when will this government stop burdening the 

people of Saskatchewan with the costs of their poor 

management in our Crown corporations? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister for Economy and 

SaskPower. 

 

Hon. Mr. Boyd: — Under the NDP [New Democratic Party], 

rates increased almost every single year that they were in 

government, with a shrinking population here in the province of 

Saskatchewan. Our government has increased rates to keep up 

with the demand and to ensure that there is reinvestment 

through the dividends back into SaskPower, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Through 2000 and 2007, $638 million at the time, ranging from 

60 to 90 per cent of the dividend, or of the net income, pardon 

me, of SaskPower was stripped away by the members opposite, 

Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this government has not done that, 

Mr. Speaker. There’s been two occasions where dividends have 

been paid to the Government of Saskatchewan, and the first one 

was as a result of significant amounts of water flows in the river 

systems here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

I will remind the members opposite of a program that the NDP 

had opposite, Mr. Speaker, perhaps in the next question. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Prevention of Domestic Violence 

 

Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there 

are a lot of things that the government was not upfront about 

throughout the election. However, one thing they were clear on 

was their lack of commitment to address domestic violence. 

When this government released their poverty reduction strategy 

in February, they very clearly stated that they would not 

implement initiatives to address interpersonal violence and 

domestic abuse until “fiscal capacity allows.” 

 

Our province has the highest rate of domestic violence deaths in 

Canada, and tragically this weekend we saw another life lost. 

Regardless of the fiscal situation, will the minister commit to 

advice that his own government commissioned and take efforts 

to prevent and reduce interpersonal violence and domestic 

abuse? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank 

you very much for the question. Mr. Speaker, we’ve done quite 

a bit on the area of domestic violence over the years that we’ve 

had the privilege of being in government. Just last year, we 

introduced amendments to The Victims of Domestic Violence 

Act, Bills 144 and 152, to enhance the ability of police and the 

justice systems to engage in dealing with this very, very 

difficult problem. 

 

[14:00] 

 

And just last fall, Mr. Speaker, we introduced our plan to bring 

forward a domestic violence death review committee, which is 

currently in the process of being assembled. We’ve had to work 

on some information-sharing agreements, Mr. Speaker, to bring 

that to bear. We will be announcing the memberships of that 

committee in the very, very near future, Mr. Speaker, with their 



76 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2016 

work to begin in early July. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, to the extent that the member opposite is 

critical of our commitment, I think we’ve made some 

significant contributions to this in the years since we’ve had the 

privilege of being here, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has the highest 

rates of sexual assault, intimate partner violence, and homicide. 

We know that as economic times get worse, we actually see 

increases in violence, and particularly violence against women. 

At a time when supports should be bolstered, this government is 

not taking action fast enough. 

 

It is clear that victims of domestic violence are not the main 

priority of this government. Even in a fiscally restrained period, 

the government still finds money for takeout food and private 

contract fiascos. Even a fraction of that money would go a long 

way in providing initiatives to address interpersonal violence 

and domestic abuse. How can the Premier justify such 

misplaced priorities? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 

2015-16 this government invested over $11 million to provide 

support for interpersonal violence and abuse services, including 

12 transition houses, family violence outreach services, and 

sexual assault services.  

 

Last year alone, Mr. Speaker, our funding commitment 

increased by 20 per cent, and that includes a new transition 

house that we committed to in Melfort, Mr. Speaker. So not 

only that, with the proclamations of Violence Prevention Week, 

we’ve had some promotional work that’s been done. Last year 

we brought forward our Who Will You Help video campaign 

which has been received very, very well, not only with the 

schools, Mr. Speaker, but through the public generally. 

 

I think, Mr. Speaker, we have more work to do. And certainly 

the work that’s being done by the domestic violence death 

review committee is going to point out perhaps some gaps that 

are in the programming, Mr. Speaker, and help us identify some 

of that, Mr. Speaker. But our commitment to combat domestic 

violence, Mr. Speaker, will continue. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Education Funding and Government Consultations 

 

Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, it’s nothing but excuses from this 

government now; well, excuses and now revelations about the 

plans they kept secret during the campaign. The Minister of 

Education let slip on Friday before the long weekend that part 

of the “transformational change” the government announced in 

their Throne Speech would be amalgamation of school boards.  

 

Mr. Speaker, this throws yet another curve ball at school boards 

who are already struggling with Sask Party cuts, all of the 

unknown cuts in the budget, increased demands, and growing 

class sizes. Now they’ve added another layer of uncertainty in 

our kids’ schools. Mr. Speaker, clearly this was their plan all 

along, so why did they keep this secret during the campaign, 

and why are they speaking so cryptically now? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I can advise the House and 

I can advise the school boards that we’ve made no 

determination or no decision on anything. What I can say is we 

would like to have an open and frank discussion and some very 

careful consideration of what options are there to continue to 

ensure that we’re able to provide the best quality of education 

for our students. We want to have consultation to find out if we 

can do this in a more effective and more cost-effective manner, 

Mr. Speaker, unlike the NDP that chose to close 176 schools, 

neglect the schools — they drove 35,000 students out of our 

province, Mr. Speaker — that is not the direction we’re going. 

We’re going to have some consultation. We’re planning for 

growth, and we’re planning for the best possible outcome for all 

of our students. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 

 

Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, we’re speaking about the condition 

in our children’s schools today. Of course school boards are 

willing to make sure that we have the best education system for 

our students, and of course consultation should take some time. 

But that still doesn’t explain why they hid this plan from 

Saskatchewan families during the campaign. 

 

It’s almost June, Mr. Speaker, and all Saskatchewan school 

boards know right now is that, thanks to the cuts, they’re short 

on money and the money that they need to give our kids the 

education Saskatchewan parents expect. Regina Public is over 

$6 million short; Prairie Spirit, $7.1 million; Regina Catholic, 

$2 million short; Saskatoon Catholic and Public are both over 

$3 million short each. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on and on about what these cuts mean. 

But let me try asking one more time, why is the minister 

throwing out even more uncertainty at our kids’ schools before 

the budget comes out, and why didn’t he talk about this during 

the campaign? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make it clear to 

the members opposite and to the public, we have never ever cut 

funding to a school board in this province. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 

we have raised funding each and every year that we were in 

government, unlike the members opposite that chose to close 

176 schools. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can say this: the budget line for education has 

more than doubled since 2007. We have increased operating 

funding by 31 per cent. We’ve increased capital spending by 

four times. We’ve increased child care spaces by 53 per cent. 

We’ve increased pre-K [pre-kindergarten] spaces by 104 per 

cent. We’ve increased child and intervention funding by . . . 

[inaudible] . . . Mr. Speaker, those aren’t cuts. Those are real 

increases because we care about the children in our province. 



May 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 77 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I will remind the minister that I sat 

at the school board table last year at Regina Public, and I sat 

through a budget where we had to find $6.1 million to deal with 

the increased growth that was not funded by this government. 

There is concern about what transformational change now will 

mean for local governance at our schools. 

 

The minister’s amalgamation trial balloon last Friday doesn’t 

make very much sense, especially considering that municipal 

elections for school board trustees are just five months away. 

Some are even wondering if this government means to do away 

with elected school board trustees altogether. So will the 

minister guarantee that transformational change and 

amalgamation won’t lead to government-appointed school 

board trustees? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — We’d like to ask all the school divisions 

in our province, all the staff, all the board members to 

participate in a process where they can have some meaningful 

input, that they can prescribe and plan where our government is 

going to go to and where our province should go to with 

education. We have a strategic sector plan, Mr. Speaker, that 

has outlined a plan that is the best for the students in our 

province. Now we as elected members, both school board 

members and government members, have to figure out the best 

way that we can fund that and deliver that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can say this to the member opposite. We’ve 

increased our overall operating grant 31 per cent since 

November of 2007. Total pre-K to grade 12 education in our 

province is now nearly $2 billion. The funding is over and 

above the $966 million that we’ve spent on capital. Mr. 

Speaker, we have made a major investment in education. We’re 

going to continue to do that. We support and value everything 

that takes place in our education . . . [inaudible] . . . and want to 

make sure it’s sustainable. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, in the absence of an answer, I’m 

going to ask the question again. Will the minister guarantee that 

transformational change and amalgamation won’t lead to 

government-appointed school board trustees in this province? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, we have no preconceived 

plan or outcome for how that consultation might end up. Mr. 

Speaker, we want to have an open, candid, full, and frank 

discussion with the school divisions in our province, with the 

SSBA [Saskatchewan School Boards Association], with the 

STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation], with our education 

partners. We don’t want to put parameters on it before we start. 

We look to them for some much valued and much needed input. 

We want to participate with them in a full discussion so that we 

can plan where we take our province and where we take the 

education system, and we’re not going to put boundaries on it 

before we start. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Funding for Post-Secondary Education 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last year 

this government cut nearly $10 million from the University of 

Saskatchewan’s operating grant, forcing the university to dip 

into savings to make up the difference. That was on top of the 

additional $20 million the university agreed to hold back in 

order to let the government balance its budget. 

 

Now the university’s acting provost is sounding the alarm. They 

can only rely on their savings for so long. And as education of 

course is the cornerstone of a strong society and economy, and 

as the acting provost said, the people of this province will most 

certainly feel the impact of under-investment in our university 

and in the post-secondary sector. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Advanced Education admit 

that they’re not doing enough, and in fact that their cuts will be 

hurting not just our students, but the future of this province as 

well? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 

 

Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 

member opposite for the question. And the fact of the matter is, 

Mr. Speaker, is it’s been this government that has invested and 

invested heavily in our post-secondary education sector here in 

the province of Saskatchewan, in our institutions, Mr. Speaker, 

as well as in the students themselves attending our institutions 

across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve increased post-secondary, funding to our 

post-secondary education sector by some 61 per cent in just 

eight short years, Mr. Speaker. This is six and a half billion 

dollars of investment, to almost half a billion dollars of 

investment in infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. It includes a 350 per 

cent increase in student supports, Mr. Speaker, programs like 

the Saskatchewan advantage grant for education savings, the 

Saskatchewan Advantage Scholarship, Mr. Speaker, and the 

graduate retention program that almost 10 per cent of our 

population here in the province are partaking in now. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, things are so great in this 

sector that Saskatchewan university students pay, on average, 

the second-highest tuition in the country, Mr. Speaker. 

Saskatchewan leadership. And if they’ve got a problem with 

that, Mr. Speaker, maybe they can take it up with Statistics 

Canada. 

 

In terms of last year’s budget, Mr. Speaker, that minister and 

that government stood in this House and made promises to the 

post-secondary sector. And then of course we found out that 

mid-year the Finance minister sent the Advanced Education 

minister around the sector asking for half of the increase back, 

Mr. Speaker. So again the sector is paying the price for 

mistakes that this government has made. 



78 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2016 

I want to know from the minister, Mr. Speaker, what guarantee 

can he make to the people of Saskatchewan, to our 

post-secondary sector, that when they stand in this House on 

June 1st that that’s as bad as it gets, that they’re not going to 

come around halfway through the year to take the other half of 

the increase back? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Advanced Education Minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. An 

indication of the University of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that 

institution, when ranked against its peers across the nation, is 

the second-best provincially funded institution in the nation of 

Canada, Mr. Speaker. The University of Regina ranked against 

their peers across the nation of Canada also ranked second in 

their level of provincial funding, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is a far cry, Mr. Speaker, from the commitment of the 

members opposite when they were in charge of the file. In 

1993-94, ’97-98, they cut nearly $10 million out of the 

post-secondary budget here in the province of Saskatchewan. 

They made policy decisions, Mr. Speaker, that resulted in 

tuition increases at the University of Saskatchewan by some 

175 per cent. The University of Regina was 144 per cent, Mr. 

Speaker; 336 per cent increase at the Sask Polytech, Mr. 

Speaker. This is the record of that party, Mr. Speaker. 

 

When it comes to investment in our post-secondary institutions 

and our students, Mr. Speaker, it’s this government that will 

continue to invest to ensure that we keep our province strong. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 1 — The Crown Corporations Public Ownership 

Amendment Act, 2016 
 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 1, 

The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 

2016 be now introduced and read for a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 

Responsible for the Liquor and Gaming Authority that Bill No. 

1 be now introduced. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — In accordance with section 5(1) of The Crown 

Corporations Public Ownership Act, this bill is required to be 

committed to a policy field committee after first reading. To 

which policy field committee shall this bill be committed? 

 

I recognize the Deputy Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I designate that Bill 

No. 1, The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment 

Act, 2016 be committed to the Standing Committee on Crown 

and Central Agencies. 

 

The Speaker: — To the Standing Committee on Crown and 

Central Agencies. 

 

[14:15] 

 

Bill No. 2 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Crown 

Corporations’ Fiscal Year End Standardization) 

Amendment Act, 2016 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 2, 

The Miscellaneous Statutes (Crown Corporations’ Fiscal Year 

End Standardization) Amendment Act, 2016 be now introduced 

and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Crown 

Investments that Bill No. 2, The Miscellaneous Statutes (Crown 

Corporations’ Fiscal Year End Standardization) Amendment 

Act, 2016 be now introduced and read the first time. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 3 — The Teachers Superannuation and Disability 

Benefits Amendment Act, 2016 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 3, The 

Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment 

Act, 2016 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 

Education that Bill No. 3, The Teachers Superannuation and 

Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2016 be now introduced 

and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 

the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 4 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2016/Loi 

modificative de 2016 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill 4, The 

Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2016 be now introduced and 



May 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 79 

read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 4, The Queen’s Bench 

Amendment Act, 2016 be now introduced and read a first time. 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 5 — The Electronic Information and Documents 

Amendment Act, 2016 
 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 5, The 

Electronic Information and Documents Amendment Act, 2016 

be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It is moved by the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General that Bill No. 5, The Electronic Information 

and Documents Amendment Act, 2016 be now introduced and 

read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 6 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 6, The 

Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 be now introduced and read 

a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It is moved by the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General that Bill No. 6, The Statute Law Amendment 

Act, 2016 be introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure 

of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 

 

Bill No. 7 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 

(No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2016 modifiant le droit législatif 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 7, The 

Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 (No. 2) be now introduced 

and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 7, The Statute Law 

Amendment Act, 2016 (No. 2) be now introduced and read a 

first time. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 

 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

Standing Committee on House Services 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 

instructed by the Standing Committee on House Services to 

report that the committee has convened pursuant to rule 138 and 

is presenting its first report. I move: 

 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on House 

Services be now concurred in. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Chair: 

 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on House 

Services be now concurred in. 

 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 

 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 

motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

TABLING OF COMMUNICATION 

 

The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I wish to table a 

message from Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor dated May 



80 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2016 

24th, 2016 communicating the membership of the Board of 

Internal Economy is as follows: Hon. Corey Tochor, Chair; 

Hon. Jim Reiter; Hon. Jeremy Harrison; Hon. Ken 

Cheveldayoff; Randy Weekes; David Forbes; Warren McCall. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Buckingham, seconded by Ms. 

Carr, and the proposed amendment to the main motion moved 

by Ms. Sproule.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 

rise again today to conclude my remarks that I had the 

opportunity to start on Thursday. Just as we were ending on 

Thursday, I was talking about surgical wait times, pointing out 

that the one area this government had made progress since last 

March, since the last budget, those numbers have gone in 

exactly the wrong direction. 

 

Starting in March 2015, wait times for surgeries across the 

province started increasing. Those waiting more than three 

months, the number of people waiting over three months for 

their surgeries has tripled in just 11 months. In Regina, the 

amount of people waiting more than three months for surgery 

has increased by 285 per cent, and in Saskatoon the amount of 

people waiting more than three months for surgeries increased 

by 120 per cent. Those waiting for more than six months, the 

amount of people waiting longer than six months for surgery 

has increased by 174 per cent. So this government, on the one 

thing that they had some success in, are going in exactly the 

wrong direction. 

 

There’s just a few other things I’d like to touch on very quickly 

that I would have liked to have seen in the Throne Speech and 

would expect to see in a budget. This government, a year and a 

half ago, came up with a mental health and addictions 10-year 

action plan with very little action tied to it, Mr. Speaker. I can 

tell you, in Saskatoon right now at RUH [Royal University 

Hospital] people who are suicidal, unless you are a 4 out of a 4, 

like you are . . . suicide is imminent, you are turned away or 

sent home after being assessed. I can tell you that the Dubé, 

from my understanding, is over capacity almost every day, Mr. 

Speaker. I can tell you that this government has a suicide 

protocol that is supposed to be, was supposed to be in place in 

2011 across all health facilities and it is nowhere near that. This 

government is not doing what it needs to do around mental 

health. 

 

I would have liked to have seen a palliative care strategy. 

There’s no dementia strategy. With our aging population, no 

senior strategy. All those things tie together, Mr. Speaker. 

There’s not a word on any of this. So we think about good 

investments in health care, which is sort of my theme of this, 

good investments in health care: no palliative care strategy, no 

dementia strategy, no senior strategy, no work on their poverty 

reduction strategy which could go a long way in saving money 

in health care. 

 

The reality is seniors’ issues have not gone away either, so over 

the last session we raised many issues and concerns around 

long-term care and the lack of staff in long-term care. Their 

proposal of $7.5 million, Mr. Speaker, is going to be a drop in 

the bucket in addressing those concerns. 

 

PTSD [post-traumatic stress disorder], I would like to see this 

government move on making it a presumptive illness under 

workers’ compensation and will be continuing to encourage the 

government to do that, Mr. Speaker. 

 

So those are some of the things we’d like to see, Mr. Speaker, 

around health care. The reality is good investments are 

absolutely imperative in good . . . They should have happened 

in good fiscal times, Mr. Speaker. Think again what $40 million 

could have done on anti-poverty reduction for health and saving 

taxpayers’ money. Instead they poured it into John Black, Mr. 

Speaker. This is about smart investments. And now the 

financial situation is tight, Mr. Speaker, because of our natural 

resources and this government’s mismanagement. I would 

argue not a single penny saved for this kind of day, Mr. 

Speaker; in fact, this government has accrued a whole bunch of 

debt. Now is the time for smart investment in many things, Mr. 

Speaker. So to that end I will be supporting the amendment and 

I will not be supporting the original motion. Thank you, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m pleased to rise to take part in the Throne Speech debate. 

Thank you for recognizing me. I want to first begin by 

congratulating you, Mr. Speaker, on your election to the Chair. 

As well, I want to join with other members last week in 

congratulating all members to their election to the House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is certainly very much an honour and a 

privilege that we all have. The way that I try to explain it when 

I, especially when I meet with school groups, is to try to put it 

into context, to say that for this four-year period of time we get 

to be one of 61 people in the entire province, out of 1.1 million 

people, that get to stand in this Chamber and say our piece on 

behalf of our constituents. And, Mr. Speaker, it’s an honour that 

I just . . . I’m very honoured to have this role. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I very quickly want to thank the people that give 

me that ability to be here — first and foremost, my constituents. 

Mr. Speaker, I am moving on to I guess it’ll be 10 years next 

month that I’ve been the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy. 

So I want to thank the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy that have 

given me this opportunity. 

 

I also want to thank our election team back home, Mr. Speaker. 

We have had a great team that has been in place for a number of 

elections now, and so I just very quickly want to thank them for 

putting in all the hard work that they did in helping with the 

re-election. 

 



May 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 81 

And, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank my family, especially 

Amanda and Jack, for their continued support to allow me to be 

in this place. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to thank certainly all of my colleagues 

for their support, but especially the member from Yorkton who, 

as the Minister for Rural and Remote Health, is a great partner 

to work with. I’ve been very fortunate in this role to have the 

support of members in the past, beginning with the member 

from Biggar and then the former member from Lloydminster 

and now the member from Yorkton. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m not 

sure how the member from Indian Head-Milestone did this job 

on his own. I certainly am very fortunate and I want to thank 

the member from Yorkton for all of his support and for being a 

good friend in the province. So I want to thank the member 

from Yorkton. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when I was listening last week, not knowing if I 

was going to get a chance to get into the debate, I was listening 

to other members and trying to think about, okay, if I had an 

opportunity to reply to the Throne Speech, you know, where I 

would want to put my focus. And so, you know, first and 

foremost what came to mind, and when Her Honour was 

delivering the speech, is I think some very strong remarks, very 

positive remarks that she made on the economy and on the 

standing that this province has in the country and the standing 

that we need to have in this country when it comes to ensuring 

that we have the ability to responsibly develop our resources 

well into the future, and what that means, not only for our 

province but also for this country. 

 

And so there were a number of members that spoke last week 

on the importance of the economy. Certainly we believe on this 

side of the House that all of the good services that we’re able to 

provide as a government, none of that is possible without a 

strong economy, Mr. Speaker. So my remarks were initially 

going to focus on that, especially in light of what we’re hearing 

by many on the national stage, certainly from members on the 

other side of the House, particularly from their federal party, 

Mr. Speaker. I think my brief comments on that will be that I 

would certainly urge, especially for me, my constituents that 

have a strong stake in ensuring that we have the ability to 

develop our resources in a responsible way . . . 

 

Certainly we are feeling in the Weyburn-Big Muddy 

constituency, we’re feeling the effects of a low oil price right 

now, Mr. Speaker. We certainly have been through this before 

and we will make it through this. But, Mr. Speaker, it certainly 

is taking its toll on our community and on employment. As well 

as, you know, just even I hear from friends of mine back home 

who, you know, even the number of kids that were in the 

daycare or in the kindergarten class are half of what it was at 

the beginning of the school year, Mr. Speaker, and it really 

shows that, you know, we’re going through a difficult time. 

 

But I would urge my constituents to pay very close attention to 

what is coming out of, especially, the NDP at a national level. 

And certainly there are supporters here in this province of 

what’s being discussed in terms of policy. Mr. Speaker, this is 

very troubling, Mr. Speaker. And so that would have been the 

focus of my comments. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, I also had an opportunity to listen to the 

member from Athabasca when he spoke. And I’ve said before 

in the House that I hope for however long I’m a member in this 

House, that he is a member as well, just so I have the 

opportunity to listen to what he has to say — not because it’s 

relevant because, Mr. Speaker, it rarely is, Mr. Speaker. But as I 

was listening to the member, it sounded a lot like things that 

he’s said in the past in this House. 

 

[14:30] 

 

And so I would say to people watching, if you want to hear 

more on the economy, look at the speeches that have been made 

by members of this side of the House, especially my friend 

from Walsh Acres who had a very good speech in terms of the 

economy. And I would say, Mr. Speaker, for members, if you 

missed what the member for Athabasca had to say, don’t worry; 

he’ll say it all again next year at the Throne Speech debate next 

year. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I want to focus most of my comments on 

health care, Mr. Speaker, the role that I have the . . . where I am, 

the area of responsibility. Mr. Speaker, and I’m pleased that I 

have the opportunity to follow up from the member from 

Riversdale who is the Health critic. And I will say, and I will 

give her credit. The member over the last number of years has 

been very, very diligent and very earnest in raising concerns, 

and she has taken a great deal of time in committee to try to 

understand the file. I give her a lot of credit for that, Mr. 

Speaker, to understand how the ministry operates and how we 

operate with our stakeholders. 

 

And I was pleased to see in her comments that she agreed with 

comments that I had made in the last week of ensuring that we 

are doing all that we can to ensure that we are putting the health 

care system on a sustainable path moving forward. We’ve 

talked about ensuring that health care is sustainable, not only 

today or next year, or to try to make it through a difficult, more 

challenging fiscal situation for the government over the short 

term, but also ensuring that we’re doing the things that we need 

to do to put health care on a sustainable path going forward into 

the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we will spend about 45 per cent . . . As a 

health care system, we’ll spend about 45 per cent of the Finance 

minister’s budget that he will table in the coming weeks. Mr. 

Speaker, 20 years ago that was 35 per cent. We will spend this 

year about $591,000 an hour, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, 

366 days, because this last year was a leap year, Mr. Speaker. 

And so we have to do what we can to ensure that we are 

bending the cost curve and keeping our growth in terms of the 

health care budget to a minimum, Mr. Speaker, because the 

higher our budget increase is, that means there’s going to be 

less money for education and agriculture and highways and 

social services and other important areas, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And so as a government, we have worked very hard. And 

certainly beginning under the Deputy Premier when he was the 

Health minister, we have seen our increases in terms of the 

health budget come down to the point where on average over 

the last eight years our health budget has increased on average 

about 5 per cent. That’s about 3 to 4 per cent lower than it was 

over the last eight years of the NDP government. Their health 

budgets were going up on average by 7 to 8 to 9 per cent a year. 



82 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2016 

And if you think about it, the economy’s growing at 2 or 3 per 

cent a year, Mr. Speaker. We certainly are outstripping the rate 

in terms of what the economy can support in health care 

spending. And so while we are sitting at about a 5 per cent on 

average increase, we’re certainly . . . [inaudible] . . . lower, on 

the lower end the last couple of years: three and a half, 3.4 per 

cent, 2.3 per cent last year, Mr. Speaker, and that trend is 

continuing. 

 

So that’s why we need to talk about ensuring that we are 

looking at continuous improvement and looking at how do we 

ensure that we are able to transform the health care system so 

that it can serve the people well into the future. 

 

So the member opposite from Riversdale talked at some length 

about some work that had been done on transformational health 

care over . . . and reports that had been issued by the CMA 

[Canadian Medical Association] and the CNA [Canadian 

Nurses Association] and other organizations over the last 

number of years. And so I’ll talk a little bit of what we’ve tried 

to focus on. 

 

We’ve looked at it through the lens of the four betters: better 

health, better care, better value, and better teams. And so this 

work has begun even at the earliest days of the Patient First 

Review that really guided where we were going to move 

initially as a government in terms of health care reform in this 

province. 

 

The better health, certainly we are seeing improvements being 

made in health promotion. We’ve seen some great results in 

terms of lowering some of our very problematic areas such as 

our HIV numbers in the province, our TB [tuberculosis] 

numbers in the province by putting in place under the former 

Health minister some very dedicated, specific strategies in those 

areas, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I will say that so in terms . . . So that was on 

the better health side. So better care, we have certainly made 

significant changes within the health care system while working 

with our front-line providers to try to put in place the concept of 

continuous improvement: daily visual management, continuous 

improvement, Mr. Speaker. And why do we do that? So we’ve 

tried to do that because the people of Saskatchewan, the people 

of Canada, are paying a lot for their health care services. And, 

Mr. Speaker, we are not, compared to a lot of other countries 

. . . And I’ll speak on more of a global basis, not necessarily 

specific to Saskatchewan because there’s areas that we do well 

and there’s areas that we need to do better in. 

 

But in terms of Canada, Canadians pay a lot for our health care. 

And there are countries in the OECD [Organization for 

Economic Co-operation and Development] and other 

organizations that monitor this that get better outcomes, not 

necessarily by even spending more dollars than we do. So we 

need to look at the way that we’re actually delivering services. 

And that is why we invested and we made the very conscious 

decision to look at what are the other high-performing health 

care organizations in North America. 

 

I had the opportunity in November in 2014 of touring the Mayo 

Clinic, one of the, I think one of the highest performing health 

care organizations in North America — certainly one of the 

most respected organizations — that has embedded in this 

concept of continuous improvement into their operations, Mr. 

Speaker. And so doing that we have seen some positive 

improvements. 

 

For example, just to name a couple, rural patients that are 

referred to Regina General Hospital emergency for cardiac care 

. . . So this is in the event that somebody’s had a heart attack 

and they are being sent to Regina General either by STARS 

[Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] or road ambulance. We’ve 

now changed the processes using input from the front-line staff 

to see that their diagnostics that they need to take place and 

their physician assessment are now occurring 50 per cent more 

quickly than when the way we previously used to do things. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure if that saves us money. I don’t 

know how much money that saves us, but if it’s my family 

member, I certainly want that diagnostic procedures to happen 

50 per cent quicker if a loved one is having a heart attack and 

being sent by ambulance to Regina from rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Prince Albert Victoria Hospital has seen the reduction in the 

time that surgical patients are waiting for medication by 57 per 

cent. I don’t know if that saves us any money, but again from 

the patient perspective, I’m glad that those patients . . . And if I 

was a patient, I’m glad that that patient is receiving their 

medication after surgery or in the surgical process 57 per cent 

less amount of time. 

 

Mental health patients in Sun Country Health Region wait 78 

per cent less time for a referral and an assessment. If you can 

imagine some of our most vulnerable individuals in our society, 

Mr. Speaker, can now count on quicker service in Sun Country 

and in Five Hills and in Regina Qu’Appelle. 

 

For example, Sunrise Health Region mental health and 

addictions units patient capacity, because of what we’re doing 

in continuous improvement, they’ve increased their capacity by 

41 per cent without adding resources. 

 

We can now see more people in a more timely way without 

adding resources. Too often in the past in health care, the 

answer was always just put more money into it and we’ll get a 

better outcome. Well, Mr. Speaker, we weren’t getting a better 

outcome so we need to actually look at what is the root cause 

and, Mr. Speaker, that is why we poured money into continuous 

improvement, Mr. Speaker. That is why we made those 

investments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the member from Riversdale also talked about 

equitable access, and we have made strides to ensure that we 

have better access regardless of where you live. Knowing that 

there will always be more work to do in this, but that’s why this 

government made the decision to ensure that the new Wigmore 

Hospital in Moose Jaw has an MRI [magnetic resonance 

imaging] machine. 

 

In the past when the NDP were the government, MRI machines 

were in Regina and Saskatoon and if you lived anywhere else, 

too bad; you had to drive. Now we have access to MRI in 

Moose Jaw in a hospital, a regional hospital. 

 

We now have CT [computerized tomography] access in 



May 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 83 

Estevan, Mr. Speaker. We are looking, continually look to see 

where can we ensure that services are being provided closer to 

home. 

 

Mr. Speaker, on better value . . . So that’s better health, better 

care. On better value, Mr. Speaker . . . And the member 

opposite, member from Riversdale who I’ve a great deal of 

respect for, said, and I quote, “. . . if the government would 

have spent money in a real and meaningful way.” Well, Mr. 

Speaker, some of the examples that I gave, I don’t know how 

you’d not call that real and meaningful, Mr. Speaker. 

  

The same would be true in terms of better value. So the surgical 

initiative, Mr. Speaker, who the member talked a little bit about, 

Mr. Speaker, she quoted a couple of studies. And I will quote 

from a couple of studies as well. Fraser report 2007 — this was 

the 17th edition — Hospital Waiting Lists in Canada, critical 

issues bulletin 2007. Mr. Speaker, right in the executive 

summary on page 3: “Saskatchewan exhibits the longest wait 

times in Canada.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also say that, I would also refer members 

to the Health Council of Canada annual report in 2006 which 

was issued in February of 2007. This is what they reported on 

hip and knee replacement surgery: British Columbia decreased 

. . . between 2001-2006, they saw a decrease; Alberta, between 

2005 and 2006, they saw a decrease. Mr. Speaker, Ontario, 

between 2005-2006, a decrease. What does the report say for 

the 2006, Mr. Speaker, for Saskatchewan? “No reported 

reduction in wait time found for hip and knee replacements on 

the government website,” Mr. Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, and this was at a time, this was at a time, 

Mr. Speaker, when the Martin government had given all sorts of 

money to end wait lists. This was going to be the fix for a 

generation for health care in this country. And, Mr. Speaker, by 

the time the NDP got finished spending the money, the wait 

lists were longer in Saskatchewan than before the fix for a 

generation began, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I briefly also want to touch on some of the other 

innovative things we were doing when it comes to value. Mr. 

Speaker, this government passed a bill to allow for citizens to 

purchase an MRI in the province, which they had already been 

doing either going to Calgary or going to the Mayo Clinic or 

driving to Minot, North Dakota, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker . . . And where we got that idea, we just extended 

what an NDP government had allowed for the Saskatchewan 

Roughriders and workers’ compensation. Now, Mr. Speaker, in 

27, 28 days of campaigning in my constituency, Mr. Speaker, in 

a month of campaigning in my constituency, I got an 

opportunity to talk to a lot of my constituents. And I have yet, 

Mr. Speaker, to meet a constituent of mine, with all due respect 

to the Roughriders, I have yet to meet a constituent of mine who 

is worth any less than a professional football player, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, we had a debate, we had a debate in Regina 

during the campaign and I remember when this came up and I 

explained the government’s record. And, Mr. Speaker, the 

member from Elphinstone was the NDP candidate at the debate 

and he replied, after I explained the government’s position on 

MRI he said, “well you know, the NDP government didn’t 

always get it right.” Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t need the 

member from Elphinstone to tell me that. I’ve lived in this 

province my entire life. History will tell us that, absolutely, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, also what we’re doing in terms of better value, 

Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we’re also looking at what is our 

core business, what do we need to provide in terms of the 

services in the health care system, and what can be provided by 

others that are not a part of the health care system, And this, 

yes, did result in some difficult decisions. 

 

Certainly my constituency was impacted on it, Mr. Speaker. 

But, Mr. Speaker, we moved for example on laundry. We had a 

system in Saskatchewan where the health care system actually 

did the laundry. Now I think we need to ensure that we have 

clean laundry, clean linen in our health care system. I just don’t 

think it needs to be the health care system to do that work, Mr. 

Speaker. And so when we looked at a proposal that would save 

. . . and the number is now well over $100 million over 10 

years, Mr. Speaker. As Health minister, I know that we needed 

about $30 million just to rebuild laundries. And, Mr. Speaker, 

my position on this . . . and the government, my colleagues 

agreed that if I can get $30 million to put into capital for 

replacement, I’d much rather put it into a hospital or into a 

long-term care facility, Mr. Speaker. That money shouldn’t be 

going into a laundry facility in this province. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, we’re having . . . So, Mr. Speaker, we are 

having a high-quality service provided and it doesn’t have to be 

the health care system providing that, Mr. Speaker. That’s what 

we need to identify in the future: what is our core services? 

What are those things that we need to be doing.? So that’s better 

health, better care, better value, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Finally on better teams, Mr. Speaker, the record is clear. The 

member opposite, when she talked about surgeries, she said that 

the surgical reductions that we saw as a government . . . She 

credited us but she said that that was the only improvement that 

we have done, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I beg to differ on that 

and better teams is a great place to look, Mr. Speaker. As well, 

look at the other things that I’ve already said. But 650 more 

doctors practicing in Saskatchewan, a 40 per cent increase; 43 

per cent more specialists; 50 per cent more pediatricians; 32 per 

cent more family doctors; 3,000 nurses of all designations, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We have the police and crisis teams working to ensure that the 

police are paired up with a mental health worker in Regina and 

Saskatoon. We’re piloting hot-spotting, Mr. Speaker, so that we 

can look at those high users of the emergency department, those 

individuals that are going to emergency departments a dozen 

times — in some cases, 100 times — in one year. Let’s build a 

service tailored to those people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[14:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, those are some of the initiatives. So just in closing 

I would say — and as a way maybe perhaps just to refute my 

colleague, my friend from Riversdale — by just saying that if 

she’s looking for real and meaningful progress, Mr. Speaker, 

more doctors is real and meaningful. More nurses is real and 



84 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2016 

meaningful. A children’s hospital is real and meaningful. Mr. 

Speaker, a new Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford is 

real and meaningful. Fifteen long-term care facilities is real and 

meaningful. A new hospital in Moose Jaw is real and 

meaningful. STARS to serve the people of this province, Mr. 

Speaker, is real and meaningful, a trauma centre on a helicopter, 

regardless of where you live. Having the lowest wait times for 

surgery in the entire country when we had the longest is real 

and meaningful. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for those reasons and the reasons I couldn’t get to 

in 20 minutes, I will support the Throne Speech. I will not be 

supporting the amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Kelvington-Wadena. 

 

Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 

support the government’s Speech from the Throne opening this 

session of the twenty-eighth legislature. It is a humbling 

experience to share this Chamber with the many committed 

leaders who have helped build this province. 

 

I’d like to take a moment to thank some of the people who 

helped me on the journey to arrive at this place. Mr. Speaker, 

I’m humbled by the support I have received. I first need to 

thank my wife, Giselle; our kids, Angela, Erik, and Mitchell; 

and the many friends who have shared this experience with me. 

We have learned a great deal about the spirit of our constituents, 

the fellowship of our peers, the leadership of the Premier, and 

our team of MLAs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was born and grew up in my constituency in 

farming and small business. My parents, Jens and Hazel, were 

farmers and entrepreneurs. I grew up in business, and my 

working career took me across this province, northern 

Manitoba, and across Alberta. We experienced the corporate 

world for many years in Alberta, having worked in banking, 

corporate reorganizations, and financial services. When the 

timing was right for our family, Giselle and I were looking for 

the right opportunity to move home, to come back to 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when we looked at opportunities to succeed in 

2003, we could see an emerging sense of optimism in 

Saskatchewan as a new party was beginning to bring a breath of 

fresh air to the province. In fact, Mr. Speaker, some would say 

that the writing was on the wall. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I bought and operated a number of small 

businesses which I sold in 2014 to pursue political aspirations. 

I’d like to honour and thank our previous MLA, June Draude, 

for her commitment to the people of Kelvington-Wadena and 

for her friendship and guidance through this experience. I also 

want to thank my election team led by campaign Chair Meagan 

Rumbold, who many of you know, and volunteer coordinator 

Bonnie Wallin. The dedication of the directors, the sign team, 

the campaign volunteers, the business manager, and all of our 

volunteers was truly amazing. 

 

I especially want to thank and recognize the support of my 

constituency Chair, Terry Zip; as well as Wes Black; Bob 

Jackson; David Ewan; Mickey Patrick; my business manager, 

Jackie Grisdale; and so many others. Each played a critical role 

in my selection as a candidate and in the election process. Also 

in particular, I want to thank the constituents of 

Kelvington-Wadena for placing their faith in me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have the good fortune of representing a 

constituency that has supported this government since its 

inception. Unlike the history of members opposite being 

satisfied with status quo policies and a lack of vision that saw 

tens of thousands of people leave this province, our government 

stands day in and day out with the people of Saskatchewan with 

a positive vision and with a sense of pride in this province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, let me share a story of perseverance, a vision of 

commitment to community and to your fellow man. That story 

is about the humble people of Kelvington-Wadena 

constituency. Kelvington-Wadena constituency was built over 

the last 120 years by immigration. Folks came from England, 

Scotland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden, the Ukraine, Poland, 

Germany, China, the Philippines, and many other countries. 

They built farms, roads, communities, churches, and a way of 

life filled with opportunity in Saskatchewan. In fact, Mr. 

Speaker, my constituents truly respect the Saskatchewan motto: 

“from many peoples, strength.” 

 

Every generation, the people of my constituency went above 

and beyond to build a better province and country. Local men 

and women stepped forward to serve their country and came 

back, sometimes broken in body but never in spirit, to build 

communities like the soldier settlements and villages carved out 

along the railways that developed. For generations my 

constituency sent our fathers and brothers off to northern 

Ontario, to northern Manitoba, and to BC [British Columbia] to 

build the Canadian mining and forestry industries. We sent our 

brothers and sisters off to build the oil and gas industry in 

Alberta and BC. We sent our best and brightest to be the 

engineers, geologists, doctors, lawyers, the welders and 

pipefitters to build industry across Canada. 

 

We are now coming home in droves to continue to build the 

new Saskatchewan. We are the educators; the health care 

leaders; the computer technologists; the scientists; the 

agriculture, forestry, and mining innovators of the future 

Saskatchewan. We are the innovative entrepreneurs that will 

build the small businesses that will drive the economy for 

generations. Our farmers feed the province and the world. My 

constituency supplies the greatest resource of all, Mr. Speaker. 

We supply the human resource. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to recognize the incredible volunteerism in 

my constituency. Whether it’s a fundraiser for an arena in 

Wynyard; a community complex in Foam Lake; arena 

upgrades, X-ray and health care facilities in Porcupine Plain; 

hospital needs in Kelvington; or hundreds of other services and 

facilities, the people of my constituency are proud to take 

ownership of their needs and to step up in amazing ways. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech first and foremost keeps the 

promises our party made during the campaign. We are 

following through on our commitment to recognize the 

incredible contribution of our seniors by allowing them to defer 

a portion of their property taxes. This allows seniors to stay in 

their homes with a lower financial burden. Mr. Speaker, our 



May 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 85 

government recognizes that these types of measures have 

multiple benefits. In this case, seniors will have the better 

quality of life in familiar surroundings. They will be in 

supportive communities, surrounded by family and friends. 

They will continue to be a stabilizing influence in their towns 

and villages across the province. This is just another example of 

forward thinking by our government. 

 

After generations of building layers of regulation and 

bureaucracy under various governments, the people of 

Saskatchewan have repeatedly asked us as their representatives 

to find a better way to facilitate an economic model that lets our 

innovators succeed. As one example of our commitment to our 

creative entrepreneurs, we are keeping the promise we made by 

introducing the innovative patent box. Mr. Speaker, the people 

of this province are incredible innovators and leaders in 

economic freedom. I have no doubt that they will rise up and 

embrace every opportunity to succeed. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s particularly interesting to note that the Fraser 

Institute’s 2015 survey of mining companies, which rated 109 

jurisdictions around the world, rated Saskatchewan as number 

one in Canada and number two in the world. That’s right, Mr. 

Speaker, number two in the world. 

 

Allow me to quote from Pam Schwann, executive director of 

the Saskatchewan Mining Association, who stated, 

“Saskatchewan provides a low-risk environment because of 

both the great geological framework, but also the considered 

regulatory and policy frameworks.” She went on to say that it is 

“predictable, transparent, and science-based,” and that policies 

are done “. . . with a holistic approach that includes 

environment, economic and social considerations.” Mr. 

Speaker, I believe that this is a representative view of what 

makes Saskatchewan strong and moving forward under our 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since being nominated I’ve made it a point to take 

the time to meet with RM [rural municipality] and municipal 

administrators. They have shared with me how they need 

continued investment in their communities, highways, and 

critical infrastructure. We have done a lot and, Mr. Speaker, we 

are going to continue to do more. Our commitment to highways 

investment is still needed as we fix the infrastructure deficit left 

after decades of NDP governments. The investments we are 

making will position our economy for growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you will know that in the very near future we will 

be opening a new integrated health facility in Kelvington. Like 

the new school in Porcupine Plain, the investments in 

Greenwater Lake Provincial Park, and the ongoing investment 

being made by municipalities, as a result of an increase of 113 

per cent in municipal revenue sharing since we formed 

government, this is just another example of how our 

government keeps our province strong and moving forward. We 

made a commitment to keep our finances strong and we will 

keep that commitment. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we must look at every aspect of our services 

Saskatchewan residents ask us to provide. Our government is 

committed to keeping our province’s finances strong so that we 

can provide the social, health care, and education resources that 

a growing economy and population require. 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take a few minutes to philosophize a bit 

about this place and the great MLAs that serve here and their 

interaction with each other and the people we serve. Mr. 

Speaker, in a parliamentary democracy it is the obligation of 

each of us to represent the interests of all of our constituents 

equally, fairly, and without prejudice. It is my privilege to be a 

part of a strong parliamentary democracy that we have. 

 

Each of us comes to this place with our personal stories, our 

backgrounds, experiences, lifestyle choices, family 

circumstances, foibles, strengths and, yes, even weaknesses. On 

both sides of the aisle we have aging parents, families dealing 

with the health care system, children and grandchildren in the 

education system, and family members in all walks of life. All 

of us drive on the same roads, use the same Crown services, 

have the same challenges with infrastructure, and care about our 

communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly we may disagree on 

philosophical approach, but we should all agree and recognize 

that each of us is here because we believe we have a role to play 

in making Saskatchewan a place where everyone can fulfill 

hopes and dreams. 

 

In addition, Mr. Speaker, I would like to address two particular 

conundrums that challenge us in this time and place. They are 

expectations of perfection and political correctness. Mr. 

Speaker, I’m reminded of Plato’s dissertation of the Apology of 

Socrates at his trial before execution in 399 BC [before Christ]. 

Essentially Socrates was on trial for corrupting the youth and 

for not recognizing the gods that the community recognized. In 

modern terms, he might be described as an outspoken critic, a 

denier, a contrarian, or a charlatan. 

 

At that time there were believed to be many gods, each with 

their following and believers. In perspective, in today’s lexicon 

we too have many gods — whether they be of a particular 

political persuasion, particular business or social leaders, and 

advocates of positions on climate, science, environment, health, 

and every imaginable end-of-the-world issue of the day. The 

difference is that today we don’t execute our detractors in 

democratic nations. We allow information to be widely 

distributed and broadly dispensed without even a modicum of 

fact-checking or skepticism. 

 

[15:00] 

 

In any event, Socrates is discussing the issue of wisdom. And I 

quote: 

 

I reflected that if I could only find a man wiser than 

myself, then I might go to the god with a refutation in my 

hand. I should say to him “Here is a man who is wiser than 

I am, but you said that I was the wisest.” 

 

Accordingly I went to one who had the reputation of 

wisdom, and observed to him — his name I need not 

mention; he was a politician whom I selected for 

examination — and the result was as follows. When I 

began to talk with him, I could not help thinking that he 

was not really wise [I could not help thinking that he was 

not really wise], although he was thought wise by many, 

and wiser still by himself. And I went and tried to explain 



86 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2016 

to him that he thought himself wise, but was not really 

wise, and the consequence was that he hated me, and his 

enmity was shared by several who were present and heard 

me. 

 

So I left him, saying to myself, as I went away: Well, 

although I do not suppose that either of us knows anything 

really beautiful and good, I am better off than he is — for 

he knows nothing, and thinks that he knows. I neither 

know nor think that I know. In this latter particular, then, I 

seem to have slightly the advantage on him. 

 

When I left the politicians, I went to the poets . . . 

 

And as a sidebar, Mr. Speaker, in those days poets were the 

historians, the pundits, and the coffee row of the day. So I 

quote: 

 

When I left the politicians, I went to the poets . . . thinking 

that they would teach me something. Will you believe me? 

I am almost ashamed to speak of this, but still I must say 

that there is hardly a person present who would not have 

talked better about their poetry than they did themselves. 

That showed me in an instant that not by wisdom do poets 

write poetry, but by a sort of genius and inspiration; they 

are like diviners or soothsayers who also say many fine 

things, but do not understand the meaning of them. And the 

poets appeared to me to be much in the same case; and I 

further observed that upon the strength of their poetry they 

believed themselves to be the wisest of men in other things 

in which they were not wise. So I departed, conceiving 

myself to be superior to them for the same reason that I 

was superior to the politicians. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at the risk of being perceived as being a student of 

ancient studies, I will admit that I am not. I am, however, 

moved by differing perspectives. And as such, over time, with 

discussion and debate and quality, substantiated information, I 

can change my mind and I should allow others the same 

latitude. Thus, Mr. Speaker, I challenge the modern-day town 

criers, the scribes, the pundits, the members herein to allow a 

certain amount of imperfection unless they should choose to 

cast the first stone from within their glass house. 

 

The point by Socrates’s eloquent words is that because we 

come to this Assembly knowing what we know, we do not 

know all things, and it is the collective wisdom that should be 

judged. Far too often we unfairly shoot the messenger as if he 

or she personally is egregious and has not taken account of 

those around him or her. Mr. Speaker, we are accountable to 

each other for our actions and words and, I repeat, we are all 

here to represent our constituents, regardless of political stripe, 

to the best of our abilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government is proud of its actions and 

direction. We rely entirely on the great people of this province 

to hold us to account. And we respectfully ask the people of 

Saskatchewan to recommit to their neighbours, their 

communities, and to the province that we’ll work hard to be 

good neighbours, good stewards of our land, and we will keep 

Saskatchewan strong for generations to come. Mr. Speaker, 

thank you for allowing me the opportunity to speak in support 

of our government’s plans for the future of this great province. 

Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Canora-Pelly. 

 

Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to thank all the 

people present here today. It’s an honour and a pleasure to 

represent the constituents of Canora-Pelly. I look forward to 

working with my colleagues on the twenty-eighth session of the 

legislature. To the newly elected on both sides, congratulations. 

I look forward to the exciting times. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would first like to take this opportunity to thank 

my wife, Lorri, who has been by my side for 32 years. She has 

supported me not only through this election but through 20 

years and seven elections municipally. Of the 20 years, I sat as 

an alderman for six years and 14 years as mayor. Lorri has 

always been a strong woman with the will to succeed and help 

me. She has spent 30 years as a registered nurse, going back to 

school and attaining a nurse practitioner’s standing. She 

continues to help the people of the Canora area. Lorri was my 

Co-Chair this past election and on the front line. Along with the 

work crew, she put up signs, door knocked, cooked hot dogs, 

and many other tireless jobs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the most important thing my wife has ever 

accomplished is providing me a home, our family, and three 

beautiful, talented, and successful children: Jasmine 

Ostapowich, her husband Shane, my little grandson Lewis; Jade 

Dennis; and Carson Dennis. Mr. Speaker, I would like to extend 

a heartfelt thank you to my three wonderful children, my 

son-in-law, and a very special grandson for all their support 

throughout the election campaign. They would all come to 

Canora from Regina and help with the campaign whenever they 

could. 

 

Jasmine, her husband Shane, and son Lewis live in Regina. 

Jasmine works at Walker Projects as a human resource 

executive assistant. Her husband Shane works at SGI 

[Saskatchewan Government Insurance]. They recently built a 

house in Harbour Landing and now have a beautiful home to 

raise their children. 

 

Jade Dennis, my middle daughter, she also lives in Regina. She 

graduated from the U of R [University of Regina] with a 

four-year degree in social work. She began her career in child 

protective services, but has since moved into a correction 

officer with the Regina Correctional Centre. She’s a great 

hockey player. She played for the U of R Cougars and is now 

playing with the men’s rec hockey league in Regina here. 

 

Carson, our youngest, graduated from Canora Composite 

School and went to Olds, Alberta to take a three-year turf 

management course and is now managing the golf course in 

Melville. He came back to Saskatchewan. Carson is a sports 

nut. He played baseball, golf, hockey, and any other thing that 

he could. In 2012 STARS ambulance was established in 

Saskatchewan. This is very close to my heart, as my son was 

one of the first ones in our area when he rolled his vehicle, and 

today he’s doing very well. Mr. Speaker, STARS ambulance is 

such an important asset to our rural and remote areas in our vast 

province. My story is not the only one. And to think that the 

NDP would not even consider bringing them to our province is 



May 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 87 

unsettling. 

 

Our children would travel out to Canora and help put out signs, 

stuff envelopes, attend our meet-and-greet events, and help any 

way they could. They were at my nomination meeting with over 

700 other people in attendance. Yes, they were with me on the 

election and then, along with other family members and friends, 

were here with me on Monday to get sworn in as the MLA of 

Canora-Pelly constituency. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to extend my thank you to my 

campaign team: my Co-Chair, my lovely wife Lorri again; and 

a good friend of mine and first female mayor of Canora, Gina 

Rakochy; my business manager, Carol Sleeva, and now my CA 

[constituency assistant]. 

 

And I just wanted to mention a few other people that did jobs 

putting up signs, cooking hot dogs, and doing breakfasts: 

Sylvester Hrynkiw, Gary Sleeva, Kris Cherewyk, Matt 

Hrynkiw, Gladys Zavislak, Claudette Hanson, Adrien Rock, 

Brandi Zavislak and her four-year-old daughter Angel, Brad 

and Sandy Tokaruk, Brad Gabora, Willy Reay, and many 

others. Thank you for your commitment, encouragement, and 

all your hard work. 

 

Mr. Speaker, at this time I’d also like to thank two men that 

have been a great inspiration for me. First of all my predecessor 

— the MLA for Canora-Pelly, deputy premier of this great 

province, minister of Finance, minister of Education, and a 

good friend of mine — Ken Krawetz. He not only represented 

the constituents of Canora-Pelly, but he represented the 

province like no other for 20-plus years. His commitment and 

dedication to the people he represented should never go 

unnoticed. I wish him well in his retirement. You most 

definitely deserve it. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another man who not only inspired me but 

encouraged me to seek the nomination of the Sask Party for 

Canora-Pelly is Lorne Kopelchuk. Lorne served as the MLA for 

the Canora constituency from 1986 to 1991. I first worked with 

Lorne when he became the alderman in the town of Canora 

when I was mayor. We worked together for six years as 

residents to serve the residents of Canora. I was honoured to 

have Mr. Kopelchuk introduce me at the nomination meeting on 

March of 2015. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to thank two very special people 

who are no longer with us. My mom and dad, they instilled in 

me the values that I live and work by today. They taught me 

that hard work . . . to work hard, be honest, and treat people 

with respect as they deserve it, and help those who are in need. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to take this time to speak about my 

campaign trail and a few stories that will stay in my heart. It all 

started back on March 4th, 2015 in Sturgis. I had spent the 

previous six months out selling memberships and convincing 

people to come out and vote. About 700 people filled the hall 

that night. And three candidates including myself were pretty 

nerve-racked and waited until I was named the Sask Party 

candidate for Canora-Pelly. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Well done. 

 

Mr. Dennis: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, the real work started 

right after that. I got out to speak to people in my constituency. 

There was a year filled with appearances at teas, fall suppers, 

hockey games, and curling bonspiels. From Usherville to York 

Lake, from Springside to Duck Mountain Park, there were 

weeks that I would cover up to 1700 kilometres, checking and 

serving with people, having coffee with seniors, listening to 

farmers, and chatting with kids after hockey games. The theme 

was always the same: the government is doing a great job, and 

we have the best Premier in Canada. 

 

Mr. Speaker, a great day of campaigning was when the Premier 

made a stop at my constituency office in Canora. A nice crowd 

showed up to chat with him and take pictures. For one little girl 

that day, it was a special day that she will never forget. Little 

Lila Wilson, which I’m sure you’ve seen on TV, was eight 

years old and was fully prepared to interview the Premier that 

day. It was a great moment. And then I . . . A dozen kids from 

the daycare walked over across the road to meet the famous 

Premier. It was a day for them that they will never forget. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another story that touched me was 10-year-old 

Nate Wolos from Canora. Driving home after school one day, 

he asked his grandma if he could put up an “Elect Terry 

Dennis” sign on their lawn like everybody else had. Grandma 

Phylis called me, and I personally went out and pounded that 

sign in that afternoon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also remember nine-year-old Lucas Lathan who 

got interested in the whole election process. We were gathered 

at the Legion Dugout on election night to follow the results, and 

he was calling his mom every five minutes to see if I had won. I 

think he was a little more nervous than I was, maybe even 

today. After they announced my victory, I phoned Luke, 

thanked him for his support, and told him to go to bed. It was a 

school day. The next day I delivered a poster and signed it, and 

it’s now hanging above his bedroom. Mr. Speaker, it was a joy 

to see our young people involved and asking questions. The 

future of our province is bright indeed. Mr. Speaker, I was very 

humbled to receive so much support from the young children, 

retired folks, old friends and new. It has been an exciting ride 

and very humbling, and I intend to serve my constituents well. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was born and raised in the fine community of 

Canora. I grew up enjoying several sports activities offered in 

our community and, when the time came, the children became 

actively involved in sports. As many of you know, parents 

volunteer to be coaches. So I’ve coached for about 18 years, 

helping out with the kids, and now the kids are gone and I’m 

still coaching today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my father was a successful businessman in Canora 

at our family-owned business, in the grocery store business. 

This store has been in the family . . . It was a family-owned 

business since 1947 and it still operates today. At the age of 24, 

I joined my father in the business and became a meat cutter in 

the store. I established what most of you have probably heard of 

today — and some of you have tried yesterday — Terry’s 

shishliki. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned earlier, I have spent 20 years in 



88 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2016 

municipal government when I was first elected at Canora Town 

Council as an alderman in 1994. After six years on council, I 

felt an opportune time to move and to become the mayor of 

Canora. I was first elected in 2000 and then honoured to be 

re-elected as mayor the following four elections, giving me a 

total of 14 years in that position. I’m grateful to the people of 

Canora for their support and their confidence to extend my term 

for that length of time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the only reason I did resign from being mayor of 

the town of Canora, as I enjoyed my time as mayor, because I 

was no longer a resident in Canora as my wife Lorri and I 

decided to build a brand new home and move out to Crystal 

Lake. And you have to be a resident. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when Ken Krawetz announced his retirement, I 

saw an opportunity to continue to be involved in government, 

not only at the local level, but the provincial level. 

 

Of course being in the position of mayor, one is involved in 

some provincial government ministries. And as I followed the 

endeavours of the Sask Party and our own MLA [Member of 

the Legislative Assembly], at that time Ken Krawetz since he 

was elected in 2007, I really wanted to be a part of a team that 

focuses on the great things of our province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as the mayor of Canora from 2000 to 2014, I spent 

seven years working with the NDP government and seven years 

working with the Sask Party government — pretty even. I recall 

receiving a phone call from Premier Calvert, asking if he could 

meet along with me and a few community leaders and some 

prominent citizens of the area to discuss rural revitalization. 

Along with 15 other area residents, we met with Mr. Calvert 

and his staff to discuss ways that we could improve the growth 

in rural Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we did a lot of 

brainstorming that day and we were very excited about the 

prospects of the growth in our area. Well, Mr. Speaker, that 

excitement disappeared the very next day when Premier Calvert 

announced in the media that the government would be closing 

our ag office in Canora. That is the trust of the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with the Sask Party government under the new 

leadership of our Premier, our population has begun to grow. 

We are beginning to see increases in our schools and 

communities. In Canora-Pelly we saw $1.1 million spent on a 

renovation to Norquay School, $224,000 for a new roof in the 

Canora Junior Elementary, and another $900,000 for three new 

classrooms in Canora Junior Elementary to accommodate the 

population growth in our new . . . of our new school age. And 

we have also been fortunate to have a total of 70 new child care 

spaces for our young people and families in Canora. Mr. 

Speaker, our government has spent $6.4 million on pre-K to 

grade 12 capital since 2007. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another significant change has been to the 

municipal revenue sharing. Since 2007, the town of Canora, for 

example, has more than doubled to 148 per cent. This gives our 

communities a lot more to do to work within the infrastructure. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk a little more about the growth 

that we’ve experienced in Pelly constituency. In 2015 I was 

invited to attend a ribbon-cutting ceremony in a brand new 

health and medical clinic in Kamsack. This is a state of the art 

facility with the hard work of the community and their 

dedicated volunteers. This medical centre project cost $1.8 

million and was solely funded by the people of Kamsack. They 

raised $1.4 million in a little over three years. 

 

Not long after the ribbon cutting, there was another ribbon 

cutting in Kamsack — a ceremony opening a Petro-Canada, a 

car wash, and a Subway restaurant in Kamsack. A Kamsack 

resident that returned home from Alberta and decided to invest 

in his community for a need of that type of business — that’s 

growth. 

 

Stenen, with a population of approximately 80 residents, is 

home to Rawhides, a licensed dining facility that has become 

very popular, not only to the area, but people from Regina, 

Humboldt, and all over the area come out for an evening and an 

outing here. The restaurant has just expanded to demand the 

large functions, adding 300 more seats and a facility to handle 

more. And they are currently talking about adding more cabins 

and expanding to help out with our tourism, and bringing in the 

fishing and hunting and everything else. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in 2015 Sunrise Health Region renovated and 

expanded the Canora Hospital and incorporated the 

collaborative emergency centre, and became home to a modern 

health and wellness centre. 

 

We now have one of the four CECs [collaborative emergency 

centre] in our province. We currently have three doctors and a 

nurse practitioner and 24-7 emergency services. Later this year, 

with the assistance of SIPPA [Saskatchewan international 

physician practice assessment], we will be adding another 

doctor this fall. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are just a few examples of the growth that 

we have seen in Canora-Pelly constituency, and there are many, 

many more. This shows that people are not only moving home, 

but they are building, investing in our great province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to also just add that our government had 

made a commitment to the young people of our province. We 

have seen this evidence now locally, not only the pre-K, but 

also to advanced education. Just one year ago, the new Trades 

and Technology Centre in Yorkton opened its doors to the 

young adults of our area who wish to remain close to home for 

their education. And, Mr. Speaker, since 2008 more than 58,000 

grads have benefited from the graduate retention program. And 

now, with the improvements to the program, these grads will be 

able to use $10,000 towards a down payment on their first home 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, over the last eight years our government has not 

only seen growth in our population, but has seen growth in our 

economy. Our government has reduced taxes for our families. 

Under the NDP, the government taxes were raised 21 times in 

16 years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, health care is very important for the people of 

Saskatchewan. Since 2007 our government has recruited 650 

doctors, over 3,000 nurses, and continues to work towards 

improvements in these numbers. Our government today has 

more than doubled the investments in hospitals compared to the 

record of the NDP. We now have the best surgical wait times in 



May 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 89 

our country. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since 2007 we have 15 new long-term care 

facilities, 40 brand new schools, 600 more teachers, 5,000 new 

child care spaces, 58,000 grads taking advantage of the GRP 

[graduate retention program]. First Nations employment is up 

27 per cent, and much, much more. Gone are the days where we 

are closing 176 schools, 52 hospitals, closing 1,000 hospital 

beds, 1,200 long-term care beds, and sending our young people 

out of the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that our province is strong, not only the 

economy but the strength of our people who live here. With the 

strong leadership of our Premier I know our province will 

continue to grow and remain strong. Mr. Speaker, I support the 

Speech from the Throne as it sets out our plans to keep 

Saskatchewan strong and continue with our growth. It also 

shows that Saskatchewan is the greatest place in the world to 

live. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood. 

 

Ms. Lambert: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a 

privilege to rise in the Assembly today to support the Speech 

from the Throne. I first want to offer my sincere congratulations 

on your election as Deputy Speaker. 

 

One of the most common questions I have been asked since I 

started the process of seeking the Saskatchewan Party 

nomination in August of 2014 for Saskatoon 

Churchill-Wildwood was why I was running for provincial 

politics. I’ve had the opportunity to reflect on the answer to that 

question over the past 20 months. I’ve arrived at what I believe 

is the question behind the question: what’s a girl like me doing 

in a place like this? Mr. Speaker, I’d like you to join me as I 

embark on a journey that attempts to answer that question. 

 

As I sat eating breakfast last Thursday at my hotel, I could not 

help but overhear the conversation taking place at the next 

table. Three colleagues were chatting and one asked the other 

about her background and where she hailed from. She went on 

to explain about her parents and her childhood and her extended 

family. There was some scientific evidence that we carry the 

memories of our ancestors with us in our DNA, our genetic 

code. So this is where I will begin my story. 

 

My great-grandfather three times removed was Jean-Baptiste 

Lagimodiere. He married Marie-Anne Gaboury and they were 

the first white couple to settle permanently in Western Canada 

in 1806. He was a French-Canadian trapper who was employed 

in the fur trade by the Hudson’s Bay Company in what was then 

Rupert’s Land. His daughter, Julie Riel, gave birth to Louis 

Riel. I am a first cousin four times removed to Louis Riel, the 

leader of the Métis and considered the founder of Manitoba. My 

roots stretch back to this prominent politician in Canada’s 

history, and it just might be where my political journey began, 

long before I was born. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my maternal grandmother was Edith Evans. She 

was born in London, England and immigrated to Canada in 

1913 with her family who were searching for a better life. Her 

father was a shoemaker. My nan worked at Manufacturers Life 

in Regina before marrying and becoming a full-time 

homemaker. She did beautiful needlework, was an impressive 

seamstress, was adept at crafts, and enjoyed crocheting and 

knitting. She called me bat eyes, and one of my strongest 

memories of her was when she would say, you fancy yourself, 

don’t you — reminding us not to boast, as she had a dim view 

of arrogance. 

 

My maternal grandfather was Emilien Berthiaume. He was born 

in St. Boniface, Manitoba in 1899 as the oldest of 13 children. 

He was quiet, soft-spoken, even-tempered, deeply religious, a 

pragmatist with lots of common sense. He worked all his adult 

life as a foreman at the Imperial Oil Refinery here in Regina. 

Gramps raised and raced pedigree pigeons, and smoked a pipe, 

which I loved. My maternal grandparents were married in 1924 

and had five children. They were happily married for over 50 

years. They retired to Victoria, and I made many trips to see my 

beloved nan after my grandfather passed away. 

 

Mary Gnesner, my paternal grandmother, was born in 

Bukovina, Austria in 1903. Bukovina was under the authority of 

the Austro-Hungarian empire at the time, however the area was 

historically Romania. She arrived in Canada with her family in 

1914 and they put down roots in Southey, Saskatchewan. When 

Granny was just past her 17th birthday, she married my much 

older Polish grandfather in an arranged marriage. They moved 

to one quarter of homestead land 9 miles north of Cupar to 

begin a life of farming, and raised six children. They purchased 

two more quarters of land. Granny spoke German, was a 

wonderful cook, gardener, and very active in the Catholic 

church. She loved to crochet and knit just like my English 

grandmother did. She spent a good amount of time travelling 

back and forth between Regina and Saskatoon for holidays and 

looking after us when my parents were away. 

 

My paternal grandfather, Mr. Speaker, was Mathias Wilchuck, 

and he was born in 1888 in Poland. He immigrated by himself 

to Saskatchewan in 1908 also from Bukovina, Austria. I know 

very little of his European family, but I do know he worked 

very hard, like many of the early settlers of this province. He 

was hired at the Saskatchewan legislature as a bricklayer, this 

very building where I stand today. It was another link in my 

political chain. He went on to a life of farming near Southey 

and he suffered through seven straight years of crop failures. 

Can you even imagine that? 

 

[15:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, now to the next generation. My mother, Marilyn 

Berthiaume, was born in 1930 here in Regina. She was a top 

student and, after taking a business college course at Sacred 

Heart Academy, my mother was hired at SGI in 1946 where she 

worked for 10 years. She married my father in 1955 and went 

on to give birth to seven children in 10 years. I share my 

mother’s love of reading and baking and involvement in the 

church. She’s a strong example of religious devotion. She stood 

solidly by my side from the moment I decided to seek the Sask 

Party nomination. And although she had no previous 

involvement in politics, she offered me practical advice and 

encouragement and attended all of my events. 

 

My father was born as Ferdinand Wilchuck on the family farm 

which was located at section 3, township 24, range 17, west of 



90 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2016 

the second meridian, Cupar, Saskatchewan. Why so specific, 

you ask? Because my father is detailed, analytical, and specific. 

He became an agent and financial adviser with Sun Life in 1951 

in Regina. In 1965 he moved his family to Saskatoon to become 

manager of the Saskatoon branch, and he stayed with Sun Life 

Financial until 1994 — 43 years. He has continued in the role of 

independent life insurance agent and financial broker, and 

remains one of the oldest practising members of his profession 

in the province. 

 

He has a volunteer history that is so extensive that I will 

highlight just a few: founding member and secretary-treasurer 

of the life insurance managers’ association of Canada, charter 

member and president of the Saskatoon Estate Planning 

Council, president of the Saskatoon baseball association, board 

member of St. Paul’s Hospital, Chair of the Holy Spirit Parish 

finance committee from 1978 to 1999, member of the Roman 

Catholic Diocese of Saskatoon finance committee. You get the 

picture. 

 

Mr. Speaker, he devoted a great deal of time, energy, and talent 

to many organizations over the years. Like my mother, he was a 

model of volunteerism for me. Again like my mother, he was 

not directly involved in politics but has always had a keen 

interest and possesses a wide knowledge of both provincial and 

national political history. Our political conversations over the 

years were another nudge for me along the path. 

 

So who is this girl I spoke about at the beginning of my 

remarks? I arrived in this world as Lisa Gail Wilchuck, the 

middle child of seven in March of 1962 at the Grey Nuns’ 

Hospital in Regina. 

 

At one point I did some research on the middle child syndrome. 

The positive qualities of middle children include 

communication skills, an ability to negotiate, and a strong sense 

of justice. They are known for an ability to see other people’s 

point of view. It is interesting to note that the Legislative 

Assembly of Saskatchewan’s website describes the role of an 

MLA as a researcher, communicator, advocator, and mediator. 

My birth order in a large and challenging family full of strong 

personalities was preparing me for the demands of this position 

long before I realized. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I carved out my place in this family as a gifted 

student, as I certainly did not possess the athletic prowess of 

most of my siblings. I was not naturally gifted. Rather I was 

diligent, organized, and motivated. Those traits have served me 

well in my life. I am still trying to uncover where I filed the 

original copy of a letter I received from the Minister of 

Education after graduating from high school. This letter 

informed me that I was the recipient of a Saskatchewan General 

Proficiency Award in the amount of $200. Little did I know that 

one day the current Minister of Education would be a great 

source of support and guidance during my quest to become an 

MLA. 

 

I started out my 31-year media career with CFQC radio. You 

name it; I did it. I remember a poem that Denny Carr 

commissioned that described me as the jill of all trades at the 

station. I was assistant to the legendary Denny, and one of my 

highest compliments was when Denny introduced me as the 

best researcher he knew. 

I was the music librarian for the largest record library in 

Western Canada. I was secretary to the program director, and 

assistant music director. I produced the John Gormley open-line 

show when he joined the staff in 1982. When John became the 

youngest Member of Parliament ever elected in 1984, Roy 

Norris took over. 

 

Looking back, Mr. Speaker, this again was preparing me for 

public life, as I arranged interviews with politicians at all levels 

and did research. I loved my time in radio and being in the thick 

of things with all the announcing staff. It was a fast-paced and 

energetic atmosphere with loads of fun mixed in. 

 

In 1987 I moved to CFQC TV, which later became known as 

CTV [Canadian Television Network Ltd.] Saskatoon. 

Operations for the six Saskatchewan TV stations were 

centralized in Saskatoon. I worked in several roles until 2011, 

but my main position was in programming, with responsibility 

for CKBI Prince Albert and CKOS Yorkton. I spent many years 

as president of the CTV Saskatoon staff association, arranging 

farewell luncheons and the annual golf tournament and other 

social events. 

 

Following in the footsteps of my father, I developed a penchant 

for volunteerism that has continued for the past three decades. I 

assumed lead roles in the annual fundraising campaigns for the 

Heart and Stroke Foundation and the Canadian Cancer Society, 

and canvas for the Salvation Army. I volunteered for Kinsmen 

Telemiracle and the United Way. As a 10-year member of the 

Lakeridge Community Association, I filled many roles 

including one term as president. During that time, I chaired the 

Lakewood Suburban Program Advisory Committee. My family 

and I served meals at the Saskatoon Friendship Inn for 15 years 

and I spent four years on the board of directors of that 

organization. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was an interesting experience to be the only 

female on the board of directors of the Zone 2 Raiders Minor 

Softball League. 

 

After serving a term as president of the St. Luke School Parent 

Council, I ran for the Greater Saskatoon Catholic Board of 

Education in 2003. There were ideas that I recognized I would 

be best able to bring forward as a trustee. Out of a slate of 17 

candidates for our at-large system, I was successful in securing 

one of the seven board positions. I am so grateful for the 

blessings I received, the friendships I formed, the knowledge I 

gained, and the experiences I encountered as a member of this 

board. Here again, the foundation was being laid for my future 

as an MLA. 

 

I was a committed trustee for 13 years and never missed a duly 

constituted meeting during that time. I was re-elected for three 

more terms. The board has one standing committee, the 

Together in Faith and Action, and I chaired this since 2005. I 

spent eight years on the board of directors of the Greater 

Saskatoon Catholic Schools Foundation. I was nominated to 

serve on two Saskatchewan School Board Association working 

advisory groups: Education Equity and Education Funding. 

 

Having a keen interest in student health, I was named as one of 

two Saskatchewan reps on the Canadian School Board 

Association’s National Network on Student Health. I co-chaired 



May 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 91 

the SSBA’s Life Threatening Conditions Policy Advisory 

Committee as I was instrumental, along with trustee Cindy 

Anderson from Regina Public School Board, in bringing 

forward the SSBA adopted resolution that guided the policy 

advisory work for school divisions across this province. I 

recently stepped down from the Saskatchewan Catholic School 

Board Association’s board of directors. 

 

I was pleased to participate in planning for the four new 

joint-use schools in Saskatoon and the new joint-use schools in 

Martensville and Warman. I attended the grand re-openings of 

Holy Cross High School and St. Matthew Elementary School, 

both in my constituency, and am grateful for the major capital 

project renovations at these schools supported by this 

government. In 2005 I was honoured to receive the President’s 

Award of Distinction from Volunteer Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, 

so many people in this province do so much for others and are 

not recognized in any formal way like I was. 

 

Having inherited my mother’s love for baking and my granny’s 

flair for cooking, and my hobby of collecting and trying new 

recipes, I self-published a cookbook, Recipes I Stole From My 

Mum in 2013. At the bottom of each page, of each recipe page 

is one of my favourite quotes. I was pleased when Marianne 

Williamson, best-selling author and lecturer, gave me 

permission to use this quote. It is at the top of my list: 

 

Our deepest fear is not that we are inadequate. Our deepest 

fear is that we are powerful beyond measure. It is our light, 

not our darkness that most . . . [threatens] us. We ask 

ourselves, who am I to be brilliant, gorgeous, talented, 

fabulous? Actually, who are you not to be? You are a child 

of God. Your playing small does not serve the world. 

There is nothing enlightened about shrinking so that other 

people won’t feel insecure around you. We are all meant to 

shine, as children do. We were born to make manifest the 

glory of God that is within us. It is not just in some of us; it 

is in everyone. And as we let our own light shine, we 

unconsciously give other people permission to do the 

same. As we are liberated from our own fear, our presence 

automatically liberates others. 

 

This quote reminds me of my province. Did we not spend too 

long playing small on the Canadian and on the world stage? Did 

we not spend too long in the darkness? I have not forgotten how 

I felt hearing the Premier’s election victory speech in 2007. 

This is Saskatchewan, and in Saskatchewan, hope beats fear. 

That speech resonated deeply with me. I felt that night, listening 

to our new leader, our fortunes were about to change. And they 

did. It felt good to be liberated from the fear that held us back as 

a province. It was another moment that played a part in this 

story of how I came to stand before you today. 

 

This cookbook was not my first foray into the entrepreneurial 

world as I have worked alongside my husband since he began 

Precision Controls, a local pneumatic controls company, as an 

owner/operator in 2004. 

 

Which leads me, Mr. Speaker, to my family. Jim and I were 

high school sweethearts, and we will celebrate our 34th 

wedding anniversary this July. He is my strongest supporter and 

my closest friend. 

 

Education was a priority with our parenting. Amy Peters, our 

eldest, is the mother of our two granddaughters and works as an 

auditor with Canada Revenue Agency. She holds a Bachelor of 

Commerce degree with distinction and is a certified 

professional accountant. 

 

Middle daughter, Monique Lambert-Wignes, completed a 

Bachelor of Arts honours degree and went on to earn a law 

degree. She is a solicitor with the city of Saskatoon with a focus 

on bylaw prosecution and municipal litigation. We look forward 

to welcoming two more grandchildren into our family as Amy 

and Karl are expecting their third child in September, and 

Monique and Aaron are expecting their first child in December. 

Our youngest daughter, Janelle, has completed a Master of 

Public Administration degree. 

 

All received their degrees through the University of 

Saskatchewan. They benefitted from this government’s 

graduate retention program, the most aggressive youth retention 

program in the country. Like so many of my fellow members 

have mentioned, I watched as thousands of bright and capable 

kids from this province would leave right after they graduated 

never to return except for summer vacations and visits at 

Christmas. I wondered what opportunities would be available 

for our daughters when they completed their education. Thanks 

to the efforts of this Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. 

Speaker, most of our young people are now choosing to stay 

because there is opportunity right here at home. I want to ensure 

that those opportunities continue to exist for my kids, for your 

kids, for our grandchildren. 

 

Government leaders serve society and the people. When Pope 

Francis visited the US [United States] Congress last fall, he 

said, and I quote: 

 

You are called to defend and preserve the dignity of your 

fellow citizens in the tireless and demanding pursuit of the 

common good, for this is the chief aim of all politics. A 

political society endures when it seeks, as a vocation, to 

satisfy common needs by stimulating the growth of all its 

members, especially those in situations of greater 

vulnerability or risk. Legislative activity is always based 

on care for the people. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my volunteer background reflects that service is 

near and dear to my heart. It fits well with my faith and my 

world view. I plan to work for the common good of not only my 

constituents but also the needs of the province as a whole. 

 

What is this place I referred to at the beginning of my remarks? 

The Saskatchewan legislature is the largest provincial 

legislature in all of Canada. As our Premier reminded us at the 

dome restoration unveiling event last week, the message of our 

forebearers who created this province and our beautiful 

legislature was that this was a place full of promise, hope, 

optimism, and high expectations. The Premier told us that it 

was our first premier, Walter Scott, who stated that 

Saskatchewan demanded a legislature that would forever 

represent the character and ambition of the people of the 

province, and who insisted our legislature would have a dome. 

 

[15:45] 

 



92 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2016 

But I am talking about more than this building. I am talking 

about this province that I love, this province that has more 

arable land than all the other provinces combined and produces 

over 54 per cent of the country’s wheat. As the government 

website states, agriculture has a long history in Saskatchewan. It 

adds to our economy, influences society, and helps the 

environment. The agriculture industry accounts for more than 

50,000 jobs across this province, and it continues to grow. 

Canada is the top mustard producer in the world, and 75 per 

cent of that mustard comes from Saskatchewan. 

 

This province that is blessed with rich resources such as potash, 

uranium, coal, oil, and natural gas. This province that is now the 

world’s largest producer of potash by capacity and a global 

industry leader in the three essential crop nutrients: potash, 

nitrogen, and phosphate. This province that is the world’s 

second largest producer of uranium with 25 per cent of the 

world’s uranium deposit. We are the country’s sunniest 

province, and we produce more NHL [National Hockey 

League] players per capita than any other province. Let’s not 

forget our beloved Riders. 

 

Mr. Speaker, could our forefathers who built this legislature see 

the promise that was to come, that has now arrived thanks in no 

small part to this Saskatchewan Party government? The 

Saskatchewan Party has removed barriers to growth through a 

change in government policies. Citizens of this province now 

understand that there is a connection between investment and 

new business activity and new people coming to the province 

and more jobs and more money to fund the health care, 

education, social services, and infrastructure needs of 

Saskatchewan residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we used to constantly refer to Saskatchewan as 

next year country. We used to have the attitude that, if things 

are good now, they will never last. We’ve shaken off that 

attitude. I don’t want to go back to the way it was. As the 

people of Saskatchewan exercised their franchise on April 4th, 

they made a statement that they don’t want to go back either. 

 

The new constituency of Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood, the 

constituency I am honoured and privileged to represent, is 

comprised of the neighbourhoods of Wildwood, Brevoort Park, 

Holliston, Nutana Suburban Centre, and a small part of 

Adelaide/Churchill. I grew up in Brevoort Park and have strong 

ties to the constituency that I now proudly represent. The 

church that Jim and I attend is right on the edge of the 

constituency. How serendipitous that the redrawing of the 

provincial map created an area that I had deep roots in. 

 

A noteworthy characteristic of Churchill-Wildwood is a high 

population of seniors. The Home Instead Senior Care website 

states that “the two mile radius around . . . Market Mall, the 

Nutana Suburban Centre, has the highest concentration of 

seniors per capita in all of Canada” not just in Saskatchewan. 

The Throne Speech confirmed the Saskatchewan Party’s 

election promise to increase seniors’ care by hiring more 

registered nurses, licensed practical nurses, and care aids in 

long-term care facilities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my constituents will benefit from the fact that 

Saskatchewan has gone from the longest surgical wait times in 

Canada to the shortest wait times. They will also benefit from 

the government’s plan to help seniors remain in their homes 

longer by allowing seniors with household incomes under 

70,000 to defer the education portion of their property taxes. 

 

I have always been a volunteer. When I asked others to help me 

in the past, it was for an organization, a charity, a cause. This 

election campaign was the first time I found myself asking 

others to help me, for me. It was not in my comfort zone, but I 

quickly realized I could not do this work alone to win the 

election. So I asked and family, friends, and others answered 

my request for help. 

 

There are too many names to mention, but I would like to 

publicly thank my campaign leadership team at this time. There 

was little political experience in the group, actually none, but 

loads of energy and loads of commitment: Bill Gowen, 

campaign manager, who did an outstanding job during the writ 

period; Candace Forrester, volunteer Chair, who staffed the 

campaign office with two volunteers for two shifts each day and 

found scrutineers for all 18 of my poll locations on e-day 

[election day] with the help of her husband Stu; James Hawkes, 

IT [information technology] Chair, and one of my most 

dependable door knockers; Bev Hanson, communications 

Chair; Keith Hanson, constituency president; Deborah Leavitt, 

office manager; Lorne Sheppard, get-out-the-vote Chair, with 

the help of Bev Hanson; Don Ravis, campaign advisor. 

 

My daughter, Monique, was my business manager. We had no 

idea of the work and time commitment that was involved with 

this position. Monique attended training sessions, helped with 

all events, door knocked for months, as well as looking after all 

the finances of the campaign, and now filing the candidate 

return of election expenses. She was so proficient that I think 

she could give workshops now to new business managers. All 

three of our daughters were capable door knockers by the end of 

this campaign. I feel truly blessed for the hard work of my 

campaign team and the support of each and every volunteer. 

 

My husband, Jim, was my sign Chair. He had assistance in 

putting up the lawn signs but looked after taking them down the 

day after the election by himself. But he was not only involved 

in lawn signs, he was involved in virtually every facet of the 

election campaign. He worked from my side for the entire 20 

months. If he was not out door knocking or engaged in other 

campaign tasks, he was at home walking the puppies or making 

meals, or cleaning the house. Words cannot express the 

appreciation I have for this man and all he did to support me. 

 

Though we do not share the same DNA, Jim occupies the most 

space in my heart and in my soul. He might be the biggest piece 

of the puzzle in my political story. 

 

In closing, Mr. Speaker, I came to the realization through my 

reflection that I’ve represented people in a number of ways all 

my adult life. My confidence and ability to manage budgets, 

make decisions based on common sense, participate effectively 

in debate, and be the voice for others had grown with each new 

leadership experience. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to share a prayer by Blessed John 

Henry Newman, a Roman Catholic theologian: 

 

God has created me to do Him some definite service; 



May 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 93 

He has committed some work to me which He has not 

committed to another. 

I have my mission — I never may know it in this life, but I 

shall be told it in the next. 

. . . I am a link in a chain, a bond of connection between 

persons. 

He has not created me for [nothing] . . . I shall do good 

[work], I shall do His work. 

 

The question: How did a girl like me end up in a place like this? 

The answer: How could I be anywhere else? 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is my pleasure to support the Speech from the 

Throne and the motion my colleague from Saskatoon Westview 

has made. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 

 

Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to publicly 

congratulate you on your new role as Speaker, and to 

congratulate the Deputy Speaker on his election as well. As you 

know, the role of Speaker is crucial to our democracy and the 

functioning of this Assembly and it plays a large role in 

maintaining order and decorum. That role is vitally important as 

it allows this Assembly to perform the duties required of all of 

us. The level of decorum also directly impacts the public’s 

confidence in this legislature. 

 

Today the task before us is to respond to the Throne Speech, but 

before I do that I hope that this Assembly will indulge me with 

some thank you remarks and a little background, as well as a 

description of the constituency that I stand here to represent. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is an honour to serve in this storied building and 

to be part of the history of this province. I remember fondly as 

an elementary student taking a tour of this Legislative Building. 

I did not dream at that time that I would be standing here today 

delivering this speech. I believe that I’m the first member 

elected to this Assembly to have attended Lang School. 

Remarkably, I’m one of five members to have graduated from 

Milestone High School. Another member sits across from me 

today, the member for Indian Head-Milestone, and I wish to 

congratulate him on his re-election. In fact, I would like to 

congratulate every member in this Assembly on their recent 

election victories, especially those elected for the first time. 

 

I can still scarcely believe my luck and privilege at being able to 

serve in this legislature. Regardless of our journey to this 

Assembly, none of us gets to serve without the hard work and 

sacrifice of many others, and I’m certainly no exception. 

 

I stand here today first because of the sacrifice and support of 

my family. My husband, Guy, and our three children, Hannah, 

Nolan, and Maya, have been patient and understanding as I 

embark on this journey into provincial politics. Like many 

families, our children are involved in dance and sports, as well 

as school and community activities. Guy has a demanding 

position as the national representative for CUPE [Canadian 

Union of Public Employees]. So even before this campaign our 

calendar was full and demanding, and we all know what the 

campaign brings. 

 

Guy did not hesitate to support me when I suggested that I was 

thinking of running for the nomination in Regina Lakeview, and 

he has been steadfast in his support ever since. He was also a 

pretty dedicated sign coordinator during the campaign. My 

children also got to know their way around a mail drop and 

even tried their hand at canvassing with me. And I hope that 

we’ve instilled in them a sense of the importance of our 

democratic process. I door knocked for almost a whole year 

prior to this election, and spent many evenings away. Mr. 

Speaker, to my family, I would like to say thank you for your 

love and support. Without them I would not be standing here 

today. 

 

I was also lucky enough to have, in my opinion, one of the best 

campaign teams in the province. Thank you to each of my team 

members: Matt, Lesley, Ryan, Chris, Sarah, and Tiffany. The 

polls on election night reflected all of their hard work, and they 

were a great group of people to get to spend every day with for 

a month. I truly enjoyed coming into the office every day. 

 

But I do want to single out my campaign manager, Donna 

Smith, for special praise. Going into this election neither Donna 

nor I had much election experience. With her hard work, 

dedication, and organizational skills, we managed to run a 

campaign that made it look like we knew what we were doing 

all along. Thank you, Donna. 

 

A sincere thank you also to the former member for Regina 

Lakeview, John Nilson, for all of his years of service to Regina 

Lakeview and to this province. I would also like to thank my 

opponents in the election, Dan Cooper for the Sask Party, Larry 

Neufeld for the Green Party, and Stewart Kerr for the Liberals. 

As candidates are prone to do, we often attended many of the 

same events. I’m pleased to say that our interactions were 

marked by respect and good humour throughout the campaign, 

and I thank each of them for their hard work. 

 

And I would be remiss if I did not thank my parents, Ray and 

Judy Beck, for their love and support during this election and 

throughout my life. My parents have never been partisan, but 

they did impart the importance of participation in our 

democracy. One of my favourite memories from the campaign 

was listening to my mom — my mom who would never tell 

anyone how she voted — calling up strangers on the phone to 

ask if they would be voting for me. And I distinctly remember 

as an 18-year-old my dad taking me to cast my very first ballot 

in a provincial election. It was in the Legion hall in Milestone in 

1991, and I was hooked. And I think we all remember the 

outcome of that election. 

 

My parents also modelled the importance of being involved in 

your community, of looking out for others, lending a hand or an 

ear or a shoulder when you can. They also instilled in me a deep 

sense of the importance of family. My brothers and I grew up 

on a mixed farm, grain and cattle with a whole lot of chickens 

thrown in. We spent our winters in the rink and our summers on 

the ball diamond. My parents were always coaching, in the 

booth, scorekeeping, and doing at least their part in making sure 

that the community that we lived in was thriving. Both have 

served on countless boards, put in thousands of volunteer hours. 

My mom served on the local school board, and my dad has been 

a councillor with the RM of Scott for over 23 years. They 

currently run an outfitting business, and my mom serves as a 



94 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2016 

lay minister with the United Church. 

 

My two brothers live in opposite corners of the southern part of 

this province, but they continue to be very involved in their 

communities. Blair and his wife, Tara, live in Carnduff with 

their four children. Blair is a school teacher and Tara is the 

community development officer. Regan and his wife, Meagan, 

live in Meadow Lake with their four children. Regan works for 

the Meadow Lake Tribal Council as the controller for NorSask, 

and Meagan is a speech and language pathologist with the local 

school division. 

 

The importance of community, volunteerism, and looking out 

for others is deeply ingrained in all of us. And I was so pleased 

to find those values strong and reflected in the community that I 

moved to when I moved into the Cathedral neighbourhood in 

Regina Lakeview over 20 years ago. The constituency that I 

represent, Regina Lakeview, is home to several diverse and 

thriving neighbourhoods and is home to a dynamic mix of 

people, businesses, and groups. 

 

The Cathedral Village, where I have lived since 1993, is a 

neighbourhood quite literally rebuilt around the arts. Once a 

declining neighbourhood, a group of dedicated citizens set 

about a plan to revitalize their community by banding together 

and embracing the arts community already present there. The 

result was the creation of one of the most vibrant communities 

in the city, with a thriving local business district along 13th 

Avenue, a busy community centre, and an active community 

association. And of course, the Cathedral Village Arts Festival 

which is celebrating its 25th year as we speak. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Regina Lakeview is also home, as you might guess, to the 

community of Lakeview. This vibrant community is served by 

the Lakeview Community Association. In Lakeview, 

community is built and supported through the LCA’s 

[Lakeview Community Association] offerings of recreational 

programs for adults and youth, community fun days, and the 

operation of the community outdoor rink. 

 

Lakeview is also home to the Hill business district complete 

with a local grocery store, restaurants, and local boutiques. 

Lakeview is home to many beautiful homes and a diverse array 

of architectural styles, and it’s well worth one’s time to take a 

heritage walking tour of either of these neighbourhoods. 

 

The constituency is also home to Normandy Heights, River 

Heights, and the River Heights shopping district. Other small 

business districts include the area along Albert Street and 

throughout the centre square. 

 

Regina Lakeview is also home to six elementary schools, one 

high school, and one alternative elementary school, Prairie Sky. 

In addition to the over a dozen churches, including the iconic 

Holy Rosary Cathedral, Westminster United, and St. Paul’s 

Greek Orthodox, Regina Lakeview is also home to Regina’s 

largest mosque, and the Sikh temple. All of these faith 

communities add to the fabric and the strength of this 

constituency. 

 

Regina Lakeview is also fortunate to be home to some of the 

most important public buildings and attractions in the city: the 

Royal Saskatchewan Museum, Darke Hall, the College Avenue 

campus of the U of R and Lifelong Learning Centre, the CBC 

[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] building, the 

under-utilized sound stage, Neil Balkwill Civic Arts Centre, 

Regina Senior Citizens’ Centre, and the cathedral community 

centre, as well as the Connaught Branch of the Regina Public 

Library. They’re all part of Regina Lakeview. 

 

Those who came before us invested in these public buildings 

and services and they contribute to the high quality of life that 

we enjoy there today. Opportunities for recreation and outdoor 

adventures abound in Regina Lakeview. Les Sherman Park, 

Kinsmen Park, Kiwanis Waterfall Park, Wascana Pool, the 

Lakeview Par 3 Golf Course, and a large portion of one of 

Canada’s largest and most beautiful urban parks, Wascana 

Centre, are all found in this constituency. The investment and 

ongoing support of these public assets contributes to the health 

and well-being of our community. 

 

An ancient Greek quote states, a society grows when old men 

and women plant trees under whose shade they know they shall 

never sit in. Thank you to all of those who literally and 

figuratively planted those trees under which we enjoy shade 

today. We need to embrace that forethought, that level 

selflessness and dedication to the future in this province today. 

 

Regina Lakeview is also home to several large seniors’ 

high-rises and I spent a lot of time there during the campaign. 

Unfortunately it was here that I also heard many stories about 

just how difficult it is to survive on a lower fixed income today 

in this province. And this leads me to my formal response to the 

Throne Speech. 

 

This Throne Speech, barely a mention was made of seniors, 

those who built our province. There is nothing to address what I 

heard on the doorsteps — seniors without adequate home care 

support. I spoke with seniors who had ill-fitting dentures and 

lapsed eyeglass prescriptions because they simply could not 

afford what it would cost to replace them. I will never forget 

one woman who told me that she simply does not walk by the 

meat aisle anymore in the grocery store because she can’t afford 

it. This woman, who worked her whole life in this province, 

simply goes without. And I literally heard hundreds of these 

stories on the doorstep, including from seniors who did not take 

their full prescription every day because they can’t afford the 

full dose of their medications. 

 

So when I hear this government boast about the strength of our 

province, I wonder why these voices are not reflected. I also 

wonder where the voices of children are in this Throne Speech. 

Between 2013 and 2014, food bank usage climbed by 19 

percent in Saskatchewan with the highest rate of increased 

usage being for children and seniors, I might add. In the middle 

of a boom, those most vulnerable were ushered to the food 

bank. Yet in the Throne Speech themed Keeping Saskatchewan 

Strong with the subtitle of a better quality of life, children are 

not mentioned once. Schools barely warrant a mention other 

than to refer to previously announced bills. The word education 

makes exactly one appearance. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the education system in this province is in turmoil. 

Years of uncertainty and underfunding have taken their toll. 



May 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 95 

This year’s delayed budget and lack of detail have led to a deep 

concern and tension within the sector. Our classrooms are 

growing, both in size and in intensity of need. We are at least 

five months behind on the latest promise for clarity on the 

funding model, and schools are struggling to make best-guess 

budgets so they can plan staffing and programming for next 

year. 

 

And amid all of this, what did this government do? They’ve 

cast further doubt and uncertainty by warning that our schools 

should expect difficult budget allocations and then using . . . 

After an election in which not a word was spoken of it, I might 

add, our Premier let slip that our schools can expect 

transformational change. This change was not even whispered 

to the public during the election, let alone to the 28 

democratically-elected school boards in this province who will 

be most directly affected. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our schools have experienced a great deal of 

change in the last eight years and they have met those 

challenges head-on as those who work in and around our 

schools are apt to do. However as one veteran school board 

employee recently told me, we are at a tipping point, at a 

tipping point, Mr. Speaker. We have experienced a decade-long 

boom that provided ample opportunity to invest meaningfully in 

our schools, our children, and our future. This government has 

had since 2009 to introduce a funding model that is transparent, 

predictable, and meets the needs of children in the classroom, 

but they have failed to do so. 

 

Education is the best opportunity that we have in a society to 

improve our chances for our children. It is one of the best tools 

to decrease inequality and to allow all children to meet their 

potential. It is our opportunity to plant the trees that I spoke of 

earlier, and the shade of those trees is represented in the 

opportunity to shape our future leaders, caregivers, innovators, 

and problem solvers for tomorrow. Yet this Throne Speech all 

but ignores education, and this is nothing short of shameful and 

it is terribly short-sighted. 

 

And speaking of short-sighted, we have this government’s 

musings on the environment and climate change. Like the rest 

of the world, Saskatchewan is facing very real challenges today, 

and we will continue to face challenges into the future. We 

must look no further than the recent forest fires and flooding 

events that have hit our province. We are losing the equivalent 

of 14 football fields of wetland every year in this province. 

Besides providing habitat for countless birds and animals, these 

wetlands act as natural filtration systems for our lakes and 

rivers. We continue to lose our native pasture lands at an 

alarming rate. Already one of the most endangered ecosystems 

in Canada, native pastures are home to over 30 species at risk. 

 

We have a history of stewardship over land and our natural 

resources in this province. Those were certainly the values that 

were instilled in me when I was growing up. But these 

challenges present a very real challenge for this province, yet 

this Throne Speech, we hear nothing about plans to address this 

situation. Instead we have a Premier who casts doubt on climate 

science and chastises those who would have us tackle the 

current climate realities head-on. He set up a false dichotomy 

between those who care about the environment and those who 

care about the economy, between those in the agriculture and 

resource sectors and those who want to find solutions to deal 

with climate change. This government seeks to pit neighbour 

against neighbour and they do so at the peril of both our 

economy and our natural environment. It is well past time that 

we tackle the challenges we face head-on in a consultative and 

open manner rather than trying to score cheap political points. 

 

When I was on the doorstep I was told many times that people 

are tired of wedge-issue politics. They want their leaders to 

earnestly seek to find long-term solutions to the issues that face 

us today. We can plan for the transition towards renewable 

energy sources today while still concerning ourselves with the 

very real impact that the downturn in the oil and gas sector has 

had on this province. In fact I believe that responsible 

governance requires us to do so to truly keep Saskatchewan 

strong and growing well into this century. 

 

I will agree with the Premier on this point: Saskatchewan is 

strong. We are a strong bunch of people and we have strong 

ideals and a strong history. We have strong traditions and 

overall we are very privileged to live in this place. As a 

province we’ve been especially blessed with an abundance of 

clean air, big skies, fertile farm land, natural resources, green 

spaces, forests, rivers, lakes, and wetlands. All of this is true but 

this is not the whole story. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I love this province. It is because I love this 

province that I cannot turn away from the full truth. As a social 

worker and front-line human service worker for over 20 years, 

it has been my privilege to work alongside the most vulnerable 

in our province. What has also been growing in this province 

unfortunately, along with the numbers that the Premier likes to 

tout, is inequality — the stark contrast between winners and 

losers in our province. 

 

Growing inequality has very real impacts on the society and not 

just for those who find themselves most challenged. Inequality 

impacts the economic well-being of the province. It can 

diminish the growth when large portions of the population are 

not fully using their skills and capabilities. 

 

Nowhere in this province is inequality and the failure to address 

inequality more pronounced than on First Nations and Métis 

communities. Yet again this Throne Speech is all but mute on 

that subject. While we have a crisis of mental health and 

violence in those communities, we hear nothing. The 

consequences of that silence are dire for all of us. Inequality 

undermines social cohesion and leads to increased social 

tensions. It undermines the health of all citizens and impacts 

rates of violence. And last but not least, high inequality raises 

moral questions about fairness and social justice. 

 

In 2013 I became the assistant director of a local women’s 

shelter. That year and the next we had a total of over 1,000 

women and children on our waitlist. In fact, Saskatchewan has 

the terrible distinction of having the highest rates of domestic 

violence and sexual assault out of all provinces. Yet there is no 

mention of plans to address this serious issue that affects all of 

our communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government did win a majority but they did 

not win the right to govern unopposed or without scrutiny. The 

opposition’s main role is to question the government of the day 



96 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2016 

and hold them accountable to the public. And we have the team 

to do that, this team that has achieved, for the first time in 

Saskatchewan’s history, gender parity. And I look forward to 

the opportunity to work collaboratively with this government on 

behalf of the people of Regina Lakeview when I can. 

 

And I also take very seriously our role in standing up when this 

government tries to pit neighbour against neighbour or tries to 

pick winners and losers. I will be voting against the Throne 

Speech but in favour of the proposed amendment. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Pasqua. 

 

Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a great 

honour to rise in this House on behalf of my constituents. Mr. 

Speaker, first I would like to congratulate all those returning 

and newly elected MLAs for their achievement on April 4th. I 

would also like to congratulate those across the floor, both new 

and returning MLAs. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to say thank you to the Regina 

Pasqua constituents for putting their trust in me and electing me 

their representative. In 2012 I decided to run for nomination 

after volunteering for numerous politicians in campaigns. I had 

the first-hand experience of excitement and work that goes into 

a political campaign. I was pleasantly surprised when I found 

out there would be a new constituency and saw it as my chance 

to run. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to give thanks to my family, my wife, 

Attia, and three sons, Ayaz, Kashif, and Arsalan, who helped 

me day and night for my nomination and for my election 

campaign. Saskatchewan is our home. Our one son Arsalan was 

born here in Regina. Mr. Speaker, we are happy to live in 

Regina and have our children attend school here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, thanks to my campaign manager, Trent Blazy, and 

my best friend, Waqar Bokhari, who was very determined and 

enthusiastic. Also to the members of my campaign, Jim, Dylan, 

Brittany, Lane, and Reed. These dedicated volunteers worked 

tirelessly door knocking, and some days they were in my 

campaign office from 8 a.m. till 11 p.m. These were long days, 

Mr. Speaker, but I want them to know how thankful I am for 

their dedication for my campaign. I also recognize the 

granddaughter of our member from Melville-Saltcoats. Her 

name is Brynn and she is 10 months old and she used to visit 

my campaign as a blessing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it has been a long journey to settle in 

Saskatchewan, as I migrated from Pakistan to Canada in July 

1995. When I first arrived in Canada, I lived in Toronto. While 

in Toronto, I was deciding to live somewhere else. I had friends 

living in Saskatchewan, Brian and Terry Fryklund. Brian was a 

retired police officer, and his wife, Terry, worked at SGI. They 

convinced me to come here. Mr. Speaker, they told me that 

Saskatchewan was the best place to live in this beautiful 

country and that it was second to no one. I took their words and 

my journey to Saskatchewan began. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Coming from a country where summer temperatures are usually 

between 47 to 52, living in Canada has been an adjustment, as 

even I found it, it was cold for me in July where the temperature 

was 22 or even 25 sometimes. But it wasn’t just the temperature 

I had to adjust with. In my previous country, there were massive 

violations of human rights. Mr. Speaker, since Canada is known 

as peacekeeping and generous ways, it was very easy for me to 

adopt these Canadian values, my values, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, what Canada gave to me was more than I thought 

it was possible. I was never allowed to vote in my previous 

country because of my faith. Moving to Canada, I was allowed 

to practise my faith the way I wanted to and I am practising 

now. And I now have the freedom of speech while knowing my 

family was protected. I owe Canada more than I can give back 

to Canadian people, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m thankful for the recognition I have received as 

the first Muslim MLA in Saskatchewan’s history. But, Mr. 

Speaker, I also want to be recognized as the MLA responsible 

for 23,000 people in my constituency. Regina Pasqua is the 

biggest constituency in Saskatchewan in population. I want to 

be recognized as the MLA responsible for these constituents, 

for the businesses, and for the schools in this area. 

 

I arrived in Saskatchewan in 2008. Since arriving, I had 

experienced very good employment, the lowest cost of living, 

and found great schools and teachers for my children. The 

citizens were friendly and welcoming. Mr. Speaker, I found 

Saskatchewan was the place for business and agriculture with a 

lot of credit go to farmers who seed, cultivate, and grow some 

of the best crops. They really do help feed the world. 

 

As seen in the Throne Speech, in 2015 Saskatchewan 

Agri-Food exports reached nearly 15.3 billion, surpassing the 

growth plan target of 15 billion in exports by 2020. When it 

comes to moving grain, our government is always on the front 

line and does it as quickly as humanly possible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to take this chance to express my 

happiness with the investment my government has made, most 

notably the twin schools in my constituency, which is a 

Catholic and public school. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my constituency is growing. It is growing because 

people want to live in Saskatchewan. I like to think of my 

constituency as representing some of Saskatchewan’s most 

interesting landmarks. For example we have Government 

House, the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] depot, and 

ever-growing Harbour Landing. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today Saskatchewan is better than yesterday, and 

tomorrow Saskatchewan is going to be better than today. Mr. 

Speaker, my government wants to keep Saskatchewan strong. 

We want to continue growing and building communities. My 

government is the government to do this. I support the Throne 

Speech and I am happy to be a part of this team as MLA for 

Regina Pasqua. 

 

I look forward to representing my constituents and thank them 

again for putting their trust in me. I would like to take this 

opportunity to congratulate one of my constituents, Wilf 

Perreault, as he is receiving the Saskatchewan Order of Merit 

tonight. He’s well deserving of this recognition. Thank you very 

much, Mr. Speaker. 



May 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 97 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Carlton. 

 

Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to thank 

my colleagues for the opportunity to speak in your House today. 

Also I would like to congratulate all the newly elected and the 

re-elected members from their victories in the election. And I’d 

like to congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, on your election as 

Speaker of this House. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I feel very proud and very privileged to be chosen 

by the people of Prince Albert Carlton on April 4th to represent 

them in this House. Mr. Speaker, I do commit to the people of 

Prince Albert Carlton, and all of the people of the city of Prince 

Albert, that I will serve them with integrity, with energy, and 

with all the skills that I have learned in my many years in 

business. 

 

Mr. Speaker, to run a campaign, be it successful or not, takes a 

great team of volunteers and, Mr. Speaker, I had a great team. I 

would like to take this opportunity to recognize some of those 

people that, without their help and support, it would not be 

possible for me to be here today. 

 

First and foremost, Mr. Speaker, is my wife, Fran. She’s my 

partner in life and for life in everything we do. She has worked 

by my side and every bit as hard as me in starting our 

businesses and growing our businesses to the level it has. She 

encouraged me to give my time and skills to help Prince Albert 

to be the best that it can be. Since my decision to run for this 

office in the summer of 2014, she has been by my side as my 

biggest supporter, my confidante, my adviser, my speech writer, 

and my biggest cheerleader. She is undoubtedly the love of my 

life, and I would not be here today without her. 

 

As well, Mr. Speaker, my four adult children and even my five 

grandchildren who are 7 and down supported my decision to 

run, and encouraged me to keep going. I’m so very proud of 

them all, Mr. Speaker, and I’m so thankful for their support. 

They worked hard for me throughout the months prior to the 

election, Mr. Speaker. They knocked doors. They did computer 

work. They did whatever was needed. 

 

I am so fortunate, Mr. Speaker, that all my children live within 

just mere blocks of me. They all chose to stay in Saskatchewan 

and contribute to make Prince Albert better and to keep 

Saskatchewan strong: my oldest son, Trent Hargrave, and his 

wife, Lisa, and their son Elias; my oldest daughter, Angela 

Weinrich, and husband, Joe, and their children, Noah and 

Layla; my son Colby and his wife, Becky, and their children, 

Hannah and Myles; and my youngest daughter, Jillian Bulych. I 

am so very proud of them all, Mr. Speaker, for the good people 

that they are and for the good they have done and will continue 

to do. I could never have asked for a better family. They are the 

lights of my life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I must also thank my team leader and campaign 

manager, Mr. Rick Orr, for his integrity, for his experience, but 

most of all for his friendship. He and his wife, Kathy, worked 

harder than I could have ever expected. He built and led an 

awesome team of dedicated people that gave unfailing support, 

people like Patty Hughes, Dave and Clara Fischl, Steve Jeffers, 

Harvey Agnew, Duane Hayunga, Neil Barnes, Skip Jerome, 

Cherie Rustula, Ed Zaparanuk, Brian Rindall, Joy Schewaga, 

and so many more. I am so thankful for all their hard work and 

for their ongoing support. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to thank my fellow Prince Albert 

Sask Party candidate, the former MLA for Prince Albert 

Northcote, Victoria Jurgens. Mr. Speaker, she unfortunately lost 

her seat in a very close race; however she worked tirelessly for 

her constituency for the past four years, and the past year also 

worked hard to help the constituents of Prince Albert Carlton. 

Mr. Speaker, she deserves our gratitude and respect. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many people came to me during the campaign and 

asked me why I am running for political office as I have several 

successful businesses and I’m slightly over 40 . . . over 50, I’m 

sorry, I’m slightly over 50. I would tell them I was not looking 

for a job or a retirement program, but I owe the success of my 

businesses to the people of Prince Albert, and I felt it was right 

to give back to my community by giving of my time and my 

skills that I have learned over my many years in business. It is 

my hope and my commitment, Mr. Speaker, that I will help 

Prince Albert be the best that it can be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, many years ago a very good friend of mine, Mr. 

Ted Knight from this very fine city, gave me some great advice 

that I truly believe in. He told me if you want to make a 

difference, Joe, you have to get involved. So that’s what I did, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I served on Prince Albert and District Community Futures 

board for 11 years where we lent out over $6 million to over 

120 small businesses, creating over 650 jobs. Now that, Mr. 

Speaker, makes a difference. 

 

I served on the Victoria Hospital Foundation Board for six 

years where we raised several million dollars to help the 

Victoria Hospital. That, Mr. Speaker, makes a difference. 

 

I served on the Prince Albert Board of Police Commissioners 

for three years, helping with the transition from a municipal 

board to a public board. Mr. Speaker, that makes a difference. 

 

I served on the economic development board, the chamber of 

commerce board, the Rotary Club of Prince Albert, the Hyundai 

national dealer advisory council, and the Chrysler dealers’ 

advertising association. 

 

I believe, Mr. Speaker, that I have helped make a difference in 

Prince Albert and now, Mr. Speaker, I want to make a bigger 

difference for Prince Albert by being involved, by being the 

MLA for Prince Albert Carlton, by being a member of this 

government who is committed to keeping Saskatchewan strong 

and moving this province forward. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as I am sure most members of this House know, 

elections take months of preparation as well as months of 

knocking on doors. All of this, Mr. Speaker, gave me great 

insight as to what the people of my constituency are thinking, 

and what they want to see from our government. 

 

It was more than evident, Mr. Speaker. They want to see the 

continued strong leadership that our Premier has demonstrated, 

a leader who continues to speak up for Saskatchewan’s 



98 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2016 

interests. They want to see continued economic growth that this 

province has shown under this government, a growth rate that 

has been the best economic growth rate in Canada from 2008 to 

2015. They want to see their taxes stay low as they have under 

this government, not being raised 21 times like they did under 

the NDP. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, they want to see the continued improvement 

and leadership in health care that this government has shown 

like hiring 650 more doctors and 3,000 more nurses of all 

designations, like investing in new hospitals throughout the 

province and not closing 52 hospitals like the NDP government 

did, like taking this province from the longest surgical wait 

times in Canada under the NDP government to the shortest 

surgical wait times in Canada under this government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

They want to see the record job creation that this government 

has overseen to continue in this province. They want to see 

continued investment in education of our youth that this 

government has shown since coming to power, where nearly $1 

billion has been invested in 40 brand new schools or 

replacement schools and 25 major renovations. They want to 

see the continued record investment in our highways, Mr. 

Speaker, that this government has shown. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk a bit about the city of Prince 

Albert. The city is the third largest city in this province and it 

has a very, very diverse community. It is the gateway to the 

many parks, lakes, and rivers of our beautiful northern half of 

the province. Prince Albert is also known to be a community of 

people who give tirelessly of their time to help others in need. 

 

I’m very pleased to mention, Mr. Speaker, that Prince Albert 

and specifically Prince Albert Carlton is home to two recipients 

of prestigious awards in 2016. Mr. Dale Ebert was recently 

awarded the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal and Mrs. Isabelle 

Impey who is the recipient tonight of the Saskatchewan award 

of merit. I as well as all the citizens of Prince Albert are very 

proud of them and the work that they do and have done. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, while Prince Albert has faced its up and downs 

over the years . . . But with this stronger economy overall that 

this province has enjoyed since this government took office, 

there has been solid economic growth in Prince Albert with 

both new and renewed businesses. Mr. Speaker, since 2007 the 

Prince Albert area has witnessed increased commercial 

expansion like the Cornerstone retail development, four new 

automotive dealerships, new chain restaurants, new hotels, new 

construction of existing businesses like Farm World, Redhead 

Equipment, and new Lakeland Ford, plus Pineview Terrace, 

Caleb seniors’ Village, Alfred Jenkins Field House, the Rotary 

Trail, and new SPCA [Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to 

Animals] and many, many more. That, Mr. Speaker, that has 

meant new jobs in Prince Albert and many more new 

businesses are looking to locate in Prince Albert because now, 

Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert is getting known as a place to do 

business. 

 

Our government has shown its commitment to Prince Albert as 

well, Mr. Speaker. To the city, Mr. Speaker, this government 

has shown a 156 per cent increase in municipal revenue 

sharing; a 231 per cent increase in municipal police grants; $37 

million in infrastructure to both the Prince Albert Correctional 

Centre and the Pine Grove Correctional Centre, Mr. Speaker; $3 

million for the green energy park; $16 million for water 

treatment plant and reservoir upgrade; 6.8 million upgrade to 

the Diefenbaker bridge and roads; $62 million investment in 

twinning of the Highway 11 between Saskatoon and Prince 

Albert, Mr. Speaker, and God knows how many lives that has 

saved; a commitment to participating on the P3 [public-private 

partnership] model to construction of a second bridge in Prince 

Albert, Mr. Speaker, that this government will live up to. 

 

In the area of health care, Mr. Speaker, our government has 

given $2 million for the planning and renewal of the Prince 

Albert Victoria Hospital; $85 million increase in funding for the 

P.A. [Prince Albert] Parkland Health Region; 18.2 million for 

the 60-bed, long-term care facility, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In the area of social services, Mr. Speaker, this government has 

invested $40 million to develop over 300 rental and homeowner 

units and repair more than 400 homes — that’s the equivalent 

of eight city blocks just in Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Almost $1 million for the Habitat for Humanity and the great 

work that they do, Mr. Speaker. And a solid increase in funding 

for the women’s shelter. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in the area of education, the government has again 

contributed to investment in our youth. Total pre-K to 12 capital 

allocation is $35.2 million. We’ve added over 370 child care 

spaces and we’ve added 14 pre-kindergarten programs. And 

investments, major investments in Carleton High School and St. 

Anne’s School. Mr. Speaker, it is very clear that this 

government will continue to show its commitment to our great 

city. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my father was born in a soddie near Beechy, 

Saskatchewan. And like many of his era, he served his country 

proudly and bravely on many fronts in World War II. While 

losing many friends overseas, he was fortunate to come home. 

It was these brave men and women, like my father, that were 

prepared to give their lives, and those that gave their lives. They 

gave us the freedoms that we all have today: the freedom of 

speech, the ability to debate different beliefs and ideals like we 

do in this House, the ability to vote in a democratic election like 

we did on April 4th. We owe all our veterans our great respect, 

because freedom is not free. Mr. Speaker, freedom, it comes at 

a very high cost. And thank you to all of our veterans who 

know that all too well. 

 

My father’s picture, along with his medals, hang very proudly 

in my office in this very building. When my father returned 

from World War II, he met and married my mother, and they 

spent their next 64 years together. Mr. Speaker, my father spent 

most of his working life farming, then as a grain buyer for the 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. My brother, three sisters, and I were 

raised in the small, small farming town of Chelan, in the 

northeast part of the province. As the youngest of five, it was 

my job to run for water. That was all we had, was me running 

down the basement for water. And it got a little cold in the 

winter when we had to go to the bathroom, Mr. Speaker. 

 



May 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 99 

My parents taught us that what defines us as a person is our 

faith, our morals, our integrity, our work ethic, our commitment 

to our family, and our commitment to our community, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m so proud to call Saskatchewan my 

home and I’m so happy to see the positive change in attitude 

from the way things used to be under the complacent, defeatist 

attitude of the former NDP governments to that of the new, 

positive, open-for-business model of our government, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

We have seen that attitude continue with the Speech from the 

Throne, Mr. Speaker. This party did not make a lot of costly 

promises during the election, like the NDP did, but we did 

commit to keep Saskatchewan strong by keeping the economy 

strong, by keeping the province’s finances strong, and by 

standing up for Saskatchewan interests, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our government will continue to make major 

investments in infrastructure like highways, hospitals, schools, 

and long-term care facilities. Our government is not interested 

in closing schools and hospitals like the previous government. 

Our government, Mr. Speaker, will continue to implement new 

ideas to reduce wait times in the health field like expanding the 

model used with the MRIs to include CT scans. And, Mr. 

Speaker, our government will continue its support for seniors 

and seniors’ care by reducing health region administration cost 

and redirecting that savings to front-line seniors health care 

workers. 

 

This Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, I believe shows our 

government’s commitment to Saskatchewan to keep 

Saskatchewan strong. It demonstrates our commitment to being 

fiscally responsible so that future generations can benefit. Mr. 

Speaker, this is the footprint that my government chooses to 

leave as their legacy, and not one that leaves subsequent 

governments to clean up their mess. Mr. Speaker, that is why 

I’m supporting the motion put forward by the member from 

Saskatoon Westview and oppose the amendment. Thank you 

very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

University. 

 

Mr. Olauson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wish to 

thank my colleagues for this welcome. I am humbled by the 

opportunity to represent the constituents of Saskatoon 

University during this twenty-eighth sitting of the legislature. I 

am pleased to offer my support to the Speech from the Throne, 

but first I’d like to take a few moments to recognize some of the 

people whose help and support enabled me to be here. 

 

Mr. Speaker, since the beginning of this journey, my partner, 

DonnaLyn Thorsteinson, has been my source of strength and 

encouragement. I am sure all members can confirm that running 

for public office is not for those faint of heart. Perhaps no one 

knows this more than our spouses.  

 

Since my nomination 18 months ago and throughout the 

election period, my partner has been by my side, and I want to 

sincerely thank her for that. She has taken on every role that has 

been asked of her: mother, manager, scheduler, volunteer, cook, 

and supporter. Without her, I would say that the task would 

have been very daunting and perhaps even insurmountable. 

Every person who runs for office knows that we are but the tip 

of the iceberg, the part that people see. But we all know that 90 

per cent of the iceberg is under water and most of the work is 

done behind the scenes. DonnaLyn has been that part and much 

more of the iceberg. Thank you, and I love you very much. 

 

To my mom, Joan Olauson, who has the amazing ability to both 

keep my spirits up and yet take me down that notch when I 

needed it to keep me humble, thank you. It is going to be a 

tremendous journey, and I love that she’s a part of it. She has 

been the rock my entire life, and I know that without her and 

her support, this journey would have been very different. She 

has been able to keep all four of us kids on the straight and 

narrow, and we’ve all kind of turned out all right. For her 

leadership and her . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Kind of. For 

her leadership and her strength, I thank her from the bottom of 

my heart. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if there’s one job in the world that supersedes all 

others, it’s the role of parent. I have the good fortune of being 

the father of four great kids. They are all unique and special to 

me in their own way, but I can tell you that I couldn’t have done 

any of this without their love and support. Connor’s my oldest, 

and he’s 18. He’s graduating this June from Walter Murray 

Collegiate, I hope, and will be entering the AST [automotive 

service technician] program at Sask Polytechnic. Connor has 

been a source of immense pride and joy for me. He’s always 

willing to lend a hand, be a support, and do the job that needs to 

be done. 

 

As a parent, it’s such a blessing to hear someone else praise 

your child. This happened on election day as one of our 

volunteers told me just how proud I should be to have Connor 

as my son. He was polite, courteous, and very helpful. Although 

you hope you’ve succeeded as a parent, you’re never quite sure 

how good a job you’ve done until you hear from someone else. 

I’m very proud of him. 

 

Our three youngest children attend my alma mater, École 

Cardinal Leger School. Thankfully, the teachers and 

administrators are all new since I attended, or our kids probably 

wouldn’t be able to catch a break. I spent a little bit of time in 

the office when I was attending there. 

 

Abigail is 11, in grade 6. Although it isn’t cool to like anything 

your parents do, Abby thinks this politics stuff is pretty neat. 

She’s also a good humbler as she takes me down a peg 

whenever my ego gets too big. She reminds me that it’s hard 

work, not showmanship, that is the true value of a leader and 

that in order to be a success, hard work is the only path. I 

enjoyed walking and talking with her all those evenings on the 

doorsteps. It was a special kind of bonding time for us, and I 

love her for sharing her time with me. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Danielle is 10 and in grade 5. She’s quite the kid. 

Very smart and athletic, she’s always willing to jump in with 

both feet into any challenge. Whether it was trying to say 

everyone’s name exactly right while we were out door knocking 

or being at every rally asking a million questions, Danielle was 

there for me. She’s a special kind of cheerleader. Having 

someone that young who is so engaged is also very humbling, 

and I love her for that. 

 



100 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2016 

Rebecka is the youngest. She is 8 and in grade 3 in Ms. 

Shappert’s class. Her class is super fun, and I visited a few 

times during the last year, Mr. Speaker. Becks is a cutie and 

was a good worker throughout our whole campaign. She had 

some very good questions and concerns that were very well 

thought out, and sometimes really hard to answer. I’m sure 

she’ll make many trips to her legislature in the next four years, 

and I hope I’m up for that. She is smart and inquisitive, and I 

love her for that. 

 

To my team under the leadership of my campaign Chair, 

Michael Couros, I was truly blessed by your hard work and 

support. Your notes of encouragement and endless efforts mean 

more to me than you can imagine. Our team included a large 

youth component that were so exuberant to the cause, kept the 

whole team energized and, for many of them, voting for the first 

time only confirmed why I made the decision to run for public 

office. 

 

Mr. Speaker, all of us know that it is very humbling to have 

people, some of who you have never met, come out and 

volunteer to help you get elected. Every time we would head 

out the door for knocking, even in the dead of winter, there was 

someone giving up their time to move forward our goal. So 

thank you to the Saskatoon University board and all of our 

volunteers, some of who I am sure I’m going to miss here, but 

I’m going to try anyway. Here we go. So there was Ron, 

Sophie, Edna, Sharon, Al, Gerald, Bev, Iris, Judy, Rod, Elias, 

Preston, Angie, Nick, Mary, Randy, Lauren, Tiffany, Eden, 

Rhode, Katie, Preston, Ross, Monica, Lana, Frank, Thomas, 

Mahad, Winston, and Zach. I’m truly blessed for all you have 

done and all you will do for me. Mr. Speaker, I believe we are 

the only constituency who had volunteers ranging from two to 

over 101 years of age. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could never express enough my sincere gratitude 

to the people of Saskatoon University who have given me their 

support and their trust. I give them my word to do all that I can 

to represent them with the respect and honour they deserve. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my journey began not unlike many others. I was 

born in Saskatoon, raised and educated in College Park. I am 

the son of teachers. My father was an elementary school 

principal in Saskatoon for 28 years and retired in 1997. My 

mother was a teacher for 27 years and retired in 2003. We were 

never rich, but we never went without anything either. Summers 

were spent at Chitek Lake where my family built a cabin in 

1977.  

 

I am the oldest of four siblings. My oldest sister, Claire, is a 

teacher in Calgary with her husband, Cam. She is the mother of 

two super kids, Bridget and Henry. My brother, Glen, works for 

Revenue Canada with his wife, Jennifer, and is the father to 

three great kids: Anna, Sophia, and Joseph. My youngest sister, 

Erin, lives in Calgary and is a geological engineer and project 

manager. We were all blessed with great parents who always 

had us as their first priority. 

 

Mr. Speaker, after high school I was one of the fortunate ones 

who got to stay here and attend post-secondary education. 

Many, many others in my graduating class at Holy Cross High 

School received luggage for graduation and headed to Alberta. 

That’s what we did back then. We graduated and headed west 

because there just weren’t opportunities here. 

 

I entered the U of S [University of Saskatchewan], expecting to 

go into education because my parents had, and I hoped that in 

four years I could graduate and use my dad’s pull to get me a 

job in Saskatoon. That was my goal. That was my hope. I was 

very short sighted but I was like everyone else here — think 

small, don’t shoot high, and settle because you had to. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I quickly recognized, and the university 

recognized for me, that it just wasn’t going to happen. So I 

enrolled, Mr. Speaker, in the recreation and leisure diploma 

program at Kelsey SIAST [Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology] institute. I thought if I was going to 

work at something for the rest of my life, then I’d better enjoy 

it. 

 

I graduated in 1993 with my diploma and I got set to set the 

world on fire. However, Saskatoon and indeed Saskatchewan 

had a different take on things. There was no opportunities here. 

It was as if everyone had given up on Saskatchewan and its 

people. 

 

[16:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was pathetic. The first job I was offered was in a 

small town close to Saskatoon, and I remember some of the 

conditions of employment. I had to move to the town. I had to 

buy a house there. My contract would be for one-year terms 

only, and I had to fundraise half of my salary. This was in 1994, 

Mr. Speaker, and I was going to be the recreation director. That 

simply wasn’t possible. 

 

So I worked two jobs, Mr. Speaker, until our first child was 

born. Then I was fortunate enough to only have to work one, 

and referee hockey on the side in the winter. That’s what it took 

to stay in this province, Mr. Speaker. Those nights travelling to 

Macklin, Blaine Lake, Hafford, and Wakaw, among others, in 

the dead of winter to referee was extra money that helped put 

food on the table. We met a lot of good, hard-working people 

on those nights and we had a lot of fun, but it didn’t have to be 

that way. 

 

I got my start in trucking in 1998, Mr. Speaker. Starting small 

and working my way up, I eventually landed a pretty good role 

at a mid-sized family trucking firm in Saskatoon. Things were 

starting to look up, but not as big as they could have been. Most 

of our clients were still in Alberta and west. They were the 

companies ordering equipment and supplies. They were 

prospering. Saskatchewan was barely holding its own. We were 

treading water. We were exporting very little and importing 

even less. All the freight went to Alberta and hardly any was 

coming to Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that all changed around 2007. All of a sudden, Mr. 

Speaker, our economy started to grow. People started to move 

here. Jobs were being created. We became a have province 

instead of always depending on others. Our attitude became 

very different. No longer did we envy others for their success, 

but we asked ourselves, how do I do that too? It used to be 

when our neighbour bought a new car or truck, the first things 

that we said were things like show-off, or boy I wish I could 

afford something like that, or where did he get the money for 



May 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 101 

that? Now people were seeing the new vehicles or houses or 

new clothing, and saying, good for him. I want that, and how 

can I get it? What do I need to do to have what he has? We 

became happy for others and proud of our province. Mr. 

Speaker, it was about time. 

 

Mr. Speaker, as our family grew and I became more involved in 

our community, I found it hard to sit on the sidelines. Our 

community was in need of some lights in our park that would 

help light the walking path for our seniors and our new moms, 

so I joined the East College Park Community Association, and 

we set out to make this a reality. Our small community raised 

over $32,000 to get those lights, and they were installed in 

2012. 

 

Along the way it was noted that our city councillor would be 

retiring that year and wouldn’t run for re-election. So I decided 

to take the opportunity to help not only our community but our 

city as a whole. Through a lot of dedicated volunteers, my 

campaign Chairs Joceline Schreimer and Gary Broste, I was 

elected in October 2012 to Saskatoon City Council, 

representing the fine folks of ward 8. 

 

For a first-time politician it was like drinking water from a 

firehose, Mr. Speaker. It was an excellent opportunity and I 

would never trade it for anything, but it was a lot of information 

very fast. I enjoyed helping people, and being a municipal 

leader is as close to the people as you can get. Whether it was 

talking about roads, snow, potholes, or taxes, everyone has an 

opinion about what you should do and has no problem sharing 

that opinion. The public is very engaged in everything that is 

done, so you have to be in front of them as much as possible. I 

loved the experience of being so close to the citizens and being 

in the trenches helping people. 

 

I enjoyed and respected my colleagues on city council. They 

didn’t agree with me all the time, but they all wanted the best 

for the city. I also enjoyed working with the staff at city hall. 

They are all good people who have the city’s best interest at 

heart and I look forward to working with them again, although 

in a different capacity. Saskatoon has many needs and I will 

advocate for them once again, just from a different perspective. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there is no question that it is our Premier and this 

government that has been investing in cities, from record 

infrastructure investments to a 173 per cent increase in revenue 

sharing from when the Sask Party first formed government. 

That translates to an increase of sharing from 17.8 million in 

2007-2008 to 48.5 million in 2016-17. I know first hand that 

our government is the right partner for our municipalities. 

 

When I started my political journey, Mr. Speaker, I had only 

one objective: make Saskatoon and Saskatchewan a better place 

for our children and our grandchildren. I wanted my kids to be 

able to get their education here, enjoy a career here, and retire 

here, period. I don’t ever want them to have to make the 

decisions and the choices I did when I was younger. If they 

want to stay here, raise a family here, and retire here, I want 

them to have that choice. And we are quickly achieving that 

goal. Saskatchewan is now not the place to be from; it is truly 

the place to be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another big piece of Saskatoon University is the 

University of Saskatchewan. I believe you and all my fellow 

colleagues can attest to the world-renowned and reputable 

school that our University of Saskatchewan is. The U of S holds 

membership in the U15, which is a group of the top 15 research 

universities in Canada — highly impressive indeed. 

 

Students in Saskatchewan know that the Saskatchewan Party 

values their talent and has taken several measures to ensure they 

thrive in this province. The benefits are rewarding long after 

graduation. High school graduates who attend a post-secondary 

institution are eligible to receive monies toward their tuition. 

Post-secondary funding has increased on average, Mr. Speaker, 

over seven and a half per cent per year or over 61 per cent since 

2007. As well our popular graduate retention program is to be 

enhanced as promised in our election platform. This contrasts 

the NDP record from when they were in government when they 

increased funding for post-secondary institutions by just 20 per 

cent over 16 years, Mr. Speaker, an average increase of just 

over 1 per cent per year. 

 

One of U15’s principles is advocating an open, honest approach 

to tackling complex issues, engaging all points of view, and 

making difficult decisions. Mr. Speaker, U15’s principle 

perfectly describes our Premier, our party, and our mandate. 

Our Premier is the envy of the country. While many 

neighbouring provinces are struggling with high 

unemployment, market uncertainty, and job loss, our Premier is 

innovative, well respected, and forward thinking. We can all 

sleep a little better at night knowing he has our best interests at 

heart and will make those difficult decisions that other leaders 

either neglect or overcorrect, which often leaves those most 

vulnerable picking up the pieces. 

 

Speaking of fixing past mistakes, Mr. Speaker, under the 

leadership of the NDP, residents in Saskatchewan saw their 

taxes raised 21 times in their 16 years of power, including 

raising the PST [provincial sales tax] four times and the gas tax 

twice, while our party has steadfastly delivered record property 

tax reductions and record income tax reductions. Mr. Speaker, 

it’s no wonder Saskatchewan so overwhelmingly chose the 

Sask Party to represent them at home and on the world stage 

just a short month ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, some other notable institutions of Saskatoon 

University is Royal University Hospital and the new children’s 

hospital. One simply does not go through life without using the 

services of a hospital, specialist, or a lab, either for themselves 

or for a family member. We are fortunate to be able to walk into 

a hospital and receive world-class care. The children’s hospital 

of Saskatchewan will be a tremendous addition to our suite of 

health care options. 

 

I have a niece with special needs, Mr. Speaker. People like 

Anna will no longer have to spend so much time away from 

home to get the treatment they need. From my family’s 

experience, treatment closer to home would have relieved some 

of the extra stress that is incurred by all who have to take time 

away from work, hire additional child care, pay for 

accommodations away from home, and not sleep in their own 

beds. This is an important facility, Mr. Speaker, not only for the 

patients but for their families as well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne that we are debating 



102 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2016 

here today shows that our government can be trusted. We are 

keeping the promises we made during the election. During the 

campaign, the Premier and our party made measured promises 

to help keep Saskatchewan strong. This contrasted with the 

NDP’s platform where they had hundreds of millions in 

uncosted promises. We are going to move forward, not back. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to note a few of the items from the 

Throne Speech that are going to have a positive and lasting 

impact on my constituents. By introducing a new patent box tax 

incentive, the first of its kind in North America, to create jobs 

and investment through the commercialization of patents and 

intellectual property in Saskatchewan, we will foster the 

entrepreneurial spirit that is very much alive here in 

Saskatchewan like nowhere else in the world. I think we’ll see a 

lot of ideas coming from Innovation Place at the U of S campus, 

and I look forward to supporting those initiatives with this new 

tax incentive, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Expanding the two-for-one model recently introduced for MRI 

scans to also include CT scans is another 

made-in-Saskatchewan initiative that can only ensure that 

people get timely diagnostic care. This is another win-win for 

Saskatchewan people and another great selling point when 

people are looking at moving to our province. As our 

population ages, it is important for our government to ensure 

that not only are our seniors cared for but the people providing 

that care have proper supports as well. Amending The 

Saskatchewan Employment Act to ensure that those caring for a 

family member in the final stages of life will be eligible for 28 

weeks of leave per year is a common sense initiative that fits 

well into the continuum of care and growth plan that our 

government has followed these past eight years. 

 

Through all these initiatives we will work to keep the economy 

strong, to keep the province’s finances strong, and to keep 

Saskatchewan’s place in Canada strong by always standing up 

for Saskatchewan’s interests. Whether you have just started 

growing your family and are requiring child care, moving out 

for the first time, sending children to school, or supporting an 

elderly loved one who is transitioning into long-term care, our 

party is the only party that can be trusted to ensure 

Saskatchewan remains strong and continues to benefit its 

residents. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne was a document that 

I’m prepared to support and keep Saskatchewan strong. It is 

without hesitation that I support the motion by the member 

from Saskatoon Westview, seconded by the member from 

Estevan, in supporting the Speech from the Throne. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — I’d like to thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Thank you very much. I’m very honoured to get into the debate 

on the Speech from the Throne and join my colleagues in the 

support from the member from Saskatoon Westview on this 

huge step forward for Saskatchewan and the people of 

Saskatchewan. We have been given a huge honour here, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and to keep moving Saskatchewan forward, to 

be able to move the province into the potential that we’ve 

always seen within our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But before I get into the Speech from the Throne, I have to 

thank a few people. And certainly, first and foremost, I have to 

thank my family, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it 

is my wife and my children who are there to be able to support 

me, as my son has just recently reminded me that I’ve missed a 

few hockey games and I’ve missed a few of my daughter’s 

events as well. I miss a lot of things as all members do, being 

able to serve for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, but it is a difficult choice to serve the people of 

Saskatchewan. And as the member from P.A. Carlton had just 

said, it’s a service that we do this. I can tell you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, we don’t do this for the money. There are other 

opportunities out there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We do get 

compensated very well as MLAs but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 

do this because it’s more of a calling for ourselves to be able to 

improve Saskatchewan and to be able to take Saskatchewan into 

a place where we see it being for now and into the future. 

 

There are a few other people I want to thank, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. My campaign manager, Dan Wiks, and his wife, 

Arlene Wiks, who were instrumental in helping me get elected 

in 2011 and getting me re-elected, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They 

were absolutely fabulous, couldn’t have got elected without 

them. They organized the team, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They 

created some fundraisers for me. They really help. And none of 

us would be here without the people in behind them, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, to be able to step forward, put our names 

forward. But the people of Saskatchewan only get to see the 

members that are elected . . . 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It now being 5 o’clock, this House 

stands recessed till 7 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 

 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

Duncan ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 71 

Chartier ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 71 

Kaeding ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 71 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

Forbes .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 71 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

Carbon Capture and Storage Technology 

Carr .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 71 

National Fiddling Day 

Sproule ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 72 

Multiple Sclerosis Awareness Month 

Bonk ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 72 

Biju and Thingyan Celebration 

Sarauer ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 72 

Provincial Fossil Chosen 

Steele ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 73 

Family First Radiothon in Moose Jaw 

Michelson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 73 

JDC West 2016 Business Competition 

Beaudry-Mellor ........................................................................................................................................................................... 73 

QUESTION PERIOD 

SaskTel Risk Assessment 

Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................... 73 

Wall .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 74 

SaskPower Rate Increases 

Sproule ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 74 

Boyd ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 74 

Prevention of Domestic Violence 

Sarauer ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 75 

Wyant ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 75 

Education Funding and Government Consultations 

Beck .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 76 

Morgan ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 76 

Funding for Post-Secondary Education 

McCall ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 77 

Moe ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 77 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

Bill No. 1 — The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 2016 

McMorris ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 78 

Bill No. 2 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Crown Corporations’ Fiscal Year End Standardization) Amendment Act, 2016 

McMorris ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 78 

Bill No. 3 — The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2016 

Morgan ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 78 

Bill No. 4 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 

Wyant ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 79 

Bill No. 5 — The Electronic Information and Documents Amendment Act, 2016 

Wyant ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 79 

Bill No. 6 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 

Wyant ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 79 

Bill No. 7 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 (No. 2)/Loi n
o
 2 de 2016 modifiant le droit législatif 

Wyant ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 79 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

Standing Committee on House Services 

McCall ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 79 

TABLING OF COMMUNICATION 

The Speaker ................................................................................................................................................................................. 79 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

Chartier ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 80 



 

  Duncan ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 80 

  Nerlien ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 84 

  Dennis .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 86 

  Lambert ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 89 

  Beck .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 93 

  Fiaz ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 96 

  Hargrave ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 97 

  Olauson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 99 

  Merriman .................................................................................................................................................................................. 102 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


