






















































Hansard: October 31, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 33B  MONDAY, OCTOBER 31, 2016, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (Ind.) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10; Independent (Ind.) — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 993 
 October 31, 2016 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, we’ll call the 
House to order. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 1 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 1 — The 
Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 2016 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
want to right off the bat wish everybody at home a happy 
Halloween. Here we are on October 31st stuck in this . . . I 
shouldn’t say . . . this Chamber. 
 
We could be out handing candies. But you know, I think about 
all those orange pumpkins out there and people are looking at 
them and saying, that’s a great thing. And if people are out 
trick-or-treating, kids are out trick-or-treating, first I hope 
they’re all safe and sound and doing well. But you know, for 
the people of Saskatchewan when I think about Bill No. 1, An 
Act to amend The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act, 
is that a trick or is that a treat? I have to tell you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I have big question marks about that, and I tell people 
in Saskatchewan, be wary, be wary. 
 
This is just a one-line, one-line piece of legislation. And I’ll 
read that as “Subclause 2(b)(ii) of The Crown Corporations 
Public Ownership Act is repealed.” But we all know, we all 
know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one line leads to another. One line 
leads to another. 
 
And of course here we have 2(b)(ii). That is The Liquor and 
Gaming Authority Act, and then we just go through the list. So 
we are very, very worried on Halloween night. It’s a big 
question mark. Is it a trick or is it a treat? 
 
I don’t think this bill is any treat for Saskatchewan. I think it’s a 
big trick, a big trick. It’s a Trojan Horse that leads to bigger, 
bigger issues. And I have to tell you that I am deeply, deeply 
concerned. So all those folks who are watching this in between 
kids ringing the doorbell saying trick-or-treat, be wary because 
Bill 1 is just leading to things like Bill 40, and we’ve got big, 
big question marks. 
 
Now before 5 o’clock and we had that time, there’s some 
comments I made about innovation and the Internet. And I’ll 
come back to that because I know the members opposite are 
very clear about wanting me to set the record straight, to set the 

record straight. And I did say some things that I need to 
straighten the record on. 
 
But I did want to say that I am deeply concerned, on a serious 
note, and we are deeply concerned on this side about Bill No. 1. 
I said before the House wound up for the supper hour that in 
many ways this, the fact that it’s the first bill of their term as 
government . . . And they did win a mandate and we accept that, 
but what a vision to set forward in Bill No. 1. Bill No. 1 is 
fixing up their financial mess that they had created by 
mismanagement of the very strong years this province had 
record revenues, and they had mismanaged those years. And 
here we are, here we are in their third term fixing up those 
mistakes. 
 
But it’s sort of like a double-edged sword here. Part of it is 
mismanagement, and we can talk about their fiascos, scandals 
that they’ve had, whether it be lean and hiring international 
consultants at an outrageous price. Or we can talk about the 
GTH [Global Transportation Hub] and the scathing reports by 
the auditor and many, many unanswered questions that remain 
and that they don’t seem willing to be as transparent and as 
accountable as once they said they would be, once they said 
they would be. And they said they’d be different than anyone 
else because they would be accountable for their actions. But, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we haven’t seen that. We haven’t seen that 
happen. And in fact we’ve seen a government who has been 
stubborn, stubborn in their ways about being accountable for 
the kind of mismanagement we have. 
 
And of course I haven’t talked about . . . I talked a little bit 
about this earlier before the supper hour, and people just tuning 
in now, be well aware of this. Of course, the Finance minister 
who has yet to table the first quarter financial reports of this 
province, saying there’s not much to see. We are deeply 
concerned about that. When someone says there’s not much to 
see, you know, there’s the old saying, where there’s smoke, 
there’s fire. And of course . . . [inaudible] . . . saying it’s not 
much to see, I bet there’s a lot to see. So we’re waiting for the 
second quarter. But I can just bet, in fact, Mr. Speaker, I can 
just bet that it will be released in early December after we have 
risen for the holiday break, the Christmas break. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, one of the books . . . I’m very 
interested in this. This is called Superforecasting: The Art and 
Science of Prediction. This is one of the books the library had 
sent around in their flyer last week, and I thought it would be 
very interesting. How can people predict the future here in 
Saskatchewan? What can you think of, what holds for us in the 
next four years in terms of this government? 
 
Well it doesn’t take a rocket scientist to figure out that we’re 
going to see more and more of this kind of privatization. Bill 1 
is just the first of many to come, I’m thinking. Now don’t . . . 
You can call me a superforecaster if you want, but I bet a dollar 
that we’ll see more of this when you start to see Bill 1 and its 
companion piece, Bill 40, these two tools in the tool kit that this 
government is putting out about how they can get quick, easy 
money to fix their financial problems. And they forget about the 
mess. They forget about what that means in the long run for a 
province like ours in Saskatchewan. 
 



994 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2016 

And whether it’s a Liquor and Gaming Authority selling off 40 
of its liquor stores in a variety of communities, whether they be 
a smaller communities of 3 or 400, 500 people up to, in the city 
of Saskatoon. And in fact in my own riding, in Riversdale, 
there’s a centre in the Riversdale neighbourhood, one of the 
liquor board stores is for sale, I believe. And so you have the 
whole gamut here. And so it really, really does cause us a lot of 
concern. 
 
And so while they may think this is a straightforward and a 
done deal . . . And they did, they did campaign on this. This is 
one thing that we did know about before the election, but we 
did not know about Bill 40 before the election. Nobody knew 
about it. So this is the thing that’s going to be happening that 
causes people concern. 
 
If this was going to be . . . They were out there talking about 
this. And we had the debate, and of course we believe that we 
can modernize and make the liquor stores more attractive for 
customers, do what we can, thinking about how we can make 
them competitive, that they would continue to serve the 
purposes that they do in our province, selling liquor in a 
responsible manner, a socially conscious manner, and yet at the 
same time providing a return on their investments to the people 
of Saskatchewan and creating meaningful employment 
throughout the province with well-paying jobs, well-paying 
union jobs. And we know that if it’s a union job, that quite often 
that means there are pensions involved, there are benefits 
involved, that type of thing. But if it’s non-unionized, quite 
often that’s not the case, that there aren’t benefits, there aren’t 
pension plans, and people are reliant on CPP [Canada Pension 
Plan] and that type of thing. 
 
So this bill has a lot of concerns for us and what does it really 
mean for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I just want to take a minute. I was talking about why 
SaskTel was such an important Crown corporation. And it’s 
further down the list; it is about four down the list. And as I 
said, if you remove one line, then you’ve got one line that leads 
to another. And then there is no reason why they might think, 
well it’s pretty easy to take out one. Why don’t we take out 
another? 
 
But I was talking about innovation. And I do want to say that if 
the members across the way, if they did happen to look up what 
Archie was when I was talking about, I was talking about 
innovation and the Internet and what all of, you know, in the 
early days, in the ’90s, of the Internet, even before graphics and 
images were on the Internet and it was all text. It was all text 
and this FTP, file transfer protocol. There were search engines 
involved, and I was reminiscing, when I was a teacher, about 
how SaskTel was quite actively involved. And so I just want to 
set the record straight. There was such a thing as Archie search 
engine. 
 
And interestingly, if I can just educate everyone here, this was 
developed at McGill University and it was a way of, it was “a 
tool for indexing FTP archives, allowing people to find specific 
files. It is considered to be the first Internet search engine.” And 
I’m quoting Wikipedia here. And while the people making that 
search engine didn’t say it had anything to do with Archie 
Comics, it’s actually based on the word “archive” without the 

“v.” That’s how they got Archie out of it. But then it did spring 
forward to other search engines, the Veronica [very easy 
rodent-oriented net-wide index to computer archives] search 
engine, which was developed in 1992 at the University of 
Nevada. So there you go. 
 
So Canada’s leading the way and we’re getting the University 
of Nevada falling into place. So it was another search engine 
and it was used for Gopher menus, if that means anything to 
people now. So it was actually, they say it was an acronym for 
very easy rodent-oriented net-wide index to computer archives. 
That’s what they say, but cleverly I think people really realized 
it was from the comic book. But this is where I misspoke, Mr. 
Speaker, because I thought there was no such search engine as 
Jughead [Jonzy’s universal gopher hierarchy excavation and 
display], but there was. Jughead is a search engine for the 
Gopher protocol, so I do apologize to the members opposite that 
in fact Jughead is a search engine system for the Gopher 
protocol. But it’s distinct from Veronica in that it searches a 
single server at a time. Now this is its acronym, for the record, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker: Jonzy’s universal gopher hierarchy 
excavation and display. I don’t know if I believe that, but 
anyways, I just want to set the record straight if people at home 
are wondering what I was talking about. There, I clarified that. 
 
But I do want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we are deeply 
concerned about the agenda here for this government over the 
next four years and what it means in terms of their financial 
management and getting this house into shape. And we think it 
can be done, can be done quite easily, by first of all fixing up 
and getting rid of the habits of falling into financial fiascos and, 
you know, whether it’s a GTH, whether it’s the lean issue, all of 
these that can be done without the . . . and the necessary 
overpayments. We are saying very clearly — and this is the 
message that we want to leave with the people at home and the 
members opposite — that any of their corrections of the 
financial situation should not be done on the backs of those who 
are vulnerable, particularly those who are homeless, those who 
are living with disabilities. 
 
And we see that, signs being sent out very clearly from the 
ministers involved with Lighthouse and with SAID 
[Saskatchewan assured income for disability]. And with the 
SAID program they say the changes are on pause. That wasn’t 
the message people wanted to hear. They wanted to hear a clear 
no, it won’t go forward. 
 
And I know this government takes a lot of pride in SAID, and 
when it was first introduced we were supportive. We thought it 
was due, and we supported it right from the beginning. We saw 
it as a grassroots solution to making sure people could live with 
dignity when they had disabilities. But we are concerned now 
that we’re moving the opposite way. 
 
And frankly, when you consider the amount of money that they 
spent on the land deal versus what they might save on cutbacks 
on SAID, it just doesn’t make any sense. It just doesn’t make 
any sense. And so we have some real concerns about those 
signals, and the same with the Lighthouse, where you see 
facilities already created, all ready for people. And we have 
people sleeping at the door of Lighthouse. They can’t get in, 
you know, as we get ready for winter. It is a shame. It’s a crying 
shame. And this really speaks volumes: the pictures in the 



October 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 995 

paper, when you see those pictures of people right up against 
the glass door, and they can see inside, it’s just not right. It’s 
absolutely just not right. 
 
And so this is the kind of thing that causes us a lot of concerns 
when you have, as I say, Bill No. 1. And it looks 
straightforward, and it’s only one line, but it is a Trojan Horse. 
And we’ve seen that it has spawned Bill No. 40 down the road, 
where all of a sudden they feel obligated to define privatization. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite, when we were in 
government and we brought forward the bill about Crown 
ownership, they voted with us. They did not say, hey we don’t 
understand the terms. And now 10 years later they’ve said . . . 
now 10 years later it’s a problem. It’s a problem. Where were 
they for 10 years? Maybe, you know, they should’ve been 
saying all along they were going to fix it. But it’s because nine 
of those years, things were going well. Eight of those years, 
things were going well, and they didn’t really, really care. 
 
[19:15] 
 
But I do have to say, it’s like a double-edged sword though 
because part of it is mismanagement but part of it is philosophy. 
They truly believe that we don’t need the Crowns. I worry. I 
worry that that’s their belief, that they truly, at the end of the 
day, don’t support Crowns in our province. 
 
And that is worrisome because, you know, SaskPower, 
SaskEnergy, SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance], 
SaskTel, STC [Saskatchewan Transportation Company], 
SaskWater provided for us, because we know that many others, 
especially the large multinational corporations, would turn 
away from a province like ours because they would not see the 
profits easily. You know, I mean all our companies do well. 
Now I know with STC they need support, but in many ways I 
feel that . . . well I do believe completely that it’s a company 
that provides basic services in our province that we just need to 
have. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m concerned that at the heart of 
this, this is where their soul is at in terms of what they really 
would like to see move along and help solve their financial 
matters. And we are worried about that — worried, worried. 
 
You know, during the election we called for a budget before the 
election, but none was forthcoming. We knew they were 
working on this because you start to work on the budget in 
September, October. They’re well into the way, and this is 
probably why Bill 40 came out just at the end of last week. It’s 
because somebody had come up with the idea, we’re going to 
need more money. We’re going to need more money. And how 
can we get it? Because they’ve been busy at the treasury board, 
and it’s just . . . 
 
But you know, they have to stop their mismanagement. That’s 
what people want to see right off the bat. And we know GTH is 
a big, big example. And while they can say that they’re going to 
do the recommendations, the Premier is often quoted as saying 
past behaviour indicates future performance. There you go. I 
mean, you can just see, and that’s why people get worried about 
this, because the wheels are coming off. And to throw these 
kind of bills up there is problematic. 

So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think I’ve provided enough 
of a summary for people about what I feel about Bill No. 1, An 
Act to amend The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act. I 
have severe, severe grave concerns about this, not only in the 
discussion, and we’ve had the discussion about the liquor 
stores, but also what it can lead to further on. And so there will 
be many, many questions, I know, in committee on this and 
how it lines up with the other privatization tools that this 
government is bringing forward. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that we adjourn Bill 
No. 1, An Act to amend The Crown Corporations Public 
Ownership Act. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 1, The Crown 
Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 32 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 32 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance (Benefits) Amendment Act, 
2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s an 
honour today to stand up and talk about Bill No. 32, The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Amendment Act. This was 
presented by the previous Deputy Premier and Minister 
Responsible for SGI in the spring session. And when reviewing 
this Act, the amendments to this Act, it’s quite lengthy. There’s 
a lot of changes that are being made with regards to this Act, 
and so it’s kind of hard to go through all the information. And 
so I think this will be lengthy in committees because they’ll 
have to have a lot of discussion with regards to how this is 
going to impact some of the budgets that they’re talking about, 
the financial changes within the Act and the language they’re 
changing and some of the impacts that it might have on 
residents of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I know there’ll probably be a lot of discussion with 
stakeholders with regards to some of these changes. And that 
would be rightfully so because, it’s like I said before, it’s very 
lengthy. The Act itself is very lengthy, but all the amendments 
are as well. And like a lot of the other bills, a lot of the 
amendments are with regards to language and changing some of 
the format. But this one, it’s a lot of substance of information 
that’s being changed here. 
 
And so I really hope, when this is discussed in length in 
committee, that all members think about people who may be 
impacted by this and ensure that they’re being treated fairly and 
appropriately because we all know that people do make 
mistakes. I think every member in the House here probably 
knows of people who have made some mistakes, and some of 



996 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2016 

them they suffered some severe consequences from, and some 
of them they might have lucked out and not have to face those 
severe consequences. But in fact we’ve got to realize that we’re 
human, and we don’t want to make sure that people are given 
too harsh of consequences. 
 
And we also have to take into account that there could be a lot 
of reasons why people might end up in these situations, like 
with regards to addictions. People might have addictions issues 
that might lead them to these negative situations. And we also 
have a requirement of ensuring that they get the help and 
support that they need.  
 
And also with some mental health, like I look at a lot of things 
with the lens of my background from mental health, and when I 
read about a lot of these amendments, I think of people that 
could have suffered great consequences with some of the 
changes that are being suggested here with regards to some 
people who might have psychoses. They don’t realize that 
they’re in a psychosis, and they might end up being in a severe 
car crash without getting help for their mental health. And 
oftentimes people don’t right away think of that as being an 
illness or a disorder, and they go through the court process. And 
until they’ve been properly diagnosed or that’s been 
acknowledged, they might sit in jails and remand for a long 
time. 
 
And with some of the changes here, they’re talking about SGI 
payments and the lack of providing the SGI benefits for people 
who might deemed as being at fault. But again, like I said, some 
people sit in remand for months and months due to our lengthy 
court processes. And so I worry that people might be sitting in 
jail cells with some severe physical illnesses from these car 
accidents. And like I said before, oftentimes it’s not till they hit 
the whole process of the court system that maybe these mental 
health illnesses are addressed or looked into. 
 
And so that could be months of sitting with, you know, needing 
chiropractic services or having broken bones. And so who 
becomes that responsibility of providing that care? So we 
always go on the assumption that you’re innocent until proven 
guilty. And so what I’ve been reading on this, it looks a lot like 
you’re guilty as soon as you’re confronted. And it’s not looking 
at the process of what about the whole court process, and 
maybe you aren’t guilty. And people might be suffering 
because they’re not getting the services that they should have 
gotten with their insurance with SGI. And so if you are one of 
those people in those situations, like who would be responsible 
to ensure that your care is being provided? Is it going to be the 
Ministry of Justice? Is it going to be the Ministry of Health? 
Who is going to fall into that category? Or are these people just 
going to fall through the cracks? 
 
So I hope that’s something that’s really considered when they 
bring this to committee and discussed about. If this becomes 
law, what’s going to happen to these individuals? And so again, 
like I said I hope . . . Like there’s a lot of talk about different 
pay structures, a lot of talk about how they’re going to pay 
people who need these benefits. There’s a lot of discussion on 
there and, to be honest, it really became complicated. 
 
And so I’m sure the critic is going to have spend a lot of hours 
looking through this, and I know she will, and also get some 

advice from some other stakeholders about how this is going to 
be different. But in some ways it looks like some people might 
be getting more benefits and, if that’s the case, how many 
people will this impact on a general basis? And like I said 
before, what kind of impact will this have on the year-end 
budget? 
 
So I think all of those have to be taken into account because I 
hope we don’t make decisions now, and then later on — just 
like my colleague here talked about with the SAID program — 
years later say, oops we made a mistake, and now we can’t 
provide this benefit to people. And you can’t, you can’t give 
with one hand and take with the other. When you make a 
decision, you have to make it with all of the thoughts process 
and ensure that you’re making the right decision so that people 
aren’t impacted later on. 
 
And so, also financially, we also have to look at people who are 
in these accidents, that they are getting financially compensated 
to the degree that they need to be financially compensated. 
Because I know I was in a car accident at one time, and you still 
have to provide for all your bills. You have a lot of medical 
appointments you have to make, and for the most part a lot of 
that is compensated.  
 
But if your wage isn’t fully compensated, what are you going to 
do? Like most people are making it paycheque to paycheque, 
and we have to realize that. And after something like a car 
accident, like you’re overwhelmed. You might be hurt. And if 
you’re in the hospital, your family’s struggling, the last thing 
you want on your mind is, how are we going to pay our bills? 
How are we going to ensure that, you know, we still have a roof 
over our head and we have food on the table? That’s why we 
pay insurance. That’s why we buy the insurance, is so that we 
know that when accidents happen — and accidents do happen 
— that we have that ability, that we’re going to be able to 
provide for still our families and not have to worry about that 
financial, that concern. 
 
So there was a lot of talk about wage classifications and such 
like that, and if you were a seasonal worker, or if you worked 
full time, or if you worked part time, or if you were a house 
care worker or home provider, a lot of talk about all those 
different classifications. So again I hope people really sit down 
and talk about it, and is this going to compensate people at the 
right degree? 
 
Also when I was talking about benefits and who is liable of 
paying for benefits when someone’s hurt and such, if we decide 
we’re not going to provide insurance benefits to people, if we 
think that they’re guilty but then they later are not seen as 
guilty, could this potentially be a forum for lawsuits? I hope 
not. And I hope that’s considered, because as a government 
we’ve got to really look at, are we making laws that are going 
to make us more vulnerable, or are we making laws that we can 
sustain? So I hope that’s considered. 
 
And again, is it against human rights? We’ve got to look at the 
Human Rights Code as well and ensure that people’s human 
rights aren’t being taken away, because that’s going to put us in 
a lot of legal difficulties. And we can’t afford any legal issues 
and lawsuits and such because, well taxpayers don’t want their 
money to be going that direction. They want their money to be 



October 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 997 

going to services that we all need, like education, health care, 
roads. So we want to be very due diligent on how we manage 
that. 
 
[19:30] 
 
But I wrote, when I was reading some of this information, it 
seems like the amendments to this bill will make it easier to sue 
at-fault drivers and/or their estates. And so is that the direction 
that we want to go? Or is that what our priorities are at this 
point? We have people who are sleeping on the streets and 
such, and right now we want to change legislation so that 
people can, you know, sue others much more readily? Like I 
don’t know. To me those priorities seem to be a little messed up 
and so I would like to see priorities placed in other areas. And I 
can’t imagine someone who . . . Like I said, people make 
mistakes. And so being a wife, and all of a sudden, say your 
husband makes a horrible mistake and now all of a sudden his 
estate is being sued because of that. Like that doesn’t seem all 
that fair when I sit and think about the whole family and the 
family dynamics and who that’ll greatly impact. So I hope 
that’s really considered a lot when it’s discussed in committees 
and challenged a little bit. 
 
Also one area that I really feel that I need to talk about . . . and 
again, like I said, I read a lot of this stuff with my mental health 
lens. And I was reading about how no benefits are payable to 
the insured or insured spouse or dependants if the insured 
commits suicide or attempts to commit suicide with a 
motorcycle. And that really upsets me because I know, working 
in the mental health field, we really try to look at suicidality and 
the rates of suicide, and we feel that the rates of suicide are 
actually higher than what is being presented in statistics. 
 
But the fact is that a lot of families feel the burden of not 
disclosing that it could be a potential suicide because of the 
impacts on insurances. And that is sad because that really 
makes families be put in a rock and a hard place when they 
want to, you know, let people know that this is an issue and that 
they want other family members or people to know that they 
could get help but they don’t want to disclose the method that 
their loved one used, or potentially used, in fear of not being 
able to be covered under the insurance. Because again families, 
they sometimes rely on the loved one, the deceased, on their 
income. And so the insurance is supposed to supplement that. 
 
So I wish we could have less stigma, removed from suicidality, 
and have it so that people could talk about it more. Because I 
think the one way we are going to combat suicide is that we’re 
going to have to feel more comfortable talking about it. Talk 
with your family; talk with your kids; talk with your loved ones, 
and make it an open area so that they can communicate about it. 
And don’t be scared or shy to talk about when it might have 
happened to you. And the more we do that, the less stigma will 
be placed on it, and hopefully that will make people be able to 
talk about it more likely. And so I really wish the insurance 
agencies would reconsider having that as part of their clause 
with regards to their benefits. That might be wishful thinking, 
but I really hope that’s discussed and considered with regards to 
committee. 
 
Also I noticed that they’re going to be making some changes 
with regards to the language of specialists, because in the Act it 

talks about, you know, different people who could be deemed 
as specialists. I’m glad that they’re going to kind of more 
generalize that because I think as our health care expands, that 
we’re looking at different health care providers as providing 
essential service. 
 
So when we limit it . . . I notice even in the terminology 
previous to this, they have psychologists but they don’t have 
psychiatrists. A psychiatrist could diagnose a person with 
regards to some kind of disorder with regards to an accident. A 
psychiatrist is a general practitioner that specializes in mental 
health. So that was an area that wasn’t placed on there. And 
then there might be some homeopathic practitioners or others. 
So I’m glad that they’re going to make it less specific and more 
generic so that people aren’t limited to who they have to get 
their services from. So on a positive note, I noticed that and I’m 
really happy that that’s being looked at. 
 
And then, like I said before, like I know there is a lot of changes 
in this Act. It’s huge and it will take a lot of hours of reviewing 
that and consulting with stakeholders. So like I said, it will 
probably be something that will be lengthy discussions in 
committee and needing to review a lot of the terminology in 
here and some of the . . . There’s a lot of new legislation that’s 
being implemented in here where there wasn’t some before, and 
some of this could be good and some of this needs to be 
reviewed a little bit more with a few different lenses, with more 
of a financial lens and more of a compassionate lens because, 
again, I want to really specify about how people really do need 
to be treated fairly and with respect and appropriately. And I 
hope any changes that are made will reflect that. 
 
And I know there is going to be a lot of committee work with 
regards to this, and I’m sure my other colleagues will have a lot 
to add to this and will want to review this as well and put their 
lens on here. And I’m glad I was able to share a little bit of my 
mental health lens with regards to this, the changes to this 
legislation. And with that, I am going to move to adjourn this 
debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert 
Northcote has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 32, The 
Automobile Accident Insurance (Benefits) Amendment Act, 
2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 33 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 33 — The Child 
and Family Services Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s an honour to rise today and speak on this very important 
bill, Bill No. 33, An Act to amend The Child and Family 
Services Act. You know, it’s been a . . . As the former critic for 



998 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2016 

Social Services over the past eight, nine years, I’ve been 
watching this piece of legislation be in . . . [inaudible] . . . and 
consultations time and time again. And so to see this part out, 
I’m not sure if this is the last we’ll hear from the minister about 
The Child and Family Services Act, and I’ll talk briefly about 
what this piece may mean. I have a lot of questions and of 
course we’ll have questions in committee about it, but I do note 
how important it is to make sure there is appropriate 
consultations for this piece of work that the government is 
responsible, our vulnerable children. 
 
And it’s interesting because as we note in the news, at the 
federal level we’ve seen a lot of action around First Nations, the 
funding of First Nations child and family service agencies and 
the deplorable lack of funding and support from the federal 
government to the point that the Human Rights Commission at 
the federal level had to step in after the . . . 
 
Just great work of Cindy Blackstock who did a phenomenal job 
and was relentless in saying, how can it be in Canada we can 
have essentially two systems for caring for those who are the 
most vulnerable in our society? Those children who are at risk 
through no choice of their own, and often families, no matter 
who they are, find themselves in difficult, difficult straits and 
having to make difficult choices, or unfortunately their 
communities are having to step up and step in and work with 
families to make sure their children are safe and protected 
because that’s what we all believe in as Canadians, whether 
you’re indigenous or not. And so the funding should be 
consistent. 
 
So this is a very timely, timely piece of legislation because in 
many ways this legislation speaks to that relationship that the 
federal government does in terms of its relationship, in terms of 
funding First Nations and other Aboriginal family service 
agencies or groups. 
 
And so I’ll talk about some specific points. I want to talk about 
the minister’s comments, but I do want to say how important 
this piece of legislation is. I just read today that the federal 
minister responsible for First Nations said she was going to step 
up and make sure that there is emergency funding. 
 
We think of the challenges our First Nations have in terms of 
the water, housing, but perhaps most in education. But also 
what is very, very tragic is the lack of support the federal 
government has had for funding appropriately the First Nations 
family service agencies. And so this relates an awful lot to this. 
 
And I found it interesting the minister didn’t make comments 
regarding that relationship, because in many ways she is an 
agent or a surrogate for the federal government because the 
money flows through the province, in the province. The 
Minister of Social Services — who is, at the end of the day, 
responsible for all children in this province — if the Minister of 
Social Services is satisfied, then the federal money will flow 
through to the First Nations. She or he plays a very important 
role in ensuring that all children are safe in Saskatchewan. So I 
found it a little odd that the minister at the time, the former 
minister, didn’t speak to that. 
 
I’m sure that when we get into committee, that when we have 
questions about this piece of legislation, that that will be a big 

part of the discussion, because if there is more money flowing, 
if there is more money flowing from the federal government . . . 
 
And this does concern me because we saw this with several 
housing agreements, affordable housing agreement. And this 
was the same minister that we saw that the federal government 
. . . some $45 million over five years was supposed to flow to 
the province. And I’m sure it did but I hope it doesn’t, as it 
appeared to in that case, get hijacked and spent on other things. 
 
And we, as we’ve talked about the chronic situation of housing 
throughout the province but perhaps most chronic in the North, 
particularly when it comes to heating in the winter where 
they’ve changed their rules about electrical heat versus oil 
versus wood heat. But, Mr. Speaker, if this is the same situation 
where we see child and family service agreements where the 
federal government now steps up . . . And I hope they do, but 
again they haven’t actually delivered the dollars. But if that 
money does come forward then it should go to those who are 
working with the First Nations. 
 
And more often than not, I think there’s, I think 10 or 11 
agencies in the province that are working — they’re First 
Nations bands or they’re tribal councils — and together they 
have decided that . . . And it’s actually, the work they do is 
phenomenal. And the tragedy is they’re doing it with less 
money than what’s happening off-reserve. I think of the Lac La 
Ronge Band, where they have social workers and they have a 
phenomenal office and some good people working there. This 
would apply to them. 
 
[19:45] 
 
And so we’ve just got to make sure, and we’re going to be very 
vigilant and make sure that if that money does start to flow 
from the federal government, as it’s supposed to, to make sure 
that every child in Canada is treated the very same way, the 
very same way. And we’re going to be watching that very, very 
closely. This is one of the issues the Liberal government has to 
come terms with. And the honeymoon for them is slowly 
coming to an end, or quickly, as we saw last week as some 
young people were demonstrating. But education, children at 
risk, water, and housing — I know the list probably can go on, 
but those are first four I can think of. And this bill very much 
speaks to the agreement. 
 
So I’m going to take a minute, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and review 
the minister’s comments and some of the comments that I have 
about the bill because I think that the government really needs 
to be prepared. This is a very, very sensitive issue, very 
sensitive area because in many ways as we recognize that we 
are all children of the treaty and these agreements are very, 
very, very special, very sacred, especially when it comes to 
children, that we can’t be roughhousing or pushing our way 
around with this. And there are ways of making sure that proper 
consultation happens and everybody is on side because, you 
know, we all, we all want what’s best for our children, and 
particularly those who are at risk. 
 
And it’s a tragedy when we think about . . . and just my time as 
critic over those past eight years, our former . . . and as Mr. 
Pringle’s hours, he’s wrapping up the day. He will be finished 
today. We start a new Children’s Advocate tomorrow. But Mr. 



October 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 999 

Pringle did a fantastic job of many reports, unfortunately too 
many reports about kids who’ve died, who’ve been in really 
tough situations. And so we’re going to take his reports, his 
recommendations and take a look at how does it line up to this 
piece of this legislation because we want to make sure his work 
was not in vain. He worked tirelessly, as did the former 
Children’s Advocate, Marv Bernstein, just a very strong 
Children’s Advocate, now in Toronto with the United Nations 
and working with children at that level. 
 
We think this is an important piece of legislation. So right off 
the bat, I would say that I’m struck by the minister’s comments 
or lack thereof, of who she consulted with. 
 
Usually in a bill, most of the time the minister will say, I’ve 
consulted with this group, this group, this group; they’re all on 
board. And for the minister, I don’t see any record of her 
consulting with the FSIN [Federation of Sovereign Indigenous 
Nations] or any tribal councils or any agencies. I hope she did. I 
actually have a feeling that she has, but they may not be on 
board. That’s why there’s the omission. The question mark is, 
what are they saying about this piece of legislation? And we 
need to hear from them. That’s very, very important. 
 
As well as the office of the children and youth advocate, she 
doesn’t reference that office saying yay or nay with this piece of 
legislation, that this matches up. That would be a very 
important endorsement if the Children’s Advocate said this is a 
strong piece of legislation. But again, the minister was silent on 
that. And of course we’ll be asking, what’s the situation there, 
and why not an endorsement? 
 
And I guess the other one that I would say, and you know, there 
are several things I want to talk about. But she does talk about: 
 

The new provision 74(5.01) will permit the disclosure of 
confidential family information if necessary without 
consent or if there is no active Social Services involvement 
with the family, to enhance the ministry’s ability to 
contribute in an effective, efficient, and meaningful way in 
integrated case planning and service coordination. 

 
So that’s a big deal. You don’t have to have . . . And you know, 
we went through this last year about privacy and how we have 
to have our agreements all in place and all that. Now we’re 
providing an out for the minister to disclose confidential family 
information. I really want to hear what the Privacy 
Commissioner has to say about that. Is the Privacy 
Commissioner good with that and understanding the parameters 
around that? And what will be the regulations? 
 
One of the reasons I’m really concerned about that is we have 
spent, and I don’t know if the members opposite . . . Because 
there’s several new members opposite there since Social 
Services has invested in the Linkin system. That’s a computer 
system for keeping track of the kids who are in foster care, 
some $50 million on this system that they brought over from 
Ireland. It is now sold I believe to Microsoft, so that the 
ministry is paying a yearly maintenance fee, and fee to 
Microsoft, which they’re no slouch when it comes to signing 
agreements. 
 
And so, you know, I’ve heard time and time again big question 

marks about how effective that new computer system is, how 
expensive it is, and just how effective it is. And now when we 
are giving the minister a blank cheque and she has not checked 
with our officers of the legislature about whether or not this is a 
good idea. What are the parameters around this? What could be 
the situation where she or he would feel obligated to release 
confidential family information? I’m really curious about that, 
and so we need to follow up with that for sure. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some of the things particularly I just 
want to talk a bit . . . She talks about section 61 where they can 
sign “. . . agreements with First Nations Child and Family 
Service agencies for the purpose of administering services 
under the Act on behalf of the minister.” And then really on 
behalf of the minister, but really on behalf of the federal 
government, who’s flowing through the minister and providing 
funds for that, but of course the minister is the final person 
responsible. And so that’s all set out, and we’ve done some 
comparing with the old piece of legislation. So that’s really 
relatively straightforward. 
 
But this is the one that does cause us some questions and some 
concerns, and there will be questions about this: 
 

A new provision, section 62.1, is included which enables a 
termination-with-notice right of the minister for Aboriginal 
welfare agreements where in the opinion of the minister it 
is in the public interest to do so or where existing 
agreements do not include a fixed contractual termination 
period, and includes criteria by which Aboriginal child 
welfare agreements will be developed, reviewed, and 
terminated. When the minister’s authority under the Act is 
delegated to any agency, it is imperative the entity be 
accountable to provide services and compliance with the 
Act. 

 
So I’ll read through some of those. 
 
I just have to say and, you know, the word “Aboriginal,” I know 
we’re moving away from it. People are in groups are preferring 
it and I think of FSIN has changed their name to include the 
word “indigenous.” They feel more comfortable with the word 
“indigenous.” So I don’t know if we’re behind the times and 
moving up to “Aboriginal,” that really we should be using a 
more progressive term, particularly in these times of truth and 
reconciliation. Is this a term that First Nations people feel that 
they could identify with? I know that she talks about the 
Constitution Act, 1982 describes Aboriginal as Inuit, Métis, and 
First Nations, but maybe the Constitution Act needs to be 
amended. 
 
But I want to say these are the questions I’ve had about if you 
take a look at 61(1) and 62.1. 61(1) really talks about what, you 
know, the minister talks about, that: 
 

The minister may, having regard to the aspirations of . . . 
[indigenous] people to provide services to their 
communities, enter into an agreement with a band or other 
legal entity in accordance with the regulations. 

 
Now the Act does define what the word “band” means, 
meaning, as defined under the Indian Act includes the council 
of the band. So it’s pretty straightforward that the council is the 



1000 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2016 

voice of the band. And I appreciate that she talks a bit about the 
aspirations of Aboriginal people to provide services to their 
communities. So there is a recognition in the Act about that, 
some visionary statement to recognize that this is more than just 
a contract with anybody, but it has some value, some social 
mandate to it. And that’s very, very important. 
 
So it goes on to “in accordance with regulations,” and we’ll be 
interested to see the regulations, but it’s “for the provision of 
services or the administration of all or any part of this Act by 
the band or legal entity as an agency.” And of course we know 
many of them by their names and they’ve been doing well.  
 

For the exercise by the agency of those powers of the 
minister pursuant to this Act to the extent to which these 
powers are specified in the agreement.”  
 

And then goes number (2):  
 

An agency that enters into an agreement pursuant to 
subsection (1) is responsible for the exercise of powers of 
the minister to the extent to which those powers are 
specified in the agreement. 

 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the words I am using a lot, you 
may see or hear, is “agency.” The legislation refers to an 
agency. It talks a bit about a band. It talks about “agency.” And 
agency is described, “means a band or any other legal entity that 
has entered into an agreement pursuant to section 61.” This is 
what then becomes interesting. Maybe I’m just misreading this 
or I haven’t got it straight. And the minister can come over 
tomorrow and correct me. But agreement provisions, 62.1(1): 
 

Any agreement mentioned in section 61 that is entered into 
or renewed on or after the day in which this section comes 
into force must include provisions that specify all of the 
following: 
 

(a) the powers, duties and functions pursuant to this Act 
that are being delegated to the person with whom the 
agreement is being entered into. 

 
So all of a sudden we’ve switched from the word “agency,” 
which is defined, to “person.” Now interestingly the word 
“person” is not defined, you know, and maybe we have a sense 
of what . . . Well actually we have “parent” defined, we have 
“person of sufficient interest,” but we don’t have “person.” But 
we all have in our mind, you know, that there’s such an idea as 
a corporate person, that type of thing. But it seems odd that in 
section 61 they refer to agencies and having agreement with 
agencies. But all of a sudden in section 62, it switches to this 
language of a “person.” And “(b) the expected outcomes to be 
achieved by the person with whom the agreement is entered 
into.” So it switches from the ministry having agreement with 
an agency to the ministry having agreement with a person. 
 
So I don’t know why that is? And the minister didn’t talk about 
that, and I’m not sure if the First Nations or the indigenous 
people would feel comfortable with that being rolled into one 
“person” or would they feel better that it would be referred to 
the band as it’s defined or agency as it’s defined? Because both 
of those are already defined. You don’t have to re-circle and 
come back to that as this, you know, what does “person” mean 

in this? 
 
And so there are some very specific things that I would say 
make this very curious and one is: 
 

(d) the requirement that the person with whom the 
agreement is entered into report to the minister whenever 
required by the minister and in the manner and within the 
period directed by the minister. 

 
[20:00] 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that has been a fairly contentious, 
reporting has been contentious. And it gets back to this Linkin 
system, computer system. What system are people using to keep 
track of the children, and is it fully functional? Many of the 
First Nations agencies I’ve spoken to feel pretty confident in 
their system. They feel it’s, in fact, a better system than the 
Linkin system. But as often with this government, they say 
what we do is a better system than your system; please invest in 
our system. But of course the Linkin system at some incredible 
price, incredible price — it’s unbelievable — may be just too 
rich for the First Nations or the agencies to invest in. So I have 
some questions about that. 
 
And then: 
 

(e) the requirement that the person with whom the 
agreement is entered into provide the minister, within a 
period after the end of the year that is specified in the 
agreement, with an annual report of the person’s activities 
during the year in carrying out the provisions of the 
agreement. 

 
So really again, I don’t know why they use the word “person” 
and not “agency” or “band.” What is the situation there? And 
so, and it goes on. And I have some real concerns about that. 
 
And section (2) talks about: 
 

any agreement entered into pursuant to section 61 may be 
terminated only in accordance with the procedures and on 
the terms prescribed in the regulations. 

 
Again I don’t know how they would feel with the termination 
process isn’t laid out in the legislation, that everything else is 
laid out in the legislation. The one part that isn’t in the 
legislation is the termination process, and we won’t get a 
chance to debate that. We won’t get a chance to see that. And I 
don’t know how the Children’s Advocate feels about that. I 
don’t know how the First Nations feel about that. And so we 
have some concerns about that. 
 
And of course then it goes on in section (3), 62 section (3) 
about: 
 

the minister may terminate any agreement entered into 
pursuant to that section by providing 90 days’ notice in 
writing if, in the opinion of the minister: 

 
(a) it is in the public interest to terminate the agreement; 
or 
 



October 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1001 

(b) the agreement does not have a fixed term or 
termination date. 

 
Now what’s interesting, of course, the first part may seem to 
make a lot of sense. If it’s in the public interest to terminate the 
agreement, then that minister has the power and it doesn’t give 
much background to that. But the concern we do have is, the 
agreement does not have a fixed term or termination date — is 
that a good idea or bad idea? Again we haven’t heard from the 
First Nations or other groups, the Métis or Inuit on this. We 
haven’t heard from the Children’s Advocate about this. We 
don’t know whether this a good idea or not. And it seems to be 
putting a lot of power into the minister’s hands. But I’m not 
sure if people feel comfortable with that. And that’s why we 
need to hear from these groups. 
 
And so this piece of legislation does have a lot of question 
marks. And as I’ve said, I am really interested in hearing from 
the Privacy Commissioner about section 74(2)(5.01) where the 
minister or the director or an officer may disclose information 
with respect to a person mentioned in subsection (1) without 
written consent of the person to whom the information relates, 
in accordance to the regulations. That just seems pretty 
open-ended. 
 
And if we are to have confidence in this government, I think 
there should have been some comment from the Privacy 
Commissioner that they feel pretty confident that this will be 
done in a very rare situation and that, if it is done inadvertently, 
that there are penalties. You just can’t be disclosing private 
information about those who are most at risk in our province, 
the children who are vulnerable through no choice of their own. 
And so we need to make sure that this is looked after in an 
appropriate manner. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there will be many more 
people who want to speak on this. This is a critical one, and we 
know that in fact the minister has had some difficulties with 
some of the agreements that they have managed or not quite 
managed well. But the reporting and the privacy piece is key, is 
really key. 
 
I’m curious about the language, why the minister has referred to 
person and not agency or band, what would be the logic behind 
that. And of course we would encourage the government to 
think about being as current as possible in the choice of 
language, whether it’s appropriate now to be using the word 
“Aboriginal” versus using the word “indigenous.” And this is 
the time, when the legislation is open before us, that it might be 
time to reconsider that. But to me this is a very, very important 
one. 
 
And we do have some questions. And we are concerned about 
the extreme use of regulations, how some things can be buried 
in regulations and won’t see the light of day, and it would be 
really unfortunate how this all plays out. 
 
So we’ll be following up. We want to hear from groups about 
how they feel about this because clearly we want to make sure 
there are no unintended consequences, particularly when it 
comes to children. And I want to say that I am looking forward 
to seeing the outcome at the federal level about appropriate 
funding for our First Nations children on reserve, that they’re 

getting the appropriate supports in their agencies and that is 
something that has to happen. I understand the Minister 
Responsible for First Nations is really raring to go on that, and 
we look forward to that. 
 
But we do not want to see that money diverted, that when it’s 
meant to flow through the provincial ministry to the First 
Nations, that it does flow through and that it does hit and work 
with the children that it’s meant to. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I am wanting to move 
adjournment on Bill No. 33, An Act to amend The Child and 
Family Services Act. I do so move. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 33, The Child and 
Family Services Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 34 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 34 — The 
Provincial Lands Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To join in on 
Bill No. 34, The Provincial Lands Act, 2016. Before I get into it I 
guess and talking about some of the changes that are being 
proposed here, and I guess taking the Crown Act and actually just 
taking it and throwing it out and saying we’re going to redo it and 
we’re going to have new way of doing business. Before I want to 
talk about it . . . And it goes back again, our First Nations. It goes 
back to citizens of our good province, Métis. I don’t care what 
area it will impact — our farmers, our municipalities, whoever is 
going to be impacted by changes in legislation — this 
government’s track record is not very good when it comes to 
consulting individuals, people, organizations. 
 
And they can, you know, at the end of the . . . Deputy Speaker, 
they can say, oh yes, we do great. I can reassure you from the 
people I talk to, they don’t. Letters that have gone from some of 
the First Nations to ministers asking for them not to do something 
on their traditional territory and, you know, getting nowhere with 
them, very frustrated. It’s almost to the point where I have seen 
some of them saying they’re just tired of being disrespected. 
 
Like they put in their letters, and they raise their concerns for a 
reason because as First Nations people, as the protectors of our 
land, our water, our resources, they have a lot to say, and they 
have a lot of experience on the land. And they shared that process 
when settlers came here. For many, you know, they were willing 
to show them the way of life. But they also said, you know, in the 
treaties, they would share the resources. They would share the 
land, and they’ve done that. They’ve lived up to their obligation. 
 
And it’s sad to see government, whether it’s our trappers, our 



1002 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2016 

commercial fishermen, so many times government ministries 
just doing I guess whatever suits. Whether it’s a business, I 
guess an organization asking them to go on their traditional 
territory or to impact so dearly, and with no almost . . . But I 
don’t know if it is, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It may be the way I 
feel from them with no respect to them. It’s frustrating and 
they’re tired of it, and we’re hearing that. It’s clear that this 
government does not . . . And you know, and I even take it a 
little further. It gets to the point where a government, when you 
bring forward your concerns, and I know people who have told 
me that they don’t want to bring anything to this government. 
They’re intimidated. Government intimidates people. Why 
would you do stuff like that? And they do it in certain ways as 
to get the message across to them not to complain about things. 
 
So changes happen and everyone wants to stand here and say, 
oh we’ll consult and we’ll make sure. You know, it just, it goes 
nowhere with a lot of people. It doesn’t. And it doesn’t go here 
well. And when I think about watching what’s unfolding, and 
we’re going to see things unfold as more question periods come 
forward, as more information needs to come out about the GTH 
land deal and who knew what over there. Who knew what? 
Now who on that side of the House . . . And maybe the 
members, the backbenchers, I don’t know, were they consulted 
on the deals that were going on in cabinet? Some of them might 
be shocked to find out some of the stuff that’s going to come 
out. 
 
I think things are going to come out because it’s not going to 
end. People are asking for answers, and they’re frustrated and 
they’re saying, why? So they want some answers, and I think 
the government owes those answers to the people of our 
province, to the opposition, and to whoever is asking those 
questions. And it’s going to come to that. It’s not going to end 
until those answers . . . and we know. We’ve been calling for a 
judicial inquiry, for the RCMP to investigate. There has been 
lots being asked to do it, and I’m hoping that they’ll do that. 
 
Now I go about talking about consulting, and this bill that talks 
about that. And again I go back to this because they say they 
consult so well, the government of the day. Well I can reassure 
you from the people that I have talked to, they didn’t know 
what they were doing. 
 
You know, and I go back to the legislation they’re bringing in, 
proposing changing our Crowns. They didn’t talk about that on 
the doorsteps. How many people knew that they were actually 
. . . How many members on that side of the House went to the 
door saying, oh and by the way as soon as the election is over, 
and if we have a majority, we’re going to sell the Crowns, or 
we’re going to look at a definition of the Crowns. We might be 
able to sell 49 per cent. 
 
The people that I have talked to have said very clear — and 
we’re hearing more and more people coming out very 
concerned — this belongs to the people, not to the government. 
This belongs to the people. You know, our grandparents before 
us worked hard to keep those Crowns, very proud. It’s an asset 
that pays. It pays for our education; it pays for our roads; it 
helps. Well who do you think is going to pay at the end when 
you sell those Crowns and you spend that money that you’re 
going to get that you sell it? It’s gone. 
 

There’s not going to be much left, and this government is going 
to say, well you know what? We’re going to have to go to the 
taxpayers. You’re going to have to pay. We’re already paying, 
but at least now we get a dividend and it helps cover some of 
the cost and it lowers the tax, and that’s a good thing. It is. It’s 
truly a great thing and people are very proud of that. People are 
so proud of their Crowns, and I don’t even know why they’re 
messing with it. On one hand they say, oh no, we would not do 
that; we will not do that. And then come later . . .  
 
But this goes to show you about — and I’ll go back to the bill 
— but it’s about that consulting and making sure people of this 
good province have their say and their input. That’s what they 
want. They want to have their say on any legislation that comes 
along for the South. They want to feel like they have their say, 
their input, and they’re protected. 
 
This government has an obligation to do that. Yes, and I’ve said 
that. You’ve got a big majority won and I’ve said this earlier in 
my comments. You know, we get heckled. It’s fine. At the end 
of the day, it is what it is. You know, they’ve got 51 over here, 
ha ha, you . . . And that’s all right. That’s all right. That’s going 
to change. Times are changing. People are seeing when there 
was record revenue and all kinds of money, government could 
do no wrong and they would just throw money at it. Well you 
can’t do that; it’s not possible to sustain that. There was nothing 
put away for the rainy day to take care of things. 
 
And now you have legislation coming, land, and we’re not sure 
what exactly . . . this bill comes with land. Are they looking to 
sell more land? Money? Do they need cash, quick cash? Is that 
what this is for? Because at one time this bill, I think in 2013 
they brought it forward and then they found out people were not 
happy. So the government for some reason withdrew the bill 
and it was quiet. It went away. We thought it was going to be 
quiet. Now all of a sudden they need money and lo and behold 
this bill comes up that we’re going to deal with our Crown land. 
And I mean we’re not just talking about a small . . . We’re 
talking about the Crown land in this province, that there’s 
legislation being introduced for people to do what? 
 
And who do they consult? Well let me very clear on that. They 
gave people three weeks, I believe, is what it says. And I don’t 
know if that was a phone call to the minister . . . Oh, you could 
go online, and some people wouldn’t have that ability to go 
online and get that. I mean yes, there’s lots of people in our 
communities and our rural and trappers. Not everyone is, we’ll 
say, has the Internet and has computers and all that. And so 
what happens with them? Well they could call in. 
 
[20:15] 
 
So it just goes to show how this government is out of touch with 
what’s going on in the province. And they can say what they 
want, but bringing in legislation like this is concerning because 
it is . . . Is it about money, some quick cash? Are they looking 
for a sale? We’ll have to ask that in committee. And a lot of 
questions are going to have to be asked, and I think need to be 
asked, and the government needs to answer that. 
 
And it’s not just about the opposition, it’s about the good 
people of our province wanting these answers. And it’s not 
going to go away. Day after day, questions need to be asked. 



October 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1003 

Government doesn’t like answering. We understand that. They 
try to spin it any way they can and we’ve watched how they’ve 
spun some of the . . . And I’ve said this, they’ve been . . . 
They’re great at spinning, but I think people are tired of the 
spin. They want answers, and they’re going to hold the 
government to account. 
 
And you know, like I say, cabinet does its job, but the 
backbenchers have an obligation. You’re elected by the people 
to fight and speak up for the constituents that you’re . . . Go 
back home and find out if your constituents that you represent 
who sent you here, see if they are so happy that you’re looking 
at selling off their Crowns. Go ahead and ask them, Mr. 
Speaker, those backbenchers to go back and ask them again if 
they’re so happy that you’re selling their Crowns; that you’re 
looking at changing legislation, our land; that you’re looking 
for dollars because you’ve mismanaged everything so bad. 
 
And it’s been said time and time again — the mismanagement, 
the special deals, all the stuff going on — it’s all going to come 
out. And the people want answers. And those individuals back 
there that sat there are saying . . . As backbenchers, you have a 
voice. You’ve been selected by the people to represent them 
and serve this province. Do that. Ask the government. Ask them 
some questions. Put some pressure on. Why do they want to 
introduce a bill like this? Get the answers. Make sure they 
understand. Why are they trying to sell off or change the whole 
legislation for the Crown land? 
 
There’s something here, and we need to make sure we get 
through it. The opposition can’t do it alone, but you are very 
powerful as members on that side as well. You’ve been selected 
and asked. Put some questions to your government. Ask. We 
can do this together. We can make sure that government’s being 
held to account. And it’s not just a small group; we can work 
together and do that. 
 
And I think sometimes the people of this good province are 
saying that — work together. We’ve shown where we can work 
together as opposition and government, but sometimes, you 
know what? It’s going to take members on that side to ask some 
tough questions of the ministers and cabinet, and hopefully 
we’ll get those answers. 
 
But having said that, again this bill goes to making the changes 
that I talked about within the Crown lands, and I’m concerned 
about that. I know we’re going to have ask a lot of questions 
and give this due diligence that it needs in committee but also 
within our First Nations, our Métis communities, our municipal 
associations, the school divisions. To me, it’s so many of them 
that need to be asked about their input, what’s going on here 
and the changes, to understand exactly what government’s 
proposing. Not just to let them away: they’ve changed their 
legislation, they make changes, and repeal legislation. They 
don’t get it right the first time so they’re going to redo it. 
 
Well when you made the mistake like this and you hold back 
and you repeal or you change your mind . . . And that’s good 
that government will change its mind sometimes; when they’re 
bringing in legislation that is not good for Saskatchewan 
people, that they’ll hold on it. But then to bring it back once . . . 
later on without doing the consultation that they should have 
done in the first place, and then again we’re always wondering 

about the motive. 
 
Because they have no money. This government is so broke, and 
I think the public’s going to see just how broke they are. 
They’re looking for everything. We’ve seen cuts that the most 
vulnerable are getting. It doesn’t even make sense. So I wonder, 
with this Crown land, is it just they’re trying to sell? You know, 
why are they? Are they going to sell the land? What are they up 
to? And there’s so many question after question when you see a 
government that has failed so miserably with the finances. And 
the good people of this province are going to pay for years. 
 
My grandchildren, my kids will pay for this, but so will those 
members on that side. If you think that this province is doing 
well, man oh man, you may have 51 members over there, but 
your grandkids and kids will all . . . The people of this good 
province are going to pay a price for years for the debt and 
everything else. 
 
But having said that, I just wanted to give kind of comparisons 
to when you don’t consult, when you don’t talk to people, when 
you don’t go back at the end, what happens. But I just wanted to 
show that example, and it was nice to have an opportunity to 
talk and shed a little light on the bill itself. 
 
But at this point, I said we’ll have questions that we need to 
have clarified in committee. And I know the members on this 
side will do it. I’m hoping the members on that side will ask 
some tough questions of government at the end of the day. So 
with that, I’m prepared to adjourn debate on this bill, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 34, The Provincial Lands 
Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 35 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 35 — The Small 
Claims Act, 2016/Loi de 2016 sur les petites créances be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s an 
honour for me to stand here today and talk about Bill No. 35, 
The Small Claims Act. This was presented by the Minister of 
Justice in the spring sitting, and when he brought this forward, 
he talked about how this Act was to repeal and replace the 
existing small claims Act. It’s supposed to enhance and 
modernize processes and procedures at the small claims court. 
 
My understanding is the original small claims Act was from 
1997, so that’s almost 20 years ago. So I can see why there 
might be some wanting to update that. I don’t completely 
understand, I reviewed the previous Act and I reviewed this 



1004 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2016 

one, and I don’t completely understand why the other one 
needed to be repealed and not just amended like a lot of the 
other Acts that we have. But nonetheless, I know, like I said, I 
reviewed both of them and quite of the information in both of 
the Acts are quite similar. 
 
The Minister of Justice also said that the reasons why they 
decided to make some adjustments to The Small Claims Act was 
because they were getting requests, and so a lot of the changes 
were information that came from recommendations from a 
review. 
 
And so he doesn’t go into detail about who and where and 
exactly which locations, people who participated in this review. 
Like, how many people participated in it? Was it a wide scale? 
Was it people who used the system before and had some 
concerns and questions, or was it from some judges and legal 
representatives that might have had some issues with regards to 
that? Was it some of the stakeholders? You know, so it’d be 
interesting to find out exactly where the recommendations came 
from for the changes of this Act. But I’m sure that kind of 
information will be discussed possibly in committee. 
 
And I found it really interesting. I went on . . . I have to admit, 
I’ve never been to the small claims court and so I’ve never had 
any experience with regards to that. So that’s a good thing, I 
think, isn’t it? And so I went online and did some research 
based on the information that was on the website there. I 
noticed already online they’re saying that the most that you can 
claim is 30,000. Well this is one of the changes that is on this 
Act, is to change it from 20,000 to 30,000. So I found it 
interesting that we haven’t even passed this Act but some of the 
changes are already being implemented. 
 
So that’s one of the biggest. Well one of the big changes in this 
Act is changing from the limit being 20,000 to 30,000. And I 
think 30,000 seems to be a realistic number with regards to 
what people might be needing to access the small claims court 
with regards to. 
 
Also I know that the small claims court is used often and 
regularly, but it would be interesting to find out who 
predominantly uses the small claims court. Because I don’t 
come from an affluent background, and I grew up saying, like 
you solve a problem, you know, by discussing with people and 
such. And so I’m not quite sure who is using the small claims 
court mostly; like the stories that I’ve heard was people who 
have maybe had some issues with their contractors or stuff like 
that, you know. And so I get my partner to do all the contract 
work, so maybe that’s why I’ve avoided small claims court all 
this time. And so we’ve learned to do a lot of our own 
handyman work. 
 
But I really worry about what maybe some of the barriers are, 
and why. Like are there, are there people who could benefit 
from the services of the small claims court but there’s a lot of 
barriers that might prevent them from using it? You know, and 
so I think, like maybe literacy issues. I know when I went 
online and looked at things, there was a lot of paperwork and 
things to look at and review. And also within this Act, of course 
there’s a lot of things that it says that you need to put forward. 
 
So, like some people, are they limited on the legal 

representation that they can get when they are accessing small 
claims court? And how many people do that kind of work? I’m 
not quite sure. So I’m sure that’s going to be a lot of the things 
that are going to be talked about in committee and discussed. 
And it would be nice to identify some of those barriers and 
reduce them so that more people can access this service because 
it is definitely a good service. 
 
From my understanding, it’s a way to get issues dealt with in a 
manner where, like it’s cordial and that you don’t have to get a 
whole bunch of legal expenses due to it, you know. And so it’s 
a way that you can get things dealt with. 
 
I also wondered if geography might be an issue with handling 
issues with the small claims court. When I did look on the 
website, it looked like there was a lot of courts within the 
province. So that’s good. But you know, we have a big 
province, and there’s a lot of areas to cover here. And so maybe 
some people can’t access the court because of, you know, 
transportation issues or where it’s located. 
 
Yes, so those were some areas that I hope get discussed because 
it would be nice if we are going to be implementing a new Act 
and new legislation that maybe, again like I said, some of those 
barriers are discussed and can be addressed with regards to that. 
 
I also thought that there was a lot of, in the new Act, it seemed 
like the judge has a lot more control with regards to decisions, 
more so than the previous Act. And so there doesn’t seem to be 
any exact guidelines on if this is the situation, this is what 
happens, more so like criminal court where oftentimes when a 
person presents because of break and entry, then the judge says, 
okay, like this tends to be what the consequences would be. But 
it looks like for small claims court, it’s free-willy there, and so 
the judge gets to decide what exactly the consequences or what 
the decision will end up being. And I worry that that would 
present a lot of inconsistency with regards to judgments. 
 
So maybe one person presents with one issue that could be quite 
similar to another, as there are a lot of different case consults 
with regards to that and decisions made based on the past 
decisions possibly made. So, like the judge decides on awarding 
costs. They decide on additional costs, like if they think, oh this 
person should pay a little bit more. And they also make the 
decision on lawyer-related costs; so one judge might say, well 
you have to pay for that person’s lawyer. And the other judge 
might say, well no, you hired the lawyer so you have to pay for 
it. So again not much consistency there. 
 
And also the judge can decide to adjourn if the person doesn’t 
attend court. He can make that decision. And in this new Act, 
they added a provision so that the judge could dismiss 
altogether if a person doesn’t attend, whereas in the old Act 
they didn’t have that ability to do that. But so then again, that 
puts a lot of pressure on the judges and it also gives them a lot 
of power to decide. And one might be more forgiving than the 
other, and it won’t be very consistent for individuals who are 
accessing these services. 
 
[20:30] 
 
One of the other changes is the defendants have to file their 
claim with the court prior to court. So they have to provide all 



October 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1005 

their information so that the person who is bringing them to 
court will have that information before they have court. And so 
that is all good and fine if again, like I said, there aren’t any of 
these barriers that might be presented. And it looks like again 
the judge could decide. If the defendant didn’t file that 
information, the judge might still say, okay, well if you showed 
up to court then we’ll still go ahead. And the judge might say 
no, like, you didn’t file your information. So a lot of power with 
regards to that. 
 
So I think it would be good for the person, knowing what the 
defendant’s information is prior to coming to court and vice 
versa, so that both people are prepared. And then hopefully the 
court process will go a lot more smoothly if both people are 
prepared. So that’s going to have to be discussed. 
 
Like, a lot of these changes in this Act are going to require a lot 
of close inspection at the committee level. And I have a lot of 
faith in our Justice critic here. She is well versed in a lot of this 
area, and so she will make good decisions with regards to this. 
And also I think it’s really important to consult with the legal 
community to make sure, like I said, that some of these changes 
are appropriate and we protect the rights of people, especially 
people who might have limited access to lawyers. 
 
So I know it’ll be really important to talk to the legal 
community and to review each section and have a lot of 
discussion about this bill, this Act, and this legislation when it 
comes to committees. So I’m sure my colleagues will have a lot 
more to discuss with regards to this, and they’ll have a lot more 
information to add. So with that, I’m going to move to adjourn 
this debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert 
Northcote has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 35, The 
Small Claims Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 36 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 36 — The Small 
Claims Consequential Amendments Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
honoured today to stand here and talk about Bill No. 36. It’s 
The Small Claims Consequential Amendments Act, 2016 and 
this also was brought forward by the Minister of Justice in the 
spring session. This bill is the bilingual bill with regards to Bill 
35 that I just discussed a little bit about, and so it’s going to be 
exactly like Bill 35 but in French. And so a lot of the 
amendments with regards to this bill are more housekeeping in 
nature. 
 
So one of the things that I’ve been noticing is that, because of a 

lot of the changes to The Small Claims Act, that it’s going to 
change a lot of the citings, the wording in other Acts. Like it’s 
going to change section 36.2 of The Direct Sellers Act. It’s 
going to change section 73.1, The Legal Profession Act, 1990. 
It’s also going to change a lot of the wording from The Small 
Claims Act, 1997; it now needs to be The Small Claims Act, 
2016. 
 
And so, like I said before, this is just basically housekeeping in 
nature. I am glad that we’re going to be having this also in 
French in keeping with our traditions of having it bilingual. And 
other than that, I’m sure a lot of the changes with regards to it 
will be made because of the changes to Bill 35. So I’m sure my 
colleagues will have a lot more to add about this, so with this, 
I’m going to move to adjourn this debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert 
Northcote has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 36. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 37 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 37 — The 
Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and as always it’s my honour to be able to rise in this Assembly 
to speak to the bills that the government is putting forward. A 
bit of a heavy heart today though, Mr. Speaker, considering 
what we hear happening in the tragedies in the North, and it’s 
just hard to sometimes reconcile that with some of the more 
mundane tasks that we have to do here. But nonetheless, the 
debates will continue and so I will, with honour, attempt to 
enter into the debate on the Act to amend The Traffic Safety Act. 
 
So there’s a few things this bill is attempting to do, and it’s 
particularly going after people who don’t pay their bills. So as 
you can imagine, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a number of individuals 
who come in conflict with the Act in various ways are fined and 
if they can’t pay those fines or don’t pay those fines, sometimes 
under the existing bill, they could still continue to have a 
registration or a driver’s licence which is paid for. And this bill 
goes quite a bit further now and allows the cancellation of 
pretty much anything that they have registered under The 
Traffic Safety Act. 
 
So the minister indicated that what this change will do is allow 
SGI to cancel these if they have outstanding debt in their 
account and they’re not working with SGI to establish a 
payment plan. And I know that for many people those payments 
are significant. I think fines for losing your licence for drinking 
and driving are very significant. And quite often . . . And this is 
the case for a young woman that I know who unfortunately had 
an issue with alcohol and was caught and fined. She now can’t 



1006 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2016 

afford to drive at all, because not so much her, she’s done her 
. . . She’s been found guilty and has accepted that and has 
actually changed her life, but she can’t afford to have a driver’s 
licence anymore because the fines are very substantial. And I 
understand that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I just think for the consequences for people who are less 
fortunate when it comes to income or available resources, 
sometimes the fines aren’t exactly equal to those people who 
have a considerable amount of money and can pay them off 
right away. So there’s those kinds of inequities that we find in 
laws like this. But the universality of the fine is what it is, and 
that’s just the price that people have to pay when they break the 
law. So these debts would be owing on different charges, and 
now what the amendments will do, will allow SGI to cancel 
pretty much everything if there is a debt that isn’t being repaid. 
 
The second thing is also now further to cancelling driver’s 
licences and registrations. They can also, SGI will now be able 
to impound vehicles and this would be . . . What he’s saying 
here, the minister said: 
 

This change will enable vehicle impoundment fees to be 
recovered from the person operating the vehicle at the time 
it was impounded. This way the person caught driving the 
vehicle will be penalized, rather than the last known owner 
of the vehicle. 

 
And I’ll get to that change in a minute, Mr. Speaker. I’m not 
sure it actually is exactly what the minister said here, but it’s 
along those lines. 
 
And then finally is some changes to the use of three-wheeled 
vehicles and children, and there’s going to be some prohibitions 
there as well. 
 
So just going straight to the bill itself, the first change that we 
see is in clause 41(q) of the current Act, and in that sense this is 
expanding the . . . It’s much broader than it was previously. 
Section 41 is the section that relates to who is not eligible for a 
driver’s licence, and there’s a whole bunch of people or clauses 
here that you’re not eligible for a driver’s licence. But right now 
if you go to apply for your driver’s licence and you owe some 
fees with respect to driving a vehicle, you can’t get a driver’s 
licence. This proposal, the amendment would actually make it 
broader than that. And it’s not just with respect to the driving of 
the vehicle, but it’s “. . . with respect to any fees, administrative 
charges or interest fees payable pursuant to this Act or the 
regulations and that payment has been dishonoured.” So you 
can see there’s quite a bit of a broadening out of that particular 
definition. 
 
The next changes we find are to section 48, and this is division 
3 of the Act dealing with the suspension, cancellation, and 
refusal of a driver’s licence. This deals with a driver’s licence. 
And they’re broadening when the administrator shall suspend, 
cancel, or refuse to issue the driver’s licence. And it includes 
now . . . These are the new adds to who cannot get a licence for 
driving, and that’s if they’re indebted for any fees under The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Act or regulations or else had 
made a payment and the payment has been dishonoured. So if 
someone comes in, gives a cheque for $300 to pay off their fine 
and then that cheque is bounced, then automatically that 

driver’s licence that had been issued would be cancelled or 
ineffective. So that’s the change there. 
 
Clause 75 is also being amended, and that clause is in relation 
to the refusal, suspension, and cancellation of certificates and 
permits. And so in this case, this is basically for registration, 
where they can refuse to issue a registration permit. And this is 
for in the event that you owe money under The Automobile 
Accident Insurance Act or that payment has been dishonoured, 
so that’s the basic change to clause 75(1)(b.1). 
 
I am interested in what the explanatory notes say on this 
particular change because they are indicating in the explanation 
there is a second part to this amendment, and actually, Mr. 
Speaker, for the life of me I can’t see it. So I don’t know 
whether this is just an oversight, or perhaps we’ll have to ask 
maybe more questions in committee. Because the explanatory 
note says that this change is also updating the cross-reference 
for the denial of a certificate of registration as a result of a 
change in a carrier’s operating authority, but there is nothing in 
the bill itself that speaks to that. So I do think there is 
something missing here, and perhaps the minister will be able to 
explain that. And I suppose a person could ask through a letter 
or something, but I’m going to make sure that we ask that 
question in committee, because the explanatory note seems to 
suggest that there’s more to this amended clause than I actually 
see here. So I’m curious about that. 
 
Section 150 is also being amended, and 150.2 is — I’m just 
going to look at that clause as well — 150.2 is in regards to 
impoundment or immobilization of a motor vehicle. And in this 
case, this is what I talked about earlier where it’s not just the 
owner. If the owner is not found, we are now adding a change 
to that clause which suggests that “if the administrator is unable 
to determine who is the owner of the vehicle, the unauthorized 
driver” would then be responsible for the impoundment 
payment, and that’s a debt for the unauthorized driver. And the 
minister referred to that as being a problem. It’s hard to 
understand how you couldn’t know who the owner of a vehicle 
is unless it was unregistered. So I suppose that’s the 
circumstance that this clause, this amendment, is trying to deal 
with. 
 
[20:45] 
 
The next one is the regards . . . And the minister didn’t mention 
this directly in his comments, but this is about people riding 
motorcycles and where they’re allowed to ride them. So section 
247(2), there’s some additions being added here. In particular, 
you’re no longer allowed to ride sidesaddle. I’m not really sure 
what that means, but you’re not allowed to do it anymore. So 
the subsection reads as follows: “No person shall drive or ride a 
motorcycle on ae highway in a position commonly known as 
side saddle.” I know in horses it makes sense, sidesaddle, where 
you have both legs on one side. So I’m not exactly sure and 
there’s no definition here, but you’re not allowed to do it 
anymore. So that’s the change that’s being made. 
 
In addition to sidesaddle, you are no longer allowed to ride in 
front of the driver on the motorcycle. If it’s designed for two 
people or a pillion seat is provided, that’s fine. You can ride 
there, but the passenger has to be “capable of reaching and 
using a separate set of standard footrests.” Very prescribed 



October 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1007 

activities here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and often you find these 
kinds of things in the regulations. So this is a weird case where 
the actual prescribed behaviour is being put right there in the 
Act itself. Also passengers can’t “ride in a side car with another 
person.” So I know we’ve all seen motorcycles with side cars, 
but according to this you can’t put two people in a side car; you 
can only put one. So these are very prescriptive changes that are 
being made to section 247(4) I believe, adding sub (3) and sub 
(4). 
 
And finally it was the three-wheeler clause that the minister 
referred to. This changes to subsection 248(7). Well actually 
we’re adding a new subsection 248(8), and this is where, if you 
are driving a three-wheeled vehicle on a highway, your 
passenger cannot be under seven years of age, cannot weigh 
less than 36 kilograms, and cannot be shorter than 145 
centimetres tall. Once again, very prescriptive description, very 
prescriptive behaviour that normally you would find these 
things in the regulations. But I guess in this case with traffic 
safety, maybe it’s to make sure that this information is more 
easily available to the public because it’s way easier to find 
stuff in legislation than in regulations generally, although good 
old Internet is pretty good with regulations these days too. 
 
And then there’s another change to subsection 280(7), and this 
again is when a vehicle may be seized and impounded. So it’s 
in relation to the previous clause where we talked about 
impoundment. So I’m not sure why they’re so far apart in the 
bill, but that’s from section 161 all the way now to section 280. 
 
And what it does is it amends subsection (7) to refer to section 
161, and what it’s saying here is it’s not only . . . 161 applies to 
a sale of a vehicle, the application and proceeds of sale, the 
disposition of any surplus monies from the sale, and the 
recovery of any amounts pursuant to section 161. And so what 
that says is that a peace officer may seize and impound a 
vehicle now, even if you owe money under section 161, which 
is the impoundment clause. So if you had a vehicle that was 
impounded and you owe money on it and then you’re in another 
vehicle, that vehicle can also be impounded I think is the net 
result of this change. 
 
So in the whole scheme of things, Mr. Speaker, you know, these 
are administrative changes. They’re tightening up the rules. I 
think one of the questions that will bother me is, what happens 
if 49 per cent of SGI is sold and these fees and the collection of 
these fees is now tied up in The Traffic Safety Act? 
 
So it boggles my mind actually, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I’m 
trying to sort through some of the implications of Bill 40 that 
was introduced last week during the civic election day and just 
trying to figure out how . . . because SGI is so intricately 
intertwined with public policy here in Saskatchewan. And when 
you start selling off 49 per cent of a company to private 
shareholders, what happens to the public policy considerations? 
And I really am struggling with this. 
 
And I think it’s going to impact any number of bills, 
particularly in relation to traffic and traffic safety and drinking 
and driving and all of those things that we passed today in 
relation to drinking and driving. What is the tie between SGI 
and these laws when SGI would be 49 per cent privately owned 
and the shareholders would have then a say in how the company 

is run, although it wouldn’t be a majority share? But it’s those 
kinds of public policy considerations I think are going to be 
very puzzling. And we’ll have to see how that happens if and 
when the government decides to not privatize SGI — of course 
that’s now a new defined term — but sell off 49 per cent of it, 
which is not privatization according to the new definition. And 
that boggles the mind too. But that is a topic for that bill if and 
when I am able to rise on the floor to debate it. 
 
So as far as The Traffic Safety Act goes and the amendments to 
the Act that are being proposed here, they appear to have a 
public policy that seems laudable. And we didn’t get a lot of 
explanation from the minister when the bill was introduced in 
terms of why these, you know, the weight restrictions and the 
age restrictions are of such consideration that they need to be 
mentioned, actually formalized and put into a bill like this, but 
that’s all we got from the minister at the time. This was 
introduced on June 20th and so the former minister, he was 
making these explanations. But now we have a new minister so 
we’ll have to raise the questions with the new minister in 
committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I guess the final comment is, I really am curious about the 
explanatory notes in relation to clause 75 because they’re 
implying that there’s a change there that says it’s updating the 
cross-reference for the denial of a certificate of registration as a 
result of a change in a carrier’s operating authority. And I don’t 
see that housekeeping change here, but I’m sure the new 
minister will be able to point that out in committee as we go 
forward. 
 
So at this point, that would be the extent of my comments on 
this particular bill, and I would move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 37, An Act to amend The Traffic Safety Act. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member from 
Saskatoon Nutana has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 37, 
The Traffic Safety Amendment Act. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 2 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 2 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Crown Corporations’ Fiscal Year 
End Standardization) Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Regina Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure and honour to rise this evening to add my comments to 
the second reading debate for Bill No. 2, An Act to amend 
certain Statutes to Standardize Provisions respecting the Fiscal 
Year End of certain Crown Corporations. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that’s a bit of a mouthful for the title of a bill. 
 
From what I understand, the purpose of this bill is to allow the 
government to harmonize Crown corporations’ fiscal years with 



1008 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2016 

the fiscal year for the Government of Saskatchewan. I think 
some of the Crown corporations were a little bit easier to 
harmonize just because they were able to do it through order in 
council. However, the legislation requires some of that work to 
be done via a legislative change. So that’s I guess what was 
done here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now I understand that the Crown corporations that we’re 
talking about in this bill are the Saskatchewan Gaming 
Corporation, Saskatchewan Government Insurance, 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation, the Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications Holding Corporation — you often don’t 
see the full name of SaskTel — and the Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation. 
 
Now it’s possible that harmonizing these fiscal years could 
make sense. We’re not entirely sure what that’s going to look 
like yet. We want to make sure that the purpose of it is a true 
one and an honourable one. And I know we’ve had some 
problems in terms of getting financial accountability and fiscal 
responsibility from this government. So I hope that this is going 
to result in more transparency. I know our Crowns are quite 
good at that sort of thing, but I am always a little bit concerned 
when it comes to this government and handling financial 
statements frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So this legislation, I’m going to walk through it a little bit. 
Clause 2 of the legislation makes the Crown Investments 
Corporation present its annual report 120 days after the end of 
the year instead of April 30th. 
 
Clause 3 allows cabinet to set the fiscal year for the Sask 
Gaming Corporation, instead of having it set as January 1, to 
December 31st, so that I guess we’ll see what cabinet decides 
probably through order in council what they want that year-end 
to look like. I’m hoping that they will consult with both the 
stakeholders in Sask Gaming and Sask Gaming itself, make 
sure what makes the most sense for those who work within that 
Crown corporation, makes sense for those who have to decide 
budgets for not just Sask Gaming, but those who receive 
dividends and monies through Sask Gaming. I know there’s a 
lot of money that’s given to really great organizations, really 
great community-based organizations from the profits that are 
realized through Sask Gaming. 
 
And I’m hoping that with the change to the privatization 
legislation, that the privatization definition, that that’s not going 
to result in perhaps something to happen to Sask Gaming, for 
example, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And with that could result in, 
you know, up to 49 per cent potentially less dividends being 
realized to not only just the people of Saskatchewan but also to 
these great community-based organizations that receive money 
that flow out of our Crown corporations like Sask Gaming, for 
example, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Clause 4 allows cabinet to set the fiscal year for SGI again, 
instead of having it set as January 1 to December 31st. So again 
I guess that’s something we’ll wait for on bated breath to see 
what cabinet decides to have that set and what that order in 
council will look like. 
 
Also similarly clause 5 will allow cabinet to set the fiscal year 
for the Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation instead of 

having it set as January 1. So theoretically I suppose we’re kind 
of working on a theory in terms of this legislation because we 
don’t really know what cabinet’s going to decide and what the 
order in council’s going to look like. Theoretically these are all 
going to match with the government’s fiscal year-end. I think 
that would make probably logical sense, but sometimes this 
government doesn’t always do things that are logical. So I’m 
not going to make any assumptions and I’m going to wait and 
see what that decision actually looks like. For now, you know, 
we can only work with what the legislation has, the bill says 
that’s been provided to us at this point in time. We’re still left a 
little bit wondering. 
 
Similarly clause 6 will allow cabinet to set the fiscal year for 
SaskTel instead of having it set as January 1. 
 
Similarly it’s very important to make sure that we have a good 
accounting for both the revenues and the expenditures that are 
occurring in our Crown corporations. It’s very important that 
we have complete financial transparency and accountability. 
And when we’re talking about Crown corporations and what an 
incredibly vital resource they are in many different ways to our 
province, it’s important for us to know exactly how much 
money is being expended and how much money, how much 
revenue is being generated in these Crown corporations so that 
when we’re having this discussion and when we’re having these 
debates and when the public is being called on — hopefully the 
public is being called on — to consider some very important 
questions potentially in the future with respect to these Crown 
corporations, that we have a really good fiscal picture to work 
off of, that there is nothing being hidden, and that there are no 
funny games being played in terms of these year-ends and 
releasing of financial statements and financial reports, SaskTel 
being one of them. 
 
Similarly for SaskWater, clause 7 will again allow cabinet to set 
that fiscal year. 
 
And then there was also a transitional period, which makes 
sense, in clause 8 which sees January 2015 to March 2016 as 
one fiscal year for the listed Crown corporations, which is kind 
of funny, Mr. Speaker, because I think we’re way past that at 
this point. 
 
Sometimes I forget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where we’re at. You 
feel like you’re sort of in limbo when you’re in here some days, 
but I’m pretty sure that we’re well past March of 2016, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. So you know, I’m hoping that these changes 
that are being made are being done with honourable intentions 
and to insure full transparency and accountability in terms of 
revenue and expenditures in these Crown corporations. I hope 
that this government’s not trying to do something to portray a 
smaller deficit than they in fact actually have. 
 
[21:00] 
 
I know we’ve been asking for accountability in terms of the 
quarter, first quarter report. Our Finance critic has asked for that 
and we have yet to see that. The government’s been doing a 
fairly good — unfortunately good — job of dodging these 
really important financial questions and these really important 
questions with respect to the budget. 
 



October 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1009 

So I guess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s why when I see, when I 
see legislation like this that looks fairly innocuous at first 
glance, I’m a little bit concerned about what this actually means 
for the province and for the people of Saskatchewan and for 
financial accountability for this government. So that is a 
concern of ours and that’s a concern of mine, and I’m hoping 
that we’ll have the opportunity to ask some of those questions 
when we’re at committee now. 
 
From what I can see, our Finance critic, luckily for me, has 
already stepped into this discussion. So I’m going to bring up 
some of her concerns again because I think they’re very 
important, and she has a better understanding of these financial 
statements and the necessity for financial accountability in our 
Crowns and in our government ultimately than I think anybody 
else does. One of the concerns she raised when she spoke to this 
bill is the difficulty in being able to understand financial 
statements and the hope that this change ultimately, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, will result in easier to understand financial statements. 
 
Financial statements that don’t . . . Theoretically, this will result 
in a situation where the financial statements will be a bit easier 
to read and understand because everybody’s working off of the 
same fiscal year-end, which I know is a very important thing in 
terms of being able to actually have a good picture of what the 
revenues and the expenditures look like when you’re trying to 
cross-reference all sorts of different financial statements 
depending on what you’re looking at the General Revenue Fund 
or you’re looking at the Crown financial statements, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. So it’s really important that that’s very clear 
and that’s very easy to ready because it’s important that not 
only the people in this Legislative Assembly can understand 
them, but also the good people of Saskatchewan that we’re all 
here to represent can understand them as well so that we’re able 
to have a transparent discussion on what’s actually going on 
and what the picture actually is in terms of the financial state of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Another concern that the Finance critic raised that I think is 
really important is a concern she had about the length of time it 
takes to get annual reports right now from Crown corporations. 
Right now it’s a bit difficult. I know we often receive our 
annual reports, you know, in June, Julyish. I think that’s about 
right, something like that. I’ve only been through the first cycle 
this summer, but I’m pretty sure that’s pretty accurate. 
 
So there’s concern now about those being pushed back now that 
potentially — theoretically of course, because we’re waiting for 
the order in council to decide whenever the fiscal year-end is 
going to be — but theoretically if it changes to match the 
government’s fiscal year-end, then that could result in the 
annual reports being pushed back. 
 
And already we feel like they’re coming in quite late, they’re 
coming in sort of in the dead of summer, which can be a bit 
frustrating. Hopefully maybe they’ll get pushed back to when 
we’re sitting in the fall. I don’t actually know; again we’re 
operating on quite a few theoreticals right now because this bill 
is a bit sparse and we have to wait for the order in councils to 
actually lay out what it’s going to be. 
 
But I think it’s really important, as I’ve said many times, for us 
to have full transparency and accountability that we also have 

annual reports that come to us in a timely matter and give us an 
opportunity to actually really comb through them, ask the 
questions that we think deserve to be asked, and get the answers 
that are needed. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, she also raised a concern, and I’m 
just going to quote her. She said, and I quote: 
 

The alignment of budget years according to the minister, 
the former minister, would also provide Finance with more 
current information on Crown earning expectations and 
their impact to the provincial budget. 

 
So she raised a concern because she wasn’t entirely sure how 
that actually meant that better numbers are actually being 
received and why there is an issue with respect to getting good 
numbers from our Crown corporations right now, and exactly 
whether or not this is actually going to alleviate the concern that 
the former minister had raised when tabling this legislation. 
 
So I suppose that will be left to be determined, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. But these are very important concerns that I think are 
important that we’re raising them. And at committee we’ll be 
probably asking these questions as well. And we’ll be 
monitoring this as well because, as I’ve said, a lot of the devil is 
in the details in terms of this legislation in that most of the 
important decisions are going to be left to cabinet to decide and 
for an order in council. 
 
So we’ll be watching closely when this legislation passes to 
ensure that the goals are actually being met and our goals of 
transparency and accountability in our finances in the province, 
both within the government and within the Crowns, are fulfilled 
and respected. Because I can tell you we’ve been having quite a 
few problems with that for quite a while, I was going to say 
since the April election, but I think it’s probably stemmed away 
longer than that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So with that, I think there will be other colleagues of mine who 
will want to join in this debate, so at that I will adjourn debate 
on Bill No. 2. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member from 
Regina Douglas Park has moved to adjourn debate on The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Crown Corporations’ Fiscal Year End 
Standardization) Amendment Act, 2016. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 4 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 4 — The Queen’s 
Bench Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur la 
Cour du Banc de la Reine be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a pleasure to rise tonight and enter into the debate on Bill 



1010 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2016 

No. 4, An Act to amend The Queen’s Bench Act, 1998 and to 
make related amendments to The Constitutional Questions Act, 
2012.  
 
Now as we’ve been talking tonight about our different 
experiences, I’ve not had too much experience with the Queen’s 
Bench court either. We’re making confessions here. But it is an 
important part of our system, and so it’s always interesting to 
enter into the debate of this because clearly that is our job. Our 
job is to have the discussion, to think out loud about what are 
the potential pitfalls? What are the unintended consequences? 
What’s the logic; why is this being brought forward? And so we 
take our job very seriously, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because things 
can go off the rails pretty quickly if we didn’t have that careful, 
fulsome discussion and questions about what are the intentions 
of the government, and why this piece of legislation, and why 
do we need to do this in these certain ways. 
 
And of course this is one of those bills where we have to think 
carefully. You know, the relationship between the legislative 
branch and the judicial branch is one that is, it’s pretty sacred. 
It’s one of those, you know, we talked about the three branches 
of governance: the executive branch, the legislative branch, and 
the judicial branch. And so when we set up The Queen’s Bench 
Act, it’s one that we shouldn’t go back too many times, 
constantly tinkering with it. And so the questions we’ll ask 
tonight and into committee are very, very important. 
 
So to start with, I will take a minute and think about some of the 
things that the minister made when he brought this forward — 
one of the first bills; it is No. 4 — that they brought forward. 
And so it’s interesting that this was one of their priority pieces. 
So he talked about the: 
 

. . . amendments to the Act are required to fulfill 
Saskatchewan’s obligations as a signatory to the New West 
Partnership Trade Agreement, which will allow existing or 
future awards made by dispute resolution panels to be 
enforced against any party as if they were civil judgments 
of the court. 

 
And he goes on to say: 
 

Amendments to the Act will be made to allow awards to be 
made by dispute resolution panels under trade agreements 
to be enforced as if they were civil judgments of the court, 
and allow awards to be enforced against persons other than 
the Crown. 

 
So this is an interesting piece, and of course this is very much in 
the news. We’ve been watching closely the CETA 
[Canada-European Union Comprehensive Economic and Trade 
Agreement], the Canada-European trade agreement, and what’s 
been happening in Europe, particularly one of the states, I 
believe, in Belgium and their concerns particularly around this 
piece of that agreement about the ability to corporations to 
bring forward their concerns and actions against individuals and 
have them enforced. 
 
And so this is not a small thing that we should take lightly. It’s 
an important piece. Of course when we sign trade agreements, 
it’s hugely important that we honour them, and we think in 
many ways, trade agreements can be beneficial for economic 

development. But there are a lot of questions, and one of them 
is around respecting the sovereignty of nations and protecting 
unique internal economic incentives, whether they be boards of 
different kinds . . . And so this does kind of open up that can of 
worms, and of course the New West Partnership Trade 
Agreement is one that’s a domestic agreement. 
 
And so I’m not sure. You know, if I look in the Act, it does talk 
about domestic trade agreements. And so what the minister . . . 
And he doesn’t — I don’t know whether he’s being clever in 
this or just not as clear as he might be — doesn’t talk about the 
fact that he is taking the word away, the word “domestic” and 
just leaving it as “trade agreements.” So really what that means 
then, we’re really opening up to international trade agreements. 
And that’s the intent of international trade agreements. 
 
And so I don’t know why he would use the cover of the New 
West Partnership Trade Agreement, which is a domestic 
agreement, and would fit under the existing legislation. I could 
be wrong. I’m not a lawyer. But the common sense reading that 
I bring to the table says everything seems to be okay. Why are 
we getting rid of the word “domestic”? And then the minister is 
talking about the New West Trade Agreement. 
 
So if I’m missing something, I’m very happy to hear the 
clarification, but he isn’t clear in his speaking notes. The 
explanatory notes are not clear either. They just reference that 
they could be a broader interpretation. I tell you that’s the kind 
of language that leads to more questions. What does that mean? 
What does broader agreements mean? Well of course it means 
international agreements because the New West is a domestic 
agreement. 
 
So I think in many ways we should be calling a spade a spade 
and saying, this is what we’re really wanting to do. And then 
that can be straightforward and everybody knows. There is no 
sort of shell game here, or try to get something done under the 
cover of saying something else. We need to be straightforward, 
and I think many times people get nervous about any kind of 
agreement, any kind of agreement when people are not being 
straightforward and using clear language and saying what they 
mean and meaning what they say. When they start to cloud the 
issues and then saying, well we want to make this legitimate 
under the current piece of legislation by taking out the word 
“domestic,” but they don’t really say that, that’s a concern. 
That’s a concern. It only leads to loss of confidence because 
people are not being straight up. 
 
[21:15] 
 
And the question is, why? Why? Is it just laziness? Is it just 
because people think they’re all on the same page? Or is there 
more to it? And people wonder why people are suspicious of 
legislation, are suspicious of agreements when they don’t . . . 
people when they talk about them don’t say what they mean and 
don’t mean what they say. And this is a question that we’ll have 
for sure. We’ll have a question about that. 
 
And as well the minister goes on. And he talks about, in 
addition, related amendments to The Constitutional Questions 
Act, 2012 will be made for the appointment of an administrator 
for purposes of managing the court-appointed lawyer process, 
setting out rules and process for the appointment of 



October 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1011 

court-appointed lawyers from a list of approved lawyers. And it 
goes on; the lawyers are to be paid at a fee rate set by the 
administrator, and provide that any lawyers appointed outside 
this process are not entitled to payment by the government. So 
that’s pretty straightforward. 
 
Interestingly, this is a new requirement. I don’t know what’s 
been the past practice for years, many years I would assume, 
that there probably . . . You know, if there wasn’t a list, were 
people bringing in their own ideas of who they’d like to be 
represented and then paid for by the government? Has that been 
the past practice? I’m not sure. We need to know more about 
that. After all these years, you’d think we’d have a pretty 
consistent, pretty standard process for doing this. In 2016, after 
all these years, it seems to be a problem. So we need a little bit 
of history here. 
 
You know, I think I referred to the Minister of Agriculture’s 
thorough and fulsome speaking notes about the horned cattle, 
and he gave a real clear history, back to the ’30s and ’40s, about 
why we need to move on the way we do. That makes sense. 
Those kind of speaking notes, somebody like me can 
understand. But here when we’re doing this, I go, I need a little 
bit more information, a little more history. And I know you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, you’re a bit of a history buff. And clearly 
when we talk about the courts in Saskatchewan, they have a 
long, long history. And I think they go back, you know, decades 
and decades. And so when we’re talking about changing things 
up here, creating a list of lawyers that are appropriate, who’s in 
and who’s out, that’s an interesting thing. 
 
And then the other interesting twist to this is now he doesn’t 
really talk about how we remove lawyers from that list, but the 
way that they remove lawyers here is kind of odd because it 
goes . . . This is what it is. And I’ll just read the section here for 
the people at home. I know they’d be interested. Removal of a 
lawyer from the list, and I mean that’s kind of an interesting 
term: the list. You get on the list or you’re not on the list. What 
list? You’d think that they’d have a longer title than just the list, 
but maybe that has some special meaning in the world of law. 
But: 
 

“Removal of lawyer 
15.5(1) The administrator shall remove a lawyer from the 
list if, at any time during the preceding five-year . . . 
[panel], the lawyer has been removed from the panel of 
solicitors maintained by The Saskatchewan Legal Aid 
Commission pursuant to The Legal Aid Act. 
 
(2) The administrator may remove a lawyer from the list 
for just cause by giving the lawyer . . . his or her removal 
and setting out the reasons for the removal. 
 
(3) A lawyer may, within 30 days [of receiving notice can] 
. . . apply to the Court of Queen’s Bench to set aside the 
administrator’s decision. 

 
I appreciate that because it’s setting out an appeal process and 
it’s in the legislation. And we can debate it and we can have 
questions about that. And: 
 

(4) On an application made pursuant to subsection (3), the 
court may order the reinstatement of the lawyer on the list 

or dismiss the application.”. 
 
So that makes sense, but section (1), if I can review that again, 
it talks about the lawyer being removed from the panel of 
solicitors maintained by the Saskatchewan Legal Aid 
Commission. So I find that an interesting, interesting twist. 
Why is that being brought into this now if it’s not part of the 
process of putting a name on the list but it’s part of the process 
for taking the name off the list? 
 
I would think if you’re good enough to be on that list from the 
Saskatchewan Legal Aid Commission, if you’re good enough to 
have your name put on and we want . . . We have two sets of 
lists here. And what is the purpose of having two lists? You 
have the one and it’s just called simply, the list. And then you 
have this other group of names that has been from a panel of 
solicitors maintained by the Saskatchewan Legal Aid 
Commission. So I guess that list goes by the name, the panel of 
solicitors maintained by the Legal Aid Commission. Pretty 
straightforward. So I find this all very intriguing and I think that 
the minister will have questions in committee about this. 
 
The two real parts, one is the question marks around the lists 
and the implications. And I know that some of my colleagues 
have raised the question about how many lawyers are out there 
and able to act upon being appointed by the court. Is there a 
shortage? Is there a need for this? And has there been a practice 
of people coming in and saying that they need the court to 
appoint a lawyer for them? And they happen to have somebody 
in mind, you know, which seems to be kind of odd because if 
they had somebody in mind but couldn’t afford them but would 
want the government to pay, is this a common practice? Is this a 
thing that happens quite often? I don’t know because, as I said, 
I’m not privy to that information. So there’s questions about 
this. 
 
And of course, as I said, there will be questions around the 
implications of removing the word “domestic” when really they 
were after an ability for the New West Partnership Trade 
Agreement, which is not international but a domestic agreement 
among the Western provinces . . . And so domestic, including 
the word “domestic” does not create a problem for that. It might 
be more clear if it was interprovincial. But to me in my 
language, I understand domestic to mean in Canada and not just 
. . . And maybe I’m, you know . . . If domestic means within the 
province, but I would be surprised if that’s the case. I don’t 
know if that’s in the definitions. It may be in the definitions of 
what domestic means, but I would be surprised. It’s not in the 
definitions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so I think a common usage of 
language. Domestic means that it is within Canada, so why the 
need for that change? 
 
And that’s a bit of an odd thing, that they should be using one 
agreement to get something bigger done, you know. And as I 
said, you should call a spade a spade. If that’s what you mean, 
fair enough. If it’s because of CETA or TPP [Trans-Pacific 
Partnership] that we’re creating this, taking away this, but don’t 
use the New West Trade Agreement because I mean that’s 
foolish. 
 
And that’s why people lose faith in governments because, as I 
said, it’s really important for governments, particularly when 
they’re setting up, you know, the laws, that you say what you 



1012 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2016 

mean and mean what you say and don’t do doublespeak. Don’t 
be talking about TPP and CETA under the guise of talking 
about the New West Trade Agreement. That’s where frustration 
comes in and that’s where people have big questions about what 
do you really mean. What do you really mean? 
 
And so with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is important that we 
have faith in our courts, and we do. It would be interesting to 
have the discussion about the Queen’s Bench and how they’re 
doing vis-à-vis . . . I know one of the things I’m interested in, 
vis-à-vis the human rights changes we made a few years ago, 
has that been a good thing or a bad thing for, vis-à-vis the 
Queen’s Bench, and how are things going? 
 
This is interesting that the minister did not say this was part of 
the new justice initiatives that we talked about. Other pieces of 
legislation regarding different courts didn’t refer to that. So this 
is an interesting piece before us. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know we have lots of work 
tonight to do and if we’re going to get through them all, we 
have to speed this up a bit I suppose . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . Okay, I just wanted to double-check. Well I think that I’ve 
run my course because, as I’ve said, there’s two or three 
concerns here we have about the list of lawyers, what that 
means, how they get approved and who makes that decision, 
how they get removed, the inconsistencies between using the 
Legal Aid Commission and their list, and the implications of 
only using it to remove lawyers and not to put lawyers in, and 
of course the trade agreements. As I say, people are for 
economic development and they see agreements . . . We are an 
exporting province. It’s important that we do well in the 
international world. But as I say, you’ve got to mean what you 
say and say what you mean. That’s pretty common sense and 
that’s what has served us well. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be moving 
adjournment of Bill No. 4, An Act to amend The Queen’s Bench 
Act, 1998 and to make related amendments to The 
Constitutional Questions Act, 2012. I do so move. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member from 
Saskatoon Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 4, 
The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 5 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 5 — The 
Electronic Information and Documents Amendment Act, 2016 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the 
Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to join in 
the debate on The Electronic Information and Documents 
Amendment Act, 2016. Before I get into talking about the bill 
and what the bill proposes to change, I would like to start out 

with . . . I always show an example, you know, and using some 
of the things that government’s not done. And I don’t know 
who’s requested this, and obviously government doesn’t like 
consulting anyone, as we know that. They like just doing 
whatever they want and they move along doing whatever they 
would like to do. It doesn’t matter what people, you know, have 
to say. This government just says, we know what’s best and 
we’re just going to do what we want to do. And they’ve shown 
that. Because they got such a big majority, 51, they say they can 
do whatever they want. You know, they got a big majority but 
at the end of the day — I’ve said this before — the people, the 
people of this good province are going to hold those members 
to account, you know. But you know, they’ll say what they 
want and that’s all right. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to go back to 
saying the issues that many of our constituents face, and the 
issue is this government’s, the dialogue that they have . . . They 
say they have the dialogue that they have. There is no dialogue 
with a lot of groups and people. This government goes on deaf 
ears, and I’ve said that. 
 
People come in, whether it’s the NORTEP [northern teacher 
education program], that we see the cuts coming to this 
program. The government doesn’t consult anyone. They just go 
out and send out these letters and say, well you’re going to be 
cut. They’ve done that in so many different situations. 
 
[21:30] 
 
And I talked about how they bully people, how they’re 
mean-spirited, and the things that they do to people. People are 
scared. They’re intimidated, you know. And we’ve seen what’s 
happened to some of the school boards, those that speak out 
against this government, you know. 
 
At the end of the day, I think people are starting to say it 
doesn’t matter anymore and they’re going to start holding this 
government to account. They’re not going to be scared 
anymore. They’re going to speak what’s on their mind. And I 
commend those school divisions, those individuals that are 
speaking up saying, enough’s enough. Enough’s enough of the 
mismanagement. 
 
We look at so many things. Day after day we ask questions in 
this House about the GTH land deal, about the mismanagement 
of money. And we’re going to get there because we’re not 
going to let up on them. I’ve talked about that. The people are 
asking and demanding that those questions be answered. And 
we’re going to keep answering them. 
 
But it just shows back, you know. I don’t want to lose sight of 
where we are on this legislation and this bill. So I want to make 
sure we come back to make sure that we’re talking about the 
bill, what matters. But again I go back to this. We don’t know 
who’s asked for this bill to be brought forward. And there might 
be good reason. Maybe it’s the real estate company in there. 
We’ll look at that. Maybe it’s some of the banks. 
 
And you know, when you think about, you think about the 
changes, to me it sounds like they’re going from a paper 
process, that they’ll be able to go to electronic. And I don’t 
know if that’s going to matter, whether it’s the signatures you’ll 



October 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1013 

be able to . . . on mortgages, if they’re looking at that. And I 
mean some of those mortgage documents that you sign, I think 
the banks and the real estate, I think they’re, you know, it must 
be about 100 pages. So maybe this makes it where now it’s 
electronic and they don’t have to provide the paper, and it saves 
on paper. 
 
But having said that, you know what’s interesting? I was sitting 
here thinking, well that’s kind of good. We’re saving on paper 
and stuff like that. And technology is moving where it is. You 
want to make sure it’s protected. You want to make sure that 
those electronic documents are protected, that nobody has 
access to them that shouldn’t have access, just like a paper 
would be in the bank and locked up in their safe. So there’s 
those issues. I know that’ll have to be . . . [inaudible]. 
 
But you know what’s interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker? I was 
thinking about this. It’s too bad. And maybe this would have 
helped the Finance minister. The Finance minister, instead of 
being able to provide us with paper with the first quarter report, 
he could have done it electronically to make it easier for him. 
Or the mid-report he could do it. Or even how about a budget 
that he never presented to the people before the . . . He could 
have done it electronically. 
 
And instead of, you know, here we have it going where, you 
know, it’s so much work they couldn’t get it together, you 
know. They didn’t have enough members to deal with it. They 
didn’t have enough staff. Like it’s amazing to watch. 
 
But there would have been an opportunity for them to use this. 
This electronic documents would have been great. So it would 
have helped them. So maybe this definition, maybe this’ll be a 
definition in here later that’ll say . . . Like we see with the bill 
that they’re proposing, we want to make sure the definition of 
what privatization is. Well maybe the definition in here, it could 
be used for the Finance minister, again as I said, Mr. Deputy, to 
give some reports that the people of this province deserved to 
see the finances, to see exactly the mess that this government 
has made. There would have been an opportunity. But having 
said that, there’s a provision for that government and maybe 
they can do that. 
 
But the point that I wanted to make, it’s going back. It’s like 
any changes that this government wants to do. We’re not sure 
where it’s coming from. People are a little concerned. They’re 
worried, and I don’t blame them. They should be worried. They 
should be very cautious. And we’re going to do the work that 
we’re supposed to do. And government doesn’t like consulting. 
They like doing whatever it is that they figure the plan is and 
that this is what’s best for you. And the people, the good people 
of this province know better. They do. And I think at the end of 
the day, they, you know, things . . . The tide will turn, as they 
say it. Times will change. 
 
You know, they had record revenue as we talked about. They 
could’ve done so much. And I think about back home in our 
communities, the challenges we’re facing in northern 
Saskatchewan on many of our First Nations, Métis community, 
lots of areas where the challenges we are faced with. The record 
revenue for years that they could’ve dealt with. And the 
members can talk about one project. That’s great. There’s been 
so many cuts in other areas. But having said that, you know, at 

the end of the day, the good people back home knew that and 
back home they knew that. So guess what? They didn’t send 
their candidate here. So let’s be clear. The people back home 
know and they see the hardships, and it’s been going for a long 
time. 
 
So when I say that it is challenging for many, and I give . . . 
Challenges, you know, are there for a reason sometimes. 
Sometimes we challenge our leaders back home. But our 
leaders are going to start challenging hopefully this government 
to do better, whether it’s our First Nations, Métis, our municipal 
leaders. And maybe they’ll make sure that they’re consulted on 
changes that this government’s going to enact, the bills, 
legislation, or when there’s programs that are going to be cut. 
When the most vulnerable programs, whether it’s the SAID 
program, whether it’s addictions, mental health, housing, roads, 
whatever it may be, before this government just moves along 
with what they want to do, they’ll consult more with the people 
of this good province, which they should be doing, but they lack 
that. 
 
But having said that, I’m not sure at this point who requested it. 
But like I said, it might have been the real estate companies. It 
could’ve been the banks about the changes that are being 
proposed here. It doesn’t sound like there’s a lot of changes. 
But I know in committee, we’ll get to ask them tough questions, 
and we’ll work through that. And we’ll do what we need to do 
and consult with those individuals. And maybe some of my 
colleagues have heard from them, and that’s fine. I’m not aware 
of it but maybe they have and maybe those individuals will say 
this is a good piece of legislation, we’re supporting it, go ahead. 
And that makes sense. Sometimes we do that, sometimes we 
work together. 
 
But sometimes, Mr. Speaker, we’re totally opposed to what this 
government is trying to change. And when I see . . . You know 
my colleague from Athabasca talked with compassion about 
this government secretly trying to privatize our Crowns before 
the election. They didn’t talk about that, but now all of a sudden 
. . . Nobody knocked on the doors and said, you know what, 
we’re going to go out and we’re going to privatize after the 
election. They didn’t say that. I bet you none of them did. But 
now we see what’s coming, so there’s a hidden agenda. 
 
Some will say, you know, let’s hold the government account . . . 
And people are saying from all over, it doesn’t matter where I 
go, where my colleagues go, they’re hearing it from people 
saying, this is owned by our people — they are very proud of 
our Crowns — they should not be touched. And people are 
getting angry and I think they’re going to actually send a very 
clear, strong message by the petitions, by I think writing to their 
MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] — MLAs on that 
side of the House, MLAs on this side of the House — to make 
sure that our Crowns should stay protected and part of the 
province of Saskatchewan, very proud. 
 
So with that, I don’t want to take any more time on this bill 
because I know my colleagues will have more questions. And 
like I said, in committee they will ask some tough questions and 
get clarification on it from the minister and officials when it 
goes before committee. So at that time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
I’m prepared to adjourn debate on Bill No 5. 
 



1014 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2016 

The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 5, The Electronic 
Information and Documents Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 6 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 6 — The Statute 
Law Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 
pleased to rise in my chair to speak to the bill this evening. This 
is a very straightforward housekeeping bill. There’s not a lot 
that is actually happening here other than a number of spelling 
changes and word changes that reflect the minister’s desire to 
update the language in the bill. It makes, actually it makes 
amendments to 24 different Acts to update language and correct 
grammatical and reference errors. 
 
So some of the things that we see under all these different bills 
that are being amended, the word “department” is being 
changed to “ministry.” We’ve seen many bills come forward in 
the past few years making those changes. Obviously this is part 
of that ongoing cleanup. The reference to “provincial 
magistrate” now becomes “judge,” which is a modernized 
language. Ex parte applications are now just becoming 
“applications without notice,” which is anglicizing the Latin. 
“Substitutional” is being changed to the word “substituted.” 
Tort feasor as two words is now being treated as one word 
“tortfeasor,” and the same for extraprovincial. And the change 
to the name of the Pharmacy Association of Saskatchewan, 
which is the new name. 
 
So as the minister indicated, there’s about 24 bills or Acts that 
have these updates to have the grammatical corrections done to 
them. There’s three Acts where we’re changing from provincial 
magistrate to provincial court judge. Substitutional services is 
now substituted service to be consistent with the Queen’s Bench 
rules, and different spellings, as I indicated. 
 
So this is very much a classic housekeeping bill and, as far as 
that goes, I don’t really have much to add. 
 
So at this point I move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 6, 
The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 6, The Statute Law 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 7 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 7 — The Statute 
Law Amendment Act, 2016 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2016 modifiant 
le droit législatif be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Once again thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Bill No. 7 is closely related to Bill No. 6 inasmuch as it’s 
dealing with the same kind of changes. However because some 
of these bills are actually, that are being corrected, are bilingual 
bills, it had to be done as a separate bill. So in this case there’s 
some changes to The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, 
The Evidence Act, and The Family Maintenance Act. And those 
three are bilingual bills. 
 
So the changes being dealt with here, just a correction to the 
reference of the order, the Queen’s Bench rules, and then 
repealing section 68 of The Evidence Act and striking out the 
word “substitutional” and substituting “substituted,” which is 
not that easy to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So that’s the only changes that are happening here. And as such, 
these are housekeeping, and I would have no further comment 
or debate to enter into. So I would move that we adjourn debate 
on Bill No. 7, An Act to amend the Statute Law (No. 2). 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 7, The Statute Law 
Amendment Act, 2016 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 8 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 8 — The Summary 
Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 
is a pleasure to stand and enter into this debate. It seems to be a 
night of full disclosure — who’s been to what court and who’s 
got what ticket and that type of thing. It’s interesting when I 
read the minister’s comments and he says, and I quote: 
 

The amendments that I’m proposing are aimed at reducing 
court volumes and improving court efficiency. These 
amendments were developed in response to the significant 
increase in traffic tickets resulting from the automated 
speed enforcement photo laser project which is currently 
running on a two-year pilot basis in Regina, Saskatoon, 
and Moose Jaw.” 

 



October 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1015 

Now what’s interesting is while I never got a speeding ticket, I 
have had some experience, one limited experience, with a photo 
ticket in my own hometown of Saskatoon, and so I have lots of 
comments about this. And it’d be interesting in committee to 
hear what kind of letters the minister has got about this new use 
of photo justice. It would be very interesting to hear what the 
minister has to say about that. 
 
From my own experience, it was turning right on a red on 33rd 
and Idylwyld. And if you know the corner, Mr. Speaker, there’s 
an advance green. And the ticket I got was issued . . . the photo 
was taken sometime in August. I didn’t receive the ticket until 
sometime in November, and I was wondering how many more 
tickets, how many more tickets was I going to get in the 
meantime. So it ended up just one, and I’m glad to see that I 
must have been following the rules all those intervening 
months. 
 
But you know, there was a news story in the StarPhoenix about 
one company just down the street on 33rd where they use 33rd 
an awful lot, and the company got four tickets in one day about 
turning right on a red because everybody knows there’s an 
advance green to go onto 33rd. And those are bad habits. 
 
But the problem is with this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s 
interesting that the minister is more interested in making things 
a little easier in the courts and that process, and that’s fair 
enough. We can all understand that, when things get clogged 
that’s a problem. But the real issue here in many ways is, the 
reason we have laws is to improve safety and make sure that we 
reduce the number of accidents. And in this case when there’s a 
delay, when there’s a delay . . . And I was thinking, man there’s 
three months between, three or four months between the actual 
photo being taken and the ticket being received in the mail, 
that’s not justice. That’s not helping somebody understand the 
issue around safety. 
 
[21:45] 
 
If you got the ticket on the day you did it, or right away like in 
the good old days where you had the police officer issuing the 
ticket, right away you understood you did something wrong. 
Right away you thought, okay, I’m going to change my ways. 
But to go three or four months later, you just think something’s 
wrong with this picture here. If they can’t do it quicker than 
that, then maybe the ticket should be dropped. Because the 
whole point of improving safety has the moment of learning — 
and I’m a teacher — the moment of learning has come and gone 
big time, big time. And there’s a lot of anger and frustration. 
And I would really like to see what kind of letters and 
comments the Minister of Justice has got around the whole 
justice-by-photo movement we see now. 
 
I mean I understand that technology’s there and it’s a good 
thing and we can use it. But what’s interesting is how you can 
use that instantaneous method of photography and slow it down 
to a snail’s pace of months to get the ticket out. Now I 
understand there’s intervening processes where somebody has 
to review the photo and all of that. It does take time. 
 
But to me, as I say, the whole issue is about safety. And it’s not 
about making a lot of money, and that’s what we’re told over 
and over again. This is not a cash grab by the Government of 

Saskatchewan to help them balance a budget because of 
financial mismanagement and scandals like the GTH. It’s not 
about that. It’s not about that at all. It’s about, it’s about safety. 
 
Well I have a hard time believing that when I see how slow this 
process can go. And I see businesses and individuals raise those 
concerns. And they understand everybody’s on the side of 
making sure safety is happening and that people follow the 
rules. But the one thing we don’t want to see is people taking 
shortcuts through residential streets — and I’ve heard of this — 
particularly to get around the cameras on 33rd, or people going 
down Avenue B to turn on to Idylwyld just to avoid the camera. 
And that’s not the way it’s supposed to be. That’s not the 
purpose. And so when we get to committee and the minister 
comes forward, we’ll have those questions. 
 
And I find these bills tonight very interesting because, you 
know, we’re here to serve the public, the greater good, and 
sometimes I see these bills coming forward, and I’m wondering 
who are they really out to serve better. Is it the bureaucracy 
behind the system or is it the people? And I feel really, in this 
case . . . I know there’s been letters written. There have been 
articles in the newspapers about justice by photography. And I 
think that we have to have a good, good discussion about this, 
and so I will be very interested in hearing the minister’s 
comments about how this can work. 
 
I mean I think there’s some really simple ways we can change 
this up. If the tickets can’t be issued within one or two days of 
the infraction happening, then the ticket should be a warning 
because these tickets are fairly expensive. But if it goes on that 
it’s going to be past more than three months or 90 days, then the 
whole thing should get dropped because it’s just, the path, the 
time has really passed. You know — what’s the saying? — 
justice delayed is justice denied. And here’s a case of, you 
know, it may be turning right on a red light, but you know, 
that’s important. That’s important. There’s a variety of reasons 
why because of the design of the traffic. But 90 days, 120 days 
later, and they cannot get their act together to get the ticket out 
the door, there’s just no excuse for that. 
 
And if there is a reason that things have been delayed for 
whatever reason, then it’s really up to the government to say: 
you know what? We’ll take this. We’ll eat this because this is 
too . . . it’s not meaningful any more. But as I said, to delay the 
tickets and then have people continue the behaviour for up to 
three or four months without them knowing that they’ve done 
something wrong, and they continue to do it daily, this is a real 
problem. But I do understand many of these things have been 
ironed out, but I hope they have been. But if this is the reason 
for the people going to court . . .  
 
And you know, it’s interesting because he talks about this, and I 
quote: 
 

. . . this bill establishes a new administrative process for 
defendants who want to plead guilty but want more time to 
pay their fine. Currently, if a defendant wishes to plead 
guilty but would like more time to pay the fine, he or she 
has to apply to a justice for an extension. This bill will 
move these applications for an extension of time to pay out 
of court and into an administrative process through the fine 
collection branch, which will reduce the number of people 



1016 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2016 

who need to attend court. 
 
So why are we seeing so many more people in this process of 
having to pay greater amounts of fines? Are the fines that much 
higher? Are they getting that many more tickets? 
 
You know, as I said, that one company that got four tickets in 
one day without knowing that he had actually broken the law, I 
mean that is . . . And then to wait weeks to hear about it, that’s 
just not right. That doesn’t make any sense at all. And is that 
why our courts are being plugged up because of this increased 
number of tickets? And people are saying, I’ve got 1,000, 
2,000, maybe $5,000 worth of tickets that all of a sudden they 
happen to have got? 
 
Now nobody is saying that you should be speeding. Nobody is 
saying you should be turning right on a red light when the sign 
is up for that. But we are saying there needs to be a process 
that’s fair to everyone involved and that means the drivers, and 
that means the people involved. So that’s why we’ll have 
questions, and I will be very curious to know about this. 
 
I mean, part of this is the SGI process too. They seem to be 
really involved in this whole thing. But of course, the courts are 
as well. So he also talks about the bill incorporating for the 
Criminal Code provision that authorizes the swearing of 
information by means of telecommunications and making that 
provision related to provincial offences. And that makes sense 
too. So some of this will be straightforward. Now he talks about 
telecommunications such as by fax. Of course as we speak, 
faxes are even becoming more obsolete. And whether it’s by 
PDF [portable document format] or scanned documents and not 
by fax, we’ll have lots of questions about this one, Mr. Speaker. 
I know I will be. It will be my opportunity to get off my 
shoulders some grudges I’ve had about that ticket from a few 
years ago.  
 
But I do think it represents a basic unfairness of “justice 
delayed is justice denied.” And while I was happy to amend my 
ways and to pay the ticket, I’m thinking, I wonder how many 
other people are in the same circumstance that I am and feel 
pretty, pretty, pretty . . . they feel pretty treated unfairly about 
the whole process. 
 
Now with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that I know many 
others will want to speak on this Bill No. 8. I know that it’s an 
important one. And of course when we think about our own life 
experiences with the court system, it gives you different insight, 
gives you a different perspective on what it’s like to get a ticket, 
when you get one, and you think this isn’t quite right. So with 
that, I would move adjournment of Bill No. 8, An Act to amend 
The Summary Offences Procedure Act, 1990. Thank you, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 8, The Summary 
Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 9 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 9 — The 
Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 
2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’exécution des jugements 
canadiens be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
honoured today to stand here and talk about Bill No. 9, The 
Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2016. 
This was an amendment Act that was brought forward by the 
Minister of Justice in the spring session that we had, and boy, 
the Minister of Justice has been busy because a lot of these 
amended Acts come from his portfolio. So they’re going to 
have some really active committees, and our critic for Justice is 
going to be very busy with a lot of these committee dates. But 
it’s good that we review these Acts and look at this. 
 
So basically, the purpose of the amendments for this Act is so 
that it allows for easier enforcement of tax judgments made by 
the Canadian courts outside of Saskatchewan by removing an 
administrative process. So I’m happy to see that this 
government is wanting to co-operate with federal legislation. 
And also, when the Minister of Justice was bringing this 
forward, he talked about how Manitoba just recently made these 
amendments. So they’re following the Manitoba lead. And so 
hopefully this doesn’t mean that they’re going to follow in their 
lead for other things like selling our telecommunication 
company. Because we know that if that’s in fact the case, the 
NDP will be right behind here and we’ll stop it. And we’ll be 
standing behind our Crown corporations and ensuring that 
there’s no privatization happening there. 
 
So with the amendments of this Act, I think it makes sense that 
we have the legislation that requires people to be obligated for 
their tax obligations, so even made by courts outside of 
Saskatchewan, and ensuring that we enforce this. People should 
still have to pay their taxes regardless of where they live. 
 
One of the things that is mentioned here is how it’s retroactive. 
So I have a lot of questions, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And so I 
know these questions will be discussed in committee but like, 
how long? How long, when we say retroactive, how long do we 
mean? Like do we mean five years? Ten years? Fifty years? I 
don’t know. Like how long do they stay in the system? Or 
maybe people don’t even realize they have these retroactive tax 
judgments, you know. So I think it’s important that we outline 
how long this is going to take or how far back we’re going to 
go. 
 
And any outstanding tax judgments? Like is that meaning even 
if it’s businesses that are owing taxes? Is that going to be 
included in that? Or is this just personal taxes, or what is the 
description of this? And how many people will be impacted by 
this? Are we talking about lots of people that are owing back 
taxes that we’re not enforcing, or is this just a few people? Is 
this something that’s going to be cumbersome and require some 
extra staffing or is this something that, you know, we can 
implement quite easily? So I think that’s another question that 



October 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1017 

needs to be asked. 
 
And does this include businesses that, again, like I said, that 
owe back taxes? So how are we going to determine that? And 
like, if a business, say, owes taxes in another province but 
operates here, are we going to ensure that they’re paying that 
tax? 
 
[22:00] 
 
So there’s a lot of questions in here and I think we definitely 
need to talk to potential stakeholders. Possibly even consulting 
with the Manitoba government and seeing, you know, since 
they’ve implemented their amendments to their Act, what kind 
of changes have they seen? Like have they realized that this was 
more than they thought it would be? Or is it easy to maintain? 
So I think that would be something that would be really good to 
consult with them. And besides, like if we’re implementing 
decisions made by the Canadian courts, like will we get some 
federal money for that? I don’t know. 
 
Like this isn’t an area that is my expertise. And like I said, 
when I read this I have more questions than I have at times 
answers. And I think we definitely need to consult with the 
people that will be impacted by that and exactly how 
far-reaching this is going to be. So I am sure my colleagues will 
have a lot more to add about this and in future questions, you 
know. And so I don’t have much more to add to this discussion, 
so with that I move to adjourn this debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert 
Northcote has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 9, The 
Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2016. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 10 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cox that Bill No. 10 — The Forest 
Resources Management Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure and honour to rise this evening to speak to Bill No. 10, 
An Act to amend The Forest Resources Management Act. Now 
this is a bit of one of the lengthier Acts, much lengthier than the 
other legislation I’ve spoken to this evening. So I’m going to go 
into it in quite a bit of detail, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because I 
think it’s very important that we go through this legislation in 
detail. 
 
From what I understand, the bill “. . . expands on the minister’s 
authority to enter into agreements with [certain] clients for the 
purpose of developing, improving, maintaining, closing, 
reclaiming and managing new and existing roads, road 
allowances, and rights of way” rather than just the location, 

clearing, closure and reclamation of roads. 
 
It also provides “The authority to enter into agreements with 
others to use, maintain and reclaim the abandoned roads and 
trails . . .” which I believe will . . . Its intention is to help reduce 
the ecological impacts and public safety issues created by these 
abandoned roads, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So that’s a pretty 
important thing to make sure that we’re staying focused on and 
that we’re monitoring and implementing. 
 
So I’m really hoping . . . I like to see this change or this 
authority being granted or this stronger authority being granted 
to the government, but I do hope that it doesn’t fall victim to 
other environmental regulations and environmental provisions 
that we see in other legislation that essentially are starved of 
resources. So you say one thing in an Act and then you don’t 
provide the resources that are necessary to actually enforce 
those environmental desires. 
 
And it’s important. Our resource industry is extremely 
important to our province, forestry being one of them. And we 
need to make sure that we’re conducting all of our actions in 
our natural resource sector with the goal that we can continue to 
do so for generations to come, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It also, this Act . . . or this bill, sorry, removes the sections 
related to the paying of dues. From what I understand the dues 
system is established in regulation, and the transitional 
provisions and setting of dues rates by licence are no longer 
applicable. So the purpose of this amendment is to align the Act 
with the provincial dues system that came into force back in 
July 2014 and is now applicable to all licences, including forest 
management agreements. So I suppose what I would add is I’m 
not too sure what took this so long, frankly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, why the provincial dues system came into force in July 
2014 and it took over two years for this government to catch up 
to its own legislative change in terms of updating The Forest 
Resources Management Act to reflect this current reality. 
 
The bill also acknowledges that a licence may indicate the fees 
owed and the manner in which they must be paid. From what I 
understand, it’s: 
 

Setting the amount in the licence is suited to area based 
term supply licenses who have renewal obligations and 
who are seeking a more streamlined and timelier process to 
adjust forest management fee rates so that they are in 
keeping with the actual reforestation costs. 

 
So this makes sense, Mr. Speaker, for us to make sure that 
we’re sort of keeping up with the times in terms of actual 
reforestation costs. And it provides for a little bit more fluidity 
for the groups essentially that are working in this area to keep 
up with the times, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and frankly that makes 
sense to me. 
 
I’m not too sure what took that change so long to implement, 
why the delay. And it’s really important that we are making 
sure that we are staying up to date in terms of enforcing 
reforestation costs. Again it goes back to my earlier comments 
that we want to make sure that we have these resources for 
generations to come. And part of that goal or part of that 
process means making sure that we are looking and we are 



1018 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2016 

staying current with the actual reforestation costs and how they 
are applicable today. 
 
Now the bill also acknowledges that licensees must submit a 
forest management plan if this requirement is specified in a 
forest management agreement. The change removes a deterrent 
for existing term supply licence holders wanting to move to 
forest management agreements, and new companies, as a 
company is required to obtain the approval of a forest 
management plan prior to commencing operations. And it takes 
approximately two years to complete a forest management plan 
and involves a considerable investment of financial and human 
resources. 
 
Now this looks like a fairly complicated requirement. I’ll be 
interested to know and I’m hoping at committee we learn about 
what sort of consultation has been done with respect to this 
legislation. Exactly who have they talked to? Is this in line with 
other jurisdictions? Is this in line with other provinces that have 
forestry as an industry and as a resource? And I know that our 
critic for this area is going to be talking with stakeholders and 
will likely be asking these really important questions during 
committee, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I also understand that this bill modernizes language by 
transitioning from “prior to commencing” to “before 
commencing.” Again we’re seeing legislation — most of this, 
I’d say, legislation this session, with the strong exception of a 
few actually quite concerning bills — are quite grammatical in 
terms of their changes and are simply either updating legislation 
or making minor grammatical changes. So with the exception of 
a few bills, I would say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s actually a 
pretty weak legislative agenda that we’re working with this 
session. 
 
Although we are talking about very important things in these 
bills, I don’t want that to shortchange the fact that a lot of these 
bills are just minor changes and somewhat inconsequential. So 
this isn’t some sort of beefed-up, hearty legislative agenda that 
has a lot of really important changes. A lot of these bills are 
quite minor and inconsequential, with, as I said, the exception 
of some really, really concerning bills which I know colleagues 
have already spoken to and will continue to speak to, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
I understand that this bill also acknowledges that following the 
second renewal of a term supply licence, the licensee must 
submit a forest management plan for the full renewal term of 
the licence:  
 

The amendment will address situations where proponents 
are negotiating for multiple renewals of a 5 year licence 
essentially circumventing the requirement to prepare a 
forest management plan. 

 
Now it’s good, I suppose, to see that it appears that government 
is trying to close a loophole that existed in terms of the ability 
to get licences without having to prepare a forest management 
plan, which is again, as I had said, is really important that we 
are making sure that our industry and our natural resources are 
respected and we’re doing what we need to do ecologically to 
ensure that these resources are in existence for generations to 
come, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So it’s good to see that they’ve 

closed this loophole, but again I would like to see what sort of 
consultation has been done with respect to the specific change 
and whether this was a highlight highlighted by industry or 
whether this was highlighted by the ministry. I’m not entirely 
sure, but those are hopefully important discussions that will 
happen, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at committee. 
 

[It also] . . . establishes the authority for the minister to 
prohibit a person from obtaining a licence for a period up 
to 3 years for offences including failing to comply with the 
Act, regulations or code; failing to comply with an 
officer’s or minister’s order; and the unauthorized 
treatment, removal, storage, transport or utilization of 
infected materials. 

 
I’m a little bit surprised, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this 
provision didn’t exist before. I’m happy to see that there’s now 
some teeth that ministry officials can now use if they notice that 
there is an issue with complying with the Act if they’ve had 
issues with certain groups who haven’t followed the Act. And 
I’d be interested to know if this change was made because of an 
issue that’s occurred in the past and, if so, what maybe had been 
done at that time in terms of trying to maintain the enforcement 
of the Act and protect our important and valuable natural 
resources, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But I am glad to see that it looks like apparently a loophole is 
being closed here, but I’m not entirely sure . . . or not a 
loophole, sorry, but that some teeth is being given to this 
legislation. Ministry officials are going to be given the 
opportunity to actually have an enforcement tool that they can 
use, and they can essentially ban people from getting licences 
for up to three years if they’re contravening this Act and not 
respecting our natural resources. 
 
It also does give the authority for a judge to prohibit a person 
from obtaining a licence for a period of up to five years. Now 
I’m assuming that’s if there’s some sort of very extenuating 
circumstances, that it’s determined at that point that three years 
is simply insufficient, that we need to ban this organization for 
five years. 
 
From what I understand, when that prohibition does occur, the 
bill will require that written notice of the prohibition must be 
produced as soon as possible to the person convicted of the 
offence, which makes sense, likely means that it allows for the 
ability for this individual or group to appeal a conviction if 
they’re not satisfied that it was done appropriately or they have 
some sort of dispute with that particular conviction, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. So it just makes logical sense for there to be the 
requirement for written notice of the conviction and that it be 
provided to the accused — I guess it would be a sentenced 
accused at that point — as soon as possible so there is that 
ability and there is that knowledge. 
 
[22:15] 
 
The bill also allows for a judge to prohibit someone from doing 
any act or engaging in any activity that could result in the 
continuation or repetition of the offence, which again, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, likely makes sense. If you’re going to have a 
regulation and you’re going to have an offence, you have to be 
able to enforce that. And you have to be able to provide 



October 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1019 

provisions and legislation for the enforcement of that penalty. 
 
So you know, if there’s an issue with a group or a person in 
terms of following the legislation, then we should be able to 
allow, and the legislation in this bill will allow, for a judge to be 
able to essentially add teeth to any sort of conviction, I suppose 
would be the right word in this respect. 
 
Again, it adds contractor as a person with vicarious liability and 
clarifies that licence holders are responsible for the actions of 
their contractors and is consistent with the provisions in The 
Wildfire Act which . . . Mr. Speaker, I’m assuming again it’s a 
bit of a, it sounds like a bit of a loophole closure that they’re 
trying to do there, just making sure that when an organization 
contracts out their responsibility or their duties under this Act to 
contractors, that those contractors, not only those contractors 
are responsible, but the licence holders are responsible for the 
actions of their contractors, which is good to see. Hopefully, it 
will allow for, or it’ll require licence holders to be diligent in, 
first of all the contractors that they hire, making sure that those 
contractors are following this bill and following the 
requirements. And again, hopefully with the end goal of being 
to preserve our natural resources and making sure that they are 
available not just for my generation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but 
many, many generations to come. 
 
So it seems like the aim of some of these legislative changes is 
to protect more of the forest through the required approval of 
forest management plans. So that’s good to see. It’ll be 
interesting to see how these requirements come out in reality, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I had said before, some of the 
problems we’ve seen with respect to environmental protection, 
you really don’t have to look much further than some of the 
recommendations in auditors’ reports, that while there may be 
some environmental regulations and some requirements with 
the goal of trying to protect our natural resources, oftentimes 
there’s no staff or there’s no money available for enforcing 
these really important environmental protections. So that’s 
going to be the interesting thing here, is to make sure that 
there’s enough staff, ministry staff to look at these forest 
management plans, to review them, to approve them, and that 
there’s not an issue with respect to that. Because that’s 
something that I know we’ve seen in the past. 
 
As I said, a lot of the changes in this legislation is simply just 
modernizing the language. But there are some important 
amendments here that are outlining for greater accountability 
for forest companies operating in publicly owned forests. Like I 
said time and time again, it’s really important that these 
companies that are given essentially the opportunity and the 
allowance to extract essentially a very important, very vital 
natural resource, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we’re doing this in a 
way that’s . . . Essentially, they’re given this opportunity. It’s a 
. . . what is it? It’s a privilege but not a . . . Anyways, I can’t 
really remember how that works. They’re given this 
opportunity. It’s a privilege, but it’s not something that . . . It’s 
not a right. So we need to make sure that we have strong 
protection in our forest industry. 
 
It’s really important that we have a strong forest industry, 
especially for employment in our northern communities. I do 
hope that these companies that are working in the forest 
industry in the North are employing local people from the 

North, that it’s also sustainable, and that it’s also done so in an 
environmentally friendly way so that not only are these 
resources available now, that they’re going to be available for 
generations to come, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So with that, I think that’s all I have to say with respect to this 
legislation. So I will adjourn debate on Bill No. 10. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Douglas 
Park has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 10, The Forest 
Resources Management Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 11 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cox that Bill No. 11 — The Forestry 
Professions Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure and honour to rise this evening to speak to I guess the 
second forestry-related Act I’m going to speak to this evening. 
It’s Bill No. 11, An Act to amend The Forestry Professions Act. 
Now this bill is relatively short but I think there are some really 
important points worth noting, so I’m definitely going to be 
going through those in absolute detail, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This bill amends The Forestry Professions Act, and what it does 
is it amends section 40 and section 41 which are the portions of 
the legislation in The Forestry Professions Act that, I believe, 
there are penalties . . . Yes, they talk a little bit about offence 
and penalties and some limitations on the prosecution. So what 
it does is it expands what can be penalized, essentially, in this 
Act. So right now it’s only section 23 that’s subject to these 
offence and penalty sections, but this will expand it to section 
23 or section 23.01. So what that, as I said, will do, will expand 
some of this in the legislation. 
 
So I’d be interested to know where this came from in terms of 
who called for this, if this was an issue that was found in the 
ministry that they felt that more penalties were needed because 
they were having issues, if this was called on by those within 
the forestry profession, if they felt that they were having some 
issues in terms of, for example, individuals who were . . . Now 
where is it? Section 23. Section 40. Now I’m just trying to find 
it. My apologies, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Yes, for example those 
who were saying that they were registered with the association 
as a professional forester but they weren’t in fact a practising 
member. Essentially they were pretending to be one thing but 
they didn’t in fact have the credentials. 
 
So I’m wondering if there was an issue with this that they’ve 
discovered that’s been happening in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and they were having problems enforcing it, or if it’s 
just something that they noticed in the legislation that they 
thought maybe should be changed. Because it seems like the 



1020 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2016 

way the Act was created, there was some requirements in terms 
of those who are exempt. For example, a professional forest 
technologist or a registered forest technologist or a registered 
forester, there’s certain rules under abbreviations in their title 
that they’re allowed to use, essentially just making sure that 
there’s no confusion over who has what sort of designation, and 
making sure that people aren’t coming and saying that they 
have a certain designation when in fact they don’t. But 
unfortunately, for some reason when the Act was originally 
drafted, although those provisions and the provisions in section 
23 were subject to fairly strong teeth in terms of liability and 
convictions and exactly what they would be subject to, it looks 
like just the general provisions for a summary conviction, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The original drafters of the legislation didn’t include section 
23.01 in that section, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So some of the 
things that will be now subject to section 40, which, like I said, 
essentially lays out that anyone who contravenes these 
provisions of the Act will be guilty of an offence and liable on a 
summary conviction, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that will now 
include anyone who engages in the professional practice of 
forestry who states that they are, for example, registered with 
the association as a professional forest technologist or a 
professional forester, when in fact they actually aren’t. So again 
making sure that people who are working within this very 
important industry are being accurate as to the designations that 
they say they have and the level of professional expertise and 
designations that they say they have. 
 
Essentially from what it looks like, it allows for a little bit of . . . 
It allows for some more teeth. Similar to the last legislation that 
I was talking about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s really important. 
It’s good for us to have this legislation, and it’s good for us to 
have these rules making sure that the extraction of our natural 
resources like forestry are being done in a sustainable way, that 
when we put in these provisions to make sure that those who 
are doing this work aren’t contravening any legislation, that we 
actually have people in place to be monitoring this, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Because we can have all the legislation in the world, 
but if we don’t have anybody on staff, if we don’t have enough 
ministry officials actually going in and making sure that these 
are enforced, then there’s really no point. We’re kind of all 
wasting our time and frankly we’re wasting paper that, you 
know . . . It’s important that we’re being sustainable. Then let’s 
make sure that when we’re printing paper, like in legislation, 
that we’re actually getting some staff and getting some ministry 
officials to make sure that we are being able to actually enforce 
the legislation that we’re trying to . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . Right. As my colleague just noted, it’s really important to 
make sure that we’re protecting the trappers up north as well. 
These are traditional lands that we’re talking about and 
traditional territories that we’re talking about, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
So it’s really important. Not only are we talking about 
maintaining our environment and protecting our natural 
resources for generations to come, but these are really important 
territories. These are cultural lands. These are traditional 
trapping territories. And we need to make sure that any work 
that’s being done by any companies are both doing well and 
done right and that those who are working in this industry 
actually have the credentials that they say they do, and not only 

that but the government is actually putting money into the 
Ministry of Environment to ensure that these are enforced. 
 
Because that’s what we’ve seen time and time again, Mr. 
Speaker, especially with this last budget, is slashing and cutting 
in the Ministry of Environment. And then when things happen 
like the Husky oil spill, they just look at each other like they 
have no idea what happened. But this is what happens when 
you don’t have regulation and you don’t have regulation that 
you can enforce and you don’t have staff, appropriate staff, to 
be able to enforce these important environmental regulations, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So with that, although I have much more I would love to say 
about this bill, I think at this time I will adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 11. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Douglas 
Park has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 11, The Forestry 
Professions Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Being that it’s past the hour of 10:30, 
this House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 22:30.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 1 — The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 2016  
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 993 
 Bill No. 32 — The Automobile Accident Insurance (Benefits) Amendment Act, 2016  
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 995 
 Bill No. 33 — The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2016  
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 997 
 Bill No. 34 — The Provincial Lands Act, 2016  
  Vermette ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 1001 
 Bill No. 35 — The Small Claims Act, 2016/Loi de 2016 sur les petites créances  
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1003 
 Bill No. 36 — The Small Claims Consequential Amendments Act, 2016  
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1005 
 Bill No. 37 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2016  
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1005 
 Bill No. 2 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Crown Corporations’ Fiscal Year End Standardization)  
 Amendment Act, 2016  
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1007 
 Bill No. 4 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2016 
 Loi modificative de 2016 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine  
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1009 
 Bill No. 5 — The Electronic Information and Documents Amendment Act, 2016  
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1012 
 Bill No. 6 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016  
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1014 
 Bill No. 7 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2016 modifiant le droit législatif  
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1014 
 Bill No. 8 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2016  
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1014 
 Bill No. 9 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2016 
 Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens  
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1016 
 Bill No. 10 — The Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2016  
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1017 
 Bill No. 11 — The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2016  
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1019 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


