






















































Hansard: June 21, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 20A  TUESDAY, JUNE 21, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Hon. Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Hon. Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Merriman, Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 51; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Maurice Riou http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 605 
 June 21, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would request leave for an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
thanks to my colleagues for leave. Mr. Speaker, it is an honour 
and a privilege to introduce to you and to all members of the 
Assembly some very special guests who are seated in your 
gallery. Mr. Speaker, here today representing a remarkably 
diverse multi-faith coalition are a number of guests who have 
also been meeting I think with members on both sides of the 
House on the very important matter of the protection of 
conscience rights in respect of . . . The context of course is Bill 
C-14, the physician-assisted dying legislation for the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll introduce members of the delegation that are 
here, and I’d ask them maybe if they could just stand briefly so 
that we could properly acknowledge them and welcome their to 
their Assembly. In no particular order, Mr. Speaker, because the 
first shall be last I guess, I’ll introduce Bishop Bryan Bayda 
from the Ukrainian Catholic Eparchy of Saskatoon; Bishop Don 
Bolen representing the Roman Catholic Diocese of Saskatoon; 
Sandra Kary with the Catholic Health Association of 
Saskatchewan; Mary Deutscher, also representing the Roman 
Catholic Diocese of Saskatoon; President Yves Noblet from the 
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints here in Regina; 
Bishop Robert Hardwick and the Reverend Claude Schroeder 
from the Anglican Diocese of Qu’Appelle; Major Mike Hoeft 
representing the Salvation Army; Dr. Brett Salkeld, a 
theologian with the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Regina; 
and the Venerable Kay Adebogun, rector of the Anglican 
Church of the Redeemer in Regina. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this group is representing a much broader group, 
signators to a joint statement calling on governments to provide 
for conscience rights protections with respect to Bill C-14. And 
they also are representing today a number of evangelical 
churches, church leaders from the province of Saskatchewan, 
including the Alliance Church, representing the Mennonite 
churches in our province; the Pentecostal Assemblies of 
Canada, the PAOC; three imams who couldn’t be with us today, 
representing the Islamic faith; as well as two rabbis who are 
representing the Jewish faith here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. They were seeking from this House and from 
their governments at all levels for the protection of the rights of 
health care practitioners with respect to physician-assisted 
dying. 

Mr. Speaker, I just want to say to members of the House, to our 
guests, and to those who might be tuning in that this 
government intends to do whatever it can to provide that 
protection. The Attorney General is going to work with the 
Minister of Health to canvass every single option so that that 
basic, fundamental protection for people who have faith in 
health care is provided here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming this delegation to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s truly my 
honour to join with the Premier here today to welcome these 
faith leaders to their Assembly. It’s an impressive delegation 
that we met with here today, of many faiths representing many 
people across Saskatchewan, people who are devoted to so 
many across Saskatchewan and provide such leadership and 
service to many across the province. 
 
We thank them for their direct submission and conversation 
about conscience rights and a very important discussion, and 
very important considerations for a government to take on to 
ensure we ensure accommodation of those protections at the 
same time as ensuring access to health services. 
 
So we thank them so much for their presence here today, their 
voice with government, their voice with the opposition, and 
their voice as well in their advocacy around hospice, palliative 
care within Saskatchewan, something that they identify that 
needs to be much more accessible to Saskatchewan people. This 
is something that’s of holistic supports to the people of our 
province. It’s about dignity and about security, and their voice 
on this matter is so important. 
 
It’s my pleasure to welcome these faith leaders to their 
Assembly. We look forward to continuing to work with them, 
and we thank them for their service and leadership in our 
province each and every day. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, I have the honour 
of introducing a number of important guests joining us today in 
your gallery. From the Saskatoon Downtown Youth Centre, 
Inc., better known as Egadz, we have Terry Scaddan, the board 
Chair, and we have Don Meikle, the executive director. Egadz 
started as a drop-in centre for young people 26 years ago but 
it’s grown into a groundbreaking organization that provides a 
range of services and supports for Saskatoon area children, 
youth, and families. 
 
So our work with Egadz also includes Sweet Dreams, Mr. 
Speaker, which is a very important partnership and the first 
example of a social impact bond in Canada. So I’m honoured to 
introduce today a number of vital partners in the Sweet Dreams 
project. We have Wally Mah, who with his wife are the social 
benefactors of this project. We have Eric Dillon, CEO [chief 
executive officer], and Annette Revet, the executive vice 
president, both with Conexus, and we have Chantal, most 



606 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2016 

important of all, a mom who has seen considerable success for 
herself and her family through Sweet Dreams. 
 
I’d like to thank everyone involved in Sweet Dreams and the 
executive and board of Egadz for making a difference in the 
lives of children and families in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I 
ask all members to join me in welcoming them to their 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join the minister in welcoming these guests, and I’ve known 
many of them for a long, long time — Wally and Don and 
Terry. And we’re very interested in the work that social impact 
bonds are doing. 
 
Egadz is a big part of my riding, and provides a very invaluable 
service to the youth in downtown Saskatoon and all parts of 
Saskatoon. So I just want to thank you very much for your 
good, good work. And so I’d ask all members to join me and all 
of us in welcoming them to their legislature. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like 
to join with the minister and the member opposite in welcoming 
Egadz. I’ve known Don Meikle for far too long, and . . . 
[inaudible] . . . Terry Scaddan and Chantal. The amazing work 
that Egadz has done over the decades not only for youth but just 
their outcomes are absolutely amazing. And the social impact 
bond in relation to Sweet Dreams is a game changer. And I’d 
like all members to join me in welcoming Egadz to their 
Assembly and just saying thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition, well in fact in 
welcoming everybody here today, the faith leaders here today, 
the community group leaders who are here today. But I would 
like to give a special thank you to Bishop Don Bolen. I had an 
opportunity this weekend to be a survivor. We spent about a 
day and a half on the streets of Saskatoon together, learning a 
little, getting a small taste of what homelessness actually feels 
like — just a very small taste, Mr. Speaker. But I think despite 
the fact that I think we both had some understanding of the 
issues, I know that that broadened all of our perspectives and 
made us stronger advocates for those who live in poverty and 
homelessness, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’d just like to say welcome, Bishop Bolen, and thank you 
for all that you do. I would ask all members to join me. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to the Assembly, I’m pleased . . . I have a couple of 
introductions, Mr. Speaker. 

First of all, a very special introduction in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. I have two outstanding students who are accompanied 
by their parents today. These bright young students were two of 
the three winners of Saskatchewan’s first ever First Nations 
spelling bee. You’re going to hear more about that spelling bee 
in a few minutes in a member’s statement from the Minister of 
the Environment, but first, I’d like to just briefly introduce these 
bright young students. 
 
This spelling bee was sponsored by a number of public and 
private organizations including the Government of 
Saskatchewan, SIGA [Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority 
Inc.], SaskTel, and SaskEnergy. 
 
The students who have joined us here today in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, are 8-year-old William Kaysaywaysemat III from the 
Kakewistahaw First Nation. If you’d stand up please, William, 
and give us a wave. He’s accompanied today by his father, 
William Sr. Also with us is, from the Saulteaux First Nation, 
12-year-old Alexander Johanson who won the spelling bee in 
the intermediate age category. And he’s joined by his mother, 
Joanne Moccasin. Please stand and give us a wave. Thank you. 
 
I’d also like to welcome to the Assembly, Pauline Favel. She 
was the event organizer, and she’s a student support worker at 
Chief Poundmaker School. And Pauline did just an outstanding 
job organizing this event. Thank you so much, Pauline. 
 
I’d also like to mention the third student winner who was 
unable to be with us today, Makayla Cannepotato of the Onion 
Lake First Nation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to please give these 
wonderful students, their parents, and Pauline a warm welcome 
to their Assembly. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I would also like to 
introduce to you, also in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is a 
constituent and a good friend of mine from Beechy, Dean 
Stockman. Dean, if you’d give us a wave. Dean is a very busy 
guy. He’s a farmer in the Beechy area. He’s a hockey dad, and 
he’s also a pilot. And by all accounts, Mr. Speaker, I’m far less 
terrified to fly with Dean than I am with the member from 
Carrot River Valley. Mr. Speaker, I’m glad in his busy life he 
made time to be with us here today. I had an opportunity to 
meet with him this morning and have lunch with him, and I 
hope he enjoys the proceedings today. And I would ask 
members on both of the sides of the House to please give him a 
warm welcome. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
want to join with my colleague in recognizing the spelling bee 
champions. There’s no question in my mind that the parents and 
the teachers celebrate their achievement, and I wanted to point 
out that I too am very proud of their accomplishments. 
 
And while I have the opportunity, I wanted to say hello to 
Pauline Favel who is a friend from long ago. We used to play in 
an Aboriginal volleyball circuit together, and of course my 
recollection of how good the Ile-a-la-Crosse team may be 
different from hers. 



June 21, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 607 

[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
So this is my Cree language, and I’m just saying I’m so glad 
that you’re here today, that we’re celebrating your achievement, 
and that as Aboriginal people we take our rightful place, not 
only as spelling bee champions, but as legislators in this great 
democracy called Saskatchewan. And I welcome all of you here 
today, and God bless you for your work. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to introduce to you and all members, seated in 
your gallery, Russell Kalmacoff. Russell’s a very successful 
entrepreneur. He was born in the Kamsack-Buchanan area of 
our province. Back in the 1950s, Russell and his family, they 
moved to Calgary. They started an oil recycling and 
reclamation company and, Mr. Speaker, like so many families, 
when they left Saskatchewan, Russell’s heart stayed here in our 
province. 
 
Today he runs Rockmount capital corporation. He’s involved in 
establishing capital markets in Saskatchewan and across the 
prairies. His resumé is much too long for me to go through here 
in the legislature, but he is on the board of Athabasca 
University who serves many Saskatchewan students. He’s 
involved with the Frontier Centre and the Canadian Venture 
Capital Corporation. And when he’s not working, he loves to 
spend time at Madge Lake, I’m told. So I’d ask all members to 
help me to welcome Russ Kalmacoff to the Saskatchewan 
legislature today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to introduce guests, 
and again to you and through you, I’d like to take this 
opportunity, from my home community of Air Ronge is a 
group, a grade 6 class from Gordon Denny Community School. 
Give us a hand up there, you guys. Right on. Right on. 
 
I’d just like to acknowledge the teacher, Marlina Ballantyne, 
Ashley Kennedy and Mrs. Cossette for being here from Gordon 
Denny to bring those students. We had an opportunity, the 
House is sitting, and they’re bringing a group. So it is an 
opportunity to welcome northern guests here, especially so 
many of them are Aboriginal. And I want to say to them on 
National Aboriginal Day it is an honour to have you here and 
host you in your Legislative Assembly. 
 
[13:45] 
 
There’s 35 students that came with them. Grade 6, will be 
moving on next year. But they also, with them they brought 
four chaperones, Deb, Sean, Wendy, and Duane. I just want to 
say thank you for being chaperones, great chaperones. I got a 
chance to meet with them and visit, have a little bit of a laugh, 
you know, a little talk about what they can expect to see here 
today. And we’re all, on both sides, we’re going to try to be on 
our best behaviour, I said jokingly to them anyway. 
 
But I just want to seriously take a moment and recognize them. 
We in this Legislative Assembly have family who come here 
sometimes. We get an opportunity to welcome them. And this is 

the first time since I’ve been an MLA [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] that I’ve got to welcome a family 
member, one of my grandsons, Austin Vermette. He’s in grade 
6, moving on. I just want to say it’s an honour to have you here, 
my boy, and I wish you well as you move on from Gordon 
Denny to the next school in your journey. 
 
So to all the students, it is an honour to have you in your 
Legislative Assembly. This is your building, and we’re here 
serving you. So with that I would say please, all my colleagues, 
welcome them here to their Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join with the 
member opposite when recognizing the people that have come 
from La Ronge. In that group are Sean and Morgan Hallett, and 
they are close family friends of Mayor Thomas Sierzycki. I met 
with them earlier and had a chance to meet with them and 
discuss briefly politics and political things. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I would like to use the 
opportunity to withdraw and apologize for a statement I made 
yesterday. I made an accusation regarding the opposition 
making things up, and for that I unconditionally withdraw and 
apologize. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you, through you, 
and to all the members of the Assembly, I would like to 
introduce one of my campaign office volunteers, Andrew 
Marklund. And yes, Mr. Speaker, he is graduating this year 
from Campbell Collegiate and planning to go to the University 
of Regina in the near future. His major will be computer 
science. Mr. Speaker, having political interests in this age is just 
outstanding. I ask all the members of the Assembly please join 
me welcome him in his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it’s an honour to join with one brief welcome to 
those in the east gallery here today, those from Gordon Denny 
School, and particularly the grandson of the member from 
Cumberland. And Austin, you need to know that your papa is so 
proud of you, and it’s nice to have you here today. 
 
I’d also like to welcome a very special guest in your gallery, 
Mr. Speaker, young Tyan Cherepuschak, the current 
vice-president of Pilot Butte School and the president-elect for 
next year at Pilot Butte School. He’s visited us in the Assembly 
in the past. He’s shadowing me here today. He’s keenly 
interested and aware of political affairs. He’s an incredible 
baseball player, an incredible hockey player, a great golfer, all 
around good guy, and it’s a real pleasure to have this brilliant 
young man in his Assembly here today. I ask all members to 
welcome Tyan Cherepuschak to his Assembly once again. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour 



608 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2016 

to introduce to you and through you, Ryley Regier, if you can 
us a wave. Ryley’s joined today, here today, with her parents, 
Chris and Cindy Regier. Ryley’s very active in sports. She’s 
involved in competitive swimming, basketball, gymnastics, 
theatre, but most importantly, Mr. Speaker, she’s got a keen 
interest in politics. 
 
I know that many schools across the province conducted really 
great civics classes during this last campaign, and it piqued her 
interest. She wanted to come down and meet with her MLA 
today and sit through question period, and we had a great visit 
before question period started. She had a chance to meet the 
Premier and get some pictures taken. So I’d like all members to 
welcome her to her Assembly, and maybe one day in the 
not-so-distant future, she’ll be sitting over on this side of the 
House. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’d like to introduce in the west gallery 18 grade 5 
students from the Cornerstone Christian School. It was great 
visiting with them this morning. They had lots of really 
interesting questions. They’re accompanied by their teacher, 
Mr. Troy Breitkreuz; their teacher’s aid, Ms. Sheri Sommerfeld; 
parent chaperones, Tammy Geradts and Lisa Christensen; and 
their bus driver, Carman Zinn. So I’d just like all to welcome 
them to their Legislative Building. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Steele: — To you and through you, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce Jason and Loretta Gemaro in your gallery here. Jason 
and Loretta come from Toronto, Ontario not too many years 
ago, and what brought Jason here to Western Canada was 
training with the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police]. 
Then he had to convince, he decided he would like to be posted 
in Saskatchewan, and he had to convince his wife that 
Saskatchewan was the place to be. So we would like to 
welcome him to our gallery. And he’s posted in Swift Current, 
Saskatchewan at the present time. So welcome to our 
legislature. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Stonebridge-Dakota. 
 
Ms. Eyre: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave for an extended 
introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from 
Stonebridge-Dakota. 
 
Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 
and to all members, I wish to introduce, in your gallery, Mr. 
Mark Brayford, Q.C. [Queen’s Counsel], one of the more 
pre-eminent lawyers, defence lawyers in the province and in the 
country. Mr. Brayford has been president of the Saskatchewan 
branch of the Canadian Bar Association, president of the 

Saskatoon Criminal Defence Lawyers Association, and is 
presently vice-president of the Canadian Council of Criminal 
Defence Lawyers. Over 100 of his cases have been reported in 
the law journals. 
 
He’s also a university lecturer, and it’s in that capacity that I 
first met Mr. Brayford as my coach for the national Gale Cup 
Moot competition back in 1995. And we won that. I believe the 
U of S [University of Saskatchewan] team has not yet sealed the 
deal since. I also worked for Mr. Brayford as a summer student 
and learned a great deal about working defence and 
constitutional law principles, which were very formative. He’s a 
friend, and I’m pleased to introduce him today in your gallery 
and in his Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you, and through 
you, I’d like to join with the member in welcoming Mr. Mark 
Brayford to his Legislative Assembly. I know you’ve mentored 
a lot of young lawyers in Saskatoon and in Saskatchewan at the 
university, at the U of S College of Law. 
 
I unfortunately wasn’t smart enough of a law student to be one 
of your moot students, but I’ve heard that you’ve done great 
things. You represent so many people in the province, many 
people who struggle and who are hard done by. And you do 
very, very good work and you’re very extremely well respected, 
as the member had said. I’m very happy to see you here. And 
please, I’d ask that everyone join me in welcoming him again to 
his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you and to 
all members of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce 14 
extraordinary students from the Langenburg High School. 
They’re here with their teacher, Laura Sveinbjornson who is 
actually a neighbour of mine in Churchbridge, librarian Julie 
Mussell, and parent helper Jo-Anne Roulston. I understand they 
have prepared a lot of thought-provoking questions. And 
believe it or not, they are actually looking very forward to going 
back to school because on September 2nd they get to open a 
brand new school in Langenburg. So I ask all members in 
joining me in welcoming the Langenburg grade 5 students to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the Assembly, three distinctive gentlemen up in your gallery, 
three members of the Saskatchewan EMS Association who I’ve 
come to know as good friends. The first in fact is from the 
Yorkton area, is Kyle Sereda from Moose Jaw and District 
EMS [emergency medical services]. He’s the president. 
Vice-president Steven Skoworodko, affectionately known as 
Wakaw Steve; and also secretary Trevor Dutchak from 
Parkland Ambulance Care in Prince Albert. 
 



June 21, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 609 

I’d ask all members to welcome these distinctive members to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 
with the Minister of Rural and Remote Health in welcoming 
these gentlemen who work in EMS, the EMS Association in 
Saskatchewan. I had an opportunity to meet Kyle about a month 
or so ago, Mr. Speaker. But thank you for all the work that you 
do in ensuring that people in Saskatchewan have access to 
incredibly important health care, those emergency medical 
services. So thank you. And I’d ask all members to join me in 
welcoming these gentlemen to their Assembly as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
wish to introduce to you and through you, 18 grade 4 students 
seated in the east gallery from the Herbert School in Herbert, 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, accompanied by their teacher, 
Sheryl Siemens, and chaperones Donavon and Tracy Epp. I 
hope that this group of bright young people will enjoy your visit 
to your Legislative Assembly and take home some additional 
knowledge about how we do business in government in this 
province. And I hope all members will welcome this group to 
their legislative building. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If I could, I just 
want to also acknowledge Kyle Sereda who is one of my 
constituents. He does a great job in Moose Jaw. And also the 
only person that probably hasn’t been introduced in the House 
today is somebody I worked with 40 years ago, Frank Flegel, 
who is in the press gallery. And I’d like to welcome him and 
ask everybody to welcome him to his Legislative Assembly. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure today 
to also rise and bring greetings to Frank Flegel, seated in the 
gallery behind you. Frank is the Chair of the Regina Catholic 
School Board; I understand, a pilot and a gardener and outdoors 
person with a long list and a long history of community 
involvement. So I’d like to have all members join me in 
welcoming him to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Now that everyone has been introduced, I 
think we’ll still have time for question period today. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition to improve PTSD 
[post-traumatic stress disorder] coverage for Saskatchewan 
workers. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that 

post-traumatic stress disorder can severely impact the lives of 
Saskatchewan workers, and that a delay in diagnosis and 
treatment for PTSD can be detrimental to recovery. The 
petitioners are basically just asking for presumptive coverage 
under workers’ compensation. If you’re exposed to a traumatic 
event and have a diagnosis of PTSD, the traumatic event should 
be presumed to be the cause of that PTSD, Mr. Speaker. I’d like 
to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Saskatchewan government to 
make the necessary changes to ensure that if Saskatchewan 
workers are exposed to traumatic events on the job and are 
then diagnosed with PTSD, it is presumed to be caused by 
the worker’s employment and the worker will subsequently 
be covered under workers’ compensation and receive the 
same benefits as others with work-related injuries. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed today by citizens from 
Saskatoon, Dundurn, Warman, and Martensville. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
rise to present a petition as it relates to the rental purchase 
option for responsible homeowners in northern Saskatchewan. 
And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly cause the Saskatchewan 
Party government to restore the RPO rent-to-own option 
for responsible renters in northern Saskatchewan including 
La Ronge, Air Ronge, Creighton, and Denare Beach and 
all other communities in northern Saskatchewan, in 
allowing them the dignity of owning their own home and 
building communities in our province’s beautiful North. 

 
The people that have signed the petition are all from throughout 
Saskatchewan, and on this particular page, Mr. Speaker, they 
have signed, they are primarily from Air Ronge. And I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, wetlands serve a very vital 
function in our ecosystem. They take the form of marshes, bogs, 
fens, swamps, and open water. Wetlands are home to wildlife, 
including waterfowl. They clean the water running off of 
agricultural fields, they protect us from flood and drought, and 
they are a playground where families can explore and play. 
 
In the worst cases, such as some areas on the prairies, as much 
as 90 per cent of our wetlands have disappeared. As they 
continue to disappear, so do many of the benefits they provide. 
Sound wetland policy will allow Saskatchewan to provide 
sustainable development for all sectors of business in the 
province. And the prayer reads: 
 
[14:00] 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 



610 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2016 

the Government of Saskatchewan to: 
 
Increase funding to do the proper inventory work, putting 
Saskatchewan in a better position to manage the water 
resource. 
 
Speed up the evaluation of high-risk watersheds where 
there is significant damage annually from flooding. This 
evaluation must include a recognition of drainage works 
that could be closed or restored that will alleviate some of 
the issues downstream with respect to flooding and nutrient 
loading. 
 
Create a sound and transparent mitigation process that 
adequately addresses sustainable development. The 
sequence should first focus on avoiding the environmental 
harm whenever possible before a secondary focus on 
minimizing the harm, with compensation being sought 
only when the development is deemed essential and the 
first two stages cannot be met. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed from individuals from Wadena 
and Lebret. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition in support of funding for heritage 
languages here in Saskatchewan. And we know that after 25 
years, the Government of Saskatchewan is discontinuing all 
support for heritage language learning in Saskatchewan. Since 
1991 heritage language schools have depended on this modest 
funding from the Ministry of Education to help sustain their 
programs. It’s becoming increasingly important to work 
towards improving access to indigenous languages, many of 
which are endangered. Heritage language programs provide 
support not only for immigrants, refugees, and their 
descendants but also for Aboriginal peoples and all Canadians 
who recognize the benefits of learning additional languages. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to reconsider this decision and restore funding for heritage 
language education in Saskatchewan heritage language 
schools. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing the petition today come 
from Saskatoon, Regina, and Yorkton. I do so present. Thank 
you. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Meewasin. 
 

National Aboriginal Day 
 
Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is the 20th 
National Aboriginal Day. This marks the first day of a 
month-long celebration of First Nations, Métis, and Inuit 
culture. Communities across Canada and Saskatchewan will 
gather to take part in local celebrations to honour the many 
contributions Aboriginal peoples have made. 
 
Proclaimed in 1996 by the then governor general of Canada, 
Roméo LeBlanc, National Aboriginal Day has served as one of 
many opportunities to celebrate and acknowledge such an 
important part of our country’s heritage. Since the very first 
celebration, thousands of people across Canada have gathered 
to celebrate and recognize indigenous cultures and 
contributions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government values our relationships with our 
Aboriginal peoples. We are proud to support the recognition 
and importance of First Nation, Inuit, and Métis customs 
including mandating treaty education in schools in all subject 
areas and across all grade levels. I encourage everyone across 
this great province to take part in local Aboriginal Day 
celebrations and events in or near their community. 
 
I ask all members to join me in recognizing National Aboriginal 
Day and the month of festivities that follow. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today is 
National Aboriginal Day, and it’s time for all people to think 
about the contributions and the histories of Aboriginal peoples 
throughout Canada. 
 
First Nations and Métis people recognize and condemn the 
Holodomor, the Komagata Maru, and the Holocaust. We stand 
alongside those victims because we too have had atrocities 
carried out against us. Over the years Aboriginal people have 
been subject to a history of broken promises and of neglect. 
Forced starvation, residential schools, the Sixties Scoop, the 
pass and permit system — the list goes on and on. 
 
It’s important to remember that troubled past so that we can 
understand the problems and difficulties that Aboriginal people 
face today. But that history is why National Aboriginal Day is 
so important. It’s an opportunity for First Nations and Métis 
people to lift themselves up, to celebrate their language, 
cultures, and to work towards building a country where we truly 
have reconciliation between indigenous and non-indigenous 
people. It’s an opportunity for governments to demonstrate their 
willingness to acknowledge the past and make progress for the 
future. 
 
This week marks one full year since the government said it 
would apologize for the Sixties Scoop, and indigenous people 
are still waiting. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in 
calling for action on this issue, and then recognizing the need 
for reconciliation as we all celebrate National Aboriginal Day. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 



June 21, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 611 

New Rental Housing Project Opens in Regina 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very, Mr. Speaker. On June the 18th, I 
had the pleasure of attending the grand opening of a new rental 
housing project in Regina. A total of 12 safe, quality housing 
units were added to our community, providing another housing 
option for low- to moderate-income renters. These homes were 
made possible thanks to the partnership of our government and 
the Government of Canada, under the Investment in Affordable 
Housing Agreement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, together with our federal counterparts, we 
contributed a total of 240,000 towards six of these homes, 
which is subsidized for low- to moderate-income families. With 
vision and leadership provided by 237 Property Developments, 
these homes are now a reality for 12 individuals or families. 
Because these affordable units are part of the capital rent 
subsidy program, market rents are reduced by $300 a month 
over 10 years for the low- to moderate-income renters. Mr. 
Speaker, this project is a win-win for everyone involved and 
supports the goals of the poverty reduction strategy by ensuring 
Saskatchewan people have access to affordable, safe, secure, 
and stable housing. I ask all members to join me in 
commending 237 Property Development, the federal 
government for their leadership in finding solution to help make 
life better for Regina individuals and families. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Honouring the Treaties 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, National Aboriginal Day is a 
time for all of us to think about the need to honour the treaties 
and make sure that all levels of government are living up to 
their obligations to respect treaty and inherent rights. Here 
today on Treaty 4 territory, we are solemnly reminded of this. 
First Nations signed treaties to share the land in good faith with 
newcomers to Saskatchewan. And Métis and non-status 
communities also have constitutionally protected hunting, 
fishing, and land use rights.  
 
But as we all know, federal and provincial governments have 
often run roughshod over the rights of Saskatchewan’s 
indigenous peoples since European contact with the original 
inhabitants of this land. One example of that today is the Barren 
Lands First Nation on the north shore of Reindeer Lake who 
have had over a thousand acres of their reserve lost to flooding 
caused by SaskPower’s Whitesand dam. Here and in so many 
other places we see governments not living up to their treaty 
obligations and undermining the reconciliation process. 
 
In the landmark Haida Nation case from 2004, the Supreme 
Court of Canada ruled that: 
 

The honour of the Crown is always at stake in its dealings 
with Aboriginal peoples. It is not a mere incantation, but 
rather a core precept that finds its application in concrete 
practices. [and] 
 
In all its dealings with Aboriginal peoples, from the 
assertion of sovereignty to the resolution of claims and the 

implementation of treaties, the Crown must act 
honourably. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the honour of the Crown is always at stake. We 
are duty bound to remember that. May we always act 
honourably. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Sweet Dreams Experiences Early Success 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise in the House to share early results from Sweet Dreams, a 
five-year pilot project in Saskatoon. Two years ago our 
government announced that we were going to be the first in 
Canada to use a social impact bond. We partnered with Egadz, 
Conexus, Wally and Colleen Mah to make Sweet Dreams a 
reality. Sweet Dreams provides vulnerable mothers and their 
children a safe place to live while receiving parenting support, 
access to educational opportunities, and the chance to develop 
employability skills. The goal of the project is simple: to keep 
families whole. 
 
Sweet Dreams is designed to keep children with their mothers 
for more than six months after participating in the program. 
What’s more heartening is that the six-month milestone means a 
significant reduction in the likelihood that the child will ever 
come into the government’s care. Sweet Dreams is poised to 
reach this five-year goal just two years into the project, with 21 
children and their mothers have achieved this goal to date. This 
success, at such an early stage, is exciting, and we are going to 
continue to lead Canada in improving the lives of our most 
vulnerable citizens. 
 
I ask all members to join me in recognizing Egadz, Conexus, 
Colleen and Wally Mah and their hard work, and extending our 
wishes for a bright future to all participating families. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Signing of Social Infrastructure Fund Agreement 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise in 
the House to inform members about the signing of a new 
agreement under the 2014-19 Investment in Affordable Housing 
Agreement, which will give Saskatchewan people more access 
to affordable housing. Under the 2014-19 Investment in 
Affordable Housing Agreement, a total of $91.9 million is 
being made available over five years to address a range of 
housing needs in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new 2016 social infrastructure fund agreement 
goes a step further. I am pleased that this new agreement will 
see an additional investment of up to $54.8 million for 
affordable housing over two years. This money will be targeted 
at improving affordable housing options for seniors, 
maintaining the existing social housing stock, and constructing 
and renovating shelters for victims of family violence. The 
funding will allow us to choose what programs to design and 
deliver, and to have the flexibility required to invest in 
programs that will meet local needs. 



612 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2016 

Mr. Speaker, this is great news for Saskatchewan. The goal of 
this government is to work together to keep Saskatchewan 
strong. These agreements will help us achieve that, as well as 
responding to housing needs identified in Saskatchewan’s 
poverty reduction strategy, the disability strategy, and the 
mental health and addictions action plan. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 

First Nations Provincial Spelling Bee Winners 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to recognize two students who participated in 
Saskatchewan’s first-ever First Nations Provincial Spelling Bee. 
I was pleased to bring greetings at this event, sponsored by the 
Government of Saskatchewan, which was hosted by Chief 
Poundmaker School on April 8th in North Battleford. And it 
drew over 100 students from 20 different First Nations schools 
across this province. And a great morning it was, Mr. Speaker, 
with the Don Ross auditorium full to capacity that morning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, students competed in one of three different age 
categories, and the winners advanced to compete in the national 
spelling bee in Toronto on May 15th. While in Toronto they 
also had an exciting opportunity to take in a Blue Jays ball 
game. 
 
Joining us today are two of the three winners: William 
Kaysaywaysemat III and Alexander Johanson. When William 
isn’t studying for school, where he is an A student, he is playing 
hockey with the Grenfell Spitfires and performing traditional 
powwow dance representing the Treaty 4 area. And when 
Alexander isn’t at school or spending time with his parents and 
three sisters, I understand that he loves to play games, including 
soccer. 
 
Not only should we commend these students for their efforts 
but also the organizer, Pauline Favel, for promoting a love of 
learning and a bit of healthy competition as well. Thank you, 
Pauline. I ask all members to join me in congratulating all those 
that took part in the spelling bee and the winners here today for 
their hard work. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Canada Pension Plan Changes and Federal Funding 
for First Nations Education 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I want to start by giving 
credit where credit is due. Yesterday we called on the 
government to put the best interests of Saskatchewan people 
ahead of political differences and to work together with other 
provinces and the federal government to come to an agreement 
to strengthen and improve the Canada Pension Plan for 
generations to come, something we’ve called for for years. As 
you can imagine, Mr. Speaker, we were happy to see that 
coming out of the meeting yesterday, Saskatchewan was one of 
the provinces that did just that. 
 
In that spirit and on this National Aboriginal Day, I also want to 

thank the Premier for his co-operation on calling on the federal 
government to immediately close the funding gap for education 
on First Nations, a glaring injustice that must be fixed. While 
we continue to hope for more immediate action from the Sask 
Party, the Premier’s willingness to work with us on this file last 
time I asked is something we want to recognize and something I 
thank him for. Does the Premier have any update following our 
joint letter to the Prime Minister about the federal government’s 
obligation to properly fund First Nations education? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to thank the Leader of the Opposition for his question and for 
his generous comments with respect to progress made yesterday 
at the meeting of the ministers of Finance of Canada on the CPP 
[Canada Pension Plan] enhancement.  
 
I also, if I may, Mr. Speaker, want to give credit to the Finance 
minister for Saskatchewan. We were working to play a 
constructive role. The original proposal we didn’t think was 
acceptable. Way back when when others were calling on us to 
simply adopt that original proposal, it would have had an 
increased payroll cost by 2017 and, condensed over a shorter 
period of time, would have been more onerous on those who are 
trying to create and maintain jobs in the province. And we think 
a compromise, I think in many respects we helped facilitate 
through the minister, is a much-preferred option to the deal that 
might have happened anyway, given the fact that the numbers 
seemed to be there for the federal government yesterday. So I 
thank the minister. 
 
And with respect to the question, I want to again thank the 
Leader of the Opposition, who on the same day that he asked 
the question with respect to the gap in funding on-reserve 
education versus off-reserve, he was willing to immediately 
sign a letter that we both sent off to the Prime Minister. The 
federal Liberal government party has made a commitment to 
eliminate the gap, and we need to be vigilant and ensuring that 
the gap is indeed eliminated. 
 
[14:15] 
 
To his direct question, I have not yet heard back from the Prime 
Minister. We’ve not received correspondence or had a 
telephone conversation about it. We wanted to give it a little bit 
of time, but I think it will be important for us to just make direct 
contact. And we again invite, and are grateful for, the 
co-operation of the Leader of the Opposition and members 
opposite. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Truth and Reconciliation Commission Recommendations 
and Funding for Education 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thanks once again to the Premier. 
Certainly this needs to be a top priority, and it’s a glaring 
injustice that must be fixed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Truth and Reconciliation Commission’s report 
came out nearly a year ago and was a huge step forward, but 
there’s still so much more work to do. In fact now that the 



June 21, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 613 

report is done, it’s on us to undertake even greater work to 
make sure that we move forward with addressing its 94 
recommendations. Not all are our provincial jurisdiction, but we 
must do all we can to make sure that each are addressed so that 
we can move forward and build together. The key areas, of 
course, are education, child welfare, language and culture, 
health, and justice. We’ve heard the minister say that there’s a 
multi-ministry committee in place to work on addressing these 
recommendations. That’s important. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, can the Premier provide some specifics on 
what has been accomplished to date and provide some detail 
and timelines on what the plan is, so that we as a province can 
continue the crucial path towards reconciliation to ensure that 
we’re a stronger Saskatchewan for everyone? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I thank 
the member for the question. I think there’s about 34 of the 
recommendations would be under the purview of the provincial 
government, and my understanding is we’ve been making 
progress on about 23, 22 of those recommendations. And 
perhaps we’ll ask the minister responsible to provide a specific 
update to members of the House on that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is certainly, I think, also been progress made 
with respect to the spirit of the Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission recommendations in Saskatchewan. While we 
readily admit there’s more work to be done, Mr. Speaker, we do 
see a closing in the gap in terms of graduation rates between 
First Nations or Aboriginal students in our province and 
non-Aboriginal students. We’ve not yet hit the goal — we set 
out in the growth plan to reduce that gap by half by 2020 — but 
we are getting closer to it all the time. There’s been a 29 per 
cent increase in First Nations and Métis learners enrolled in 
post-secondary since 2007. That’s 16,000 learners now enrolled 
and a 93 per cent increase from the government in terms of 
funding for First Nations and Métis post-secondary education. 
There’s a number of other initiatives across government. 
 
There’s more to be done certainly, and perhaps most important 
of all is a greater engagement on the part of First Nations and 
Métis in the economy of the province of Saskatchewan, in 
direct benefit in employment, and perhaps even, Mr. Speaker, I 
would say in terms of operating and owning small businesses 
and creating jobs for others as well. And so we know there is 
more work to be done, but I think the minister can provide a 
more specific update with respect to the recommendations from 
the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, as the Leader of the Official 
Opposition and the Premier have noted, education plays a key 
role in the TRC [Truth and Reconciliation Commission], and I 
appreciate the Premier’s words. But I want to make sure that the 
Minister of Education understands that the intent of closing the 
gap is to raise funding for all students. The answer is not to cut 
funding and to walk away from commitments to off-reserve 
schools. If done properly, a new report shows that closing the 
First Nations education funding gap would provide massive 

economic benefit to all Saskatchewan people. According to the 
study, closing the gap would bring an additional $90 billion into 
our economy over the lifespan of the current population — $90 
billion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
While we await a full follow-through by the federal government 
on their commitment to adequately fund on-reserve schools, 
will the Minister of Education commit today to working with us 
to ensure that all students in Saskatchewan on- and off-reserve 
can go to schools and classrooms that are adequately funded? 
Will he commit to working to end this disparity in the right way 
once and for all? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, our First Nations partners 
in this province have children that should be fully expected and 
entitled to participate in the growth and prosperity of our 
province, not just through education but through employment 
and through every other aspect of being a Saskatchewan 
resident. Our government has made a major commitment to 
ensuring that that happens. 
 
We have set targets for the first time in the history of the 
province to close the gap between First Nations and non-First 
Nations students. We’ve increased the graduation rate from 32 
per cent to over 40 per cent. Still a long ways to go, but our 
target is to exceed 50 per cent by the year 2020. We have work 
that is still left to do, but the progress is being made through the 
education sector’s strategic plan and we’re going to continue to 
follow through with that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

First Nations Children in Care 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, child welfare is another crucial 
issue in the TRC, and once again we have another example of 
the Social Services minister getting her facts wrong. And, Mr. 
Speaker, once again it all goes back to a media scrum in April. 
At that time the minister told the media the number of First 
Nation kids in care was going down, saying, “It has come 
down, but it’s still an overrepresentation.”  
 
Yes, indigenous children are overrepresented. But no, that 
number has not come down. In fact the number of First Nations 
children in care has gone up in each of the last three years. Mr. 
Speaker, the growing number of First Nations children in care is 
unacceptable. This is an important file involving 
Saskatchewan’s children. Will the minister commit to knowing 
the facts in her file, and does she have a plan to actually move 
more indigenous children out of care? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And 67 per 
cent of children in care are First Nations children and that is an 
overrepresentation and a concern for everyone in our province. 
It’s not unique to this province. That is a challenge that is faced 
by provinces across this entire country. 
 
What we’ve done is we have expanded services, that is more 



614 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2016 

support services for in-home before the families come into 
crisis. And we’re seeing some success from those initiatives and 
will be expanding them in this very budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we don’t want to see happen again is what happened in 
the past, where under the NDP [New Democratic Party] the 
caseloads in child welfare was growing by 53 per cent between 
2000 and 2007. Mr. Speaker, that was not sustainable and quite 
concerning. So we don’t want to return to that, and I think we’ll 
continue down the path of supports for families such as the 
healthy families initiative that was announced, I believe, last 
week where we can intervene with families, give them supports 
before the family goes into crisis and we have to bring children 
into care. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Indigenous Languages and Funding for Heritage 
Language Schools 

 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, many of the recommendations 
from the TRC report revolve around indigenous languages, and 
rightly so. The languages carry the stories and cultures of 
Saskatchewan’s indigenous peoples. Michif, nēhiýawēwin, 
Dene — we need all of these languages to be strong if we want 
our province to be strong. The heritage language schools used 
to receive funding to teach indigenous languages, but this 
government cut their grant in the last budget. 
 
These programs are important. They are crucial. And we are 
working to help revitalize indigenous languages here in 
Saskatchewan. If this government is serious about its 
commitment to reconciliation, why did it cut the funding for 
heritage language schools, and will they now commit to 
restoring that funding? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for the 
question. I also want to thank the heritage language teachers 
and the schools for the work that they do in making education 
in our province a culturally rich and diverse experience. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we made the decision to discontinue funding for 
heritage language for a number of reasons. One of those reasons 
was that the programs that they were offering were almost 
invariably offered in our schools as part of our regular 20, 30 
high school curriculum. Those programs continue to exist. 
 
Many of those programs involve First Nations languages, both 
in the larger southern cities as well as in the northern 
communities. We continue to support and will fund those. 
Those programs are there, and not only are they in the schools 
as being part of the regular curriculum, those are part of the 
programs that are available so that a student will be able to get a 
full grade 12 and use that for entry into a post-secondary 
institution. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
 

Cost of Ambulance Services for First Nations Seniors 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, seniors in this province who are 
over the age of 65 have access to the senior citizens’ ambulance 
assistance program. This provides assistance to seniors faced 
with the outrageous interfacility transfer bills. They still pay up 
to $275 each. All seniors who live in the province are eligible 
for this program. Well, Mr. Speaker, all seniors get this 
program except for status First Nations people. The 
discrimination is clear. The only reason their ambulance bills 
are higher is because they have status. 
 
Yes, there are some federal programs, but when provincial 
residents don’t get the services that everyone else does simply 
because they are First Nations, that is unfair. We have heard 
from the Minister for First Nations and Métis Affairs that 
“some things are just too important to get hung up on 
jurisdiction.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the Health minister not think a medical 
emergency is important enough? To the Minister of Health: 
when will this blatant inequity be fixed? When will this issue 
become important enough? And when will our province stop 
saying that non-First Nations seniors deserve a better deal? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the member will know from committee last night, this 
is a topic of conversation that does come up from time to time 
as a part of our MOU [memorandum of understanding] through 
the tripartite, Mr. Speaker. In fact it came up at the most recent 
meeting of the quarterly MOU meeting which was held on May 
11th where it was raised in terms of the discrepancy. 
 
The deputy minister of Health has had numerous conversations 
with federal officials looking at whether or not we can actually 
take an inventory of the discrepancies with the different 
programs between what is provided in Saskatchewan through 
Saskatchewan Health and the federal Health Canada 
non-insured benefits program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would say this though, that the position that the government 
has taken in this regard is the same position taken in 2003, in 
2004, in 2005, in 2006, and 2007 by the members opposite 
when they were the government: that this is a responsibility that 
the federal government needs to make changes to the return 
transfer policy and reinstate that benefit. We will continue to 
advocate for that position, just as the members opposite did for 
five years. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Indigenous People in Custody and Aboriginal 
Court Worker Program 

 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, we know that indigenous 
peoples make up a disproportionate percentage of our 
province’s prison population. In our correctional facilities, 74 
per cent of those in custody are identified as Aboriginal. I think 
we can all agree, Mr. Speaker, that that is an overrepresentation.  
 



June 21, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 615 

The government should be working to lower that number, Mr. 
Speaker, but they have no plan. In fact they are making cuts in 
areas that help reduce that number and reduce the rates of 
recidivism. Areas like the Aboriginal court worker program and 
community-specific centres like the Buffalo Narrows 
Correctional Centre. Mr. Speaker, making cuts in these areas 
does not reduce disparities, it increases them. Will the minister 
admit these cuts were a mistake, and what is her plan to lower 
the rates of indigenous people in custody? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll speak to the Aboriginal 
court worker program. Certainly there were reductions in the 
budget this year, Mr. Speaker. We still provide $1.3 million to 
help support the Aboriginal court worker program. We are 
confident, Mr. Speaker, that level of funding is going to be 
sufficient to ensure a responsible level of service, to ensure that 
that court worker program continues, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
working with our partners, particularly people within the 
Ministry of Justice, to look for innovative ways of delivering 
that service, Mr. Speaker. But I can tell you, I’m confident that 
a responsible and responsive program will continue to be 
delivered on the Aboriginal court worker program by the 
province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 

Suicide Prevention and Funding for 
Mental Health Services 

 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, the history that everyone in this 
House knows is not ancient. It is fresh and real in many homes 
in our communities. It was lived by family members who are 
still with us, and the effects touch many, including our young 
people. Lack of funding in our schools means literacy and 
numeracy rates are low. There are too few jobs, and too many 
young people feel trapped. Many of their parents do not have 
the resources to provide them with the help and services they 
need. 
 
Struggles with mental health are growing, and poverty and 
addictions are eating away at our community’s pride and hope. 
Suicide has become all too common. Mr. Speaker, the leaders, 
families, and members of our communities have gone to too 
many funerals. It’s just not right. What is your government’s 
plan to do more to support mental health care and to bring an 
end to this crisis? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, funding for mental health services in the past eight 
years has grown by about 35 per cent. We’ve also put in place a 
number of different protocols as it relates to reducing the rates 
of suicide in communities in this province. But we know that 
there is more work to be done, Mr. Speaker. With respect to 
suicides in northern Saskatchewan. we’ve developed and 
implemented a regional suicide prevention and intervention 
plan, participated in the embracing life committee, partnered 
with trainers and the Northern Lights School Division, 

Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in fact I can report to the House that in terms of the 
northern health regions receiving visits from psychiatrists, the 
number last year was 32 clinics were conducted across the 
North in the last fiscal year. And this year we already have 
scheduled for the 2016-17 budget year 58 clinics. So we’re 
seeing a dramatic increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well the Prime Minister a couple of weeks ago 
announced some dollars for indigenous mental health. Mr. 
Speaker, at first blush, it looks like Saskatchewan is not a 
recipient of those dollars, but the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health and I have written to the federal government to ask for 
clarification to ensure that we are getting some of those dollars. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Support for Aboriginal Workforce 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, in this time of reconciliation, we 
need to take concrete steps to make reconciliation a reality. 
When it comes to a basic measure of economic justice, the 
Aboriginal unemployment gap is getting worse, not better. As 
per the government’s latest statistics, the Saskatchewan 
unemployment rate is 6 per cent; while for Aboriginal people 
the rate is 16.4 per cent; and for off-reserve First Nations people 
it is now an alarming 25.3 per cent. And it gets even worse 
on-reserve for First Nations people where statistics are not 
comprehensively reported. 
 
What is the plan to take on Aboriginal unemployment gap in 
Saskatchewan? What are the action steps for this plan? And is 
the goal for that plan as it should be, to eliminate the 
horrendous unemployment gap that has 25.3 per cent of 
off-reserve First Nations people unemployed at a rate that is 
four times the overall provincial number? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Immigration, Jobs, 
Skills and Training. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I would note that since 2007, we’ve seen Aboriginal 
employment grow by 21.3 per cent in this province. That being 
said, we know there is more work to be done. That’s why we’ve 
made record investments into adult basic education, including 
$6 million being spent this year on reserve for adult basic 
education to create the conditions so that First Nations people 
will be job ready once they complete that training. That’s a 67 
per cent increase, Mr. Speaker, over the time that the members 
opposite were in government. 
 
In terms of apprenticeship training, 76 per cent increase in 
funding for apprenticeship since 2007. I would note as well in 
terms of targeted funding for Aboriginal employment and 
training, we’ve seen an increase of 93 per cent since 2007. This 
government is taking the issue very seriously. We’re investing 
at the front end in training. We’re investing in First Nations 
people and Aboriginal people, and we know that they’re going 
to be able to continue to participate in the economic future of 
this province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 



616 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2016 

Reaction to Daniels Decision 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. For 
years Harry Daniels fought for Métis rights and fought for 
Métis people here in Saskatchewan and all across Canada. 
Earlier this year the Supreme Court of Canada handed down its 
decision in the case that bears his name and found that the 
Métis people should be considered Indians and under the 
jurisdiction of the federal government. 
 
This decision should not be viewed as a cost-saving measure 
where the provincial government off-loads their responsibility 
to the federal government. This offers an opportunity for true 
partnerships and new beginnings. In the past, this government 
hasn’t shown leadership in building meaningful partnerships 
and instead chose to dig their heels in when it comes to 
jurisdiction. 
 
I want to know, will the minister commit to a respectful, 
insightful, pragmatic, and engaging partnership with Métis 
people, non-status, First Nations, and the federal government 
under the Daniels decision and opportunity, or will they simply 
see this as a transition to the federal government as an excuse to 
stop funding their responsibilities, and as yet another way to 
avoid meaningful inclusion of indigenous peoples here in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
that decision by the Supreme Court is indeed groundbreaking, 
as the member opposite said. It’s going into unchartered 
territory, Mr. Speaker. We had a discussion about it last night in 
Estimates. The member raised those same questions with both 
myself and the deputy minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to his more pointed . . . to his question on whether 
or not we’d be willing to meet with the affected groups, 
including the Métis Nation that he mentioned, absolutely we 
would. My door is always open to meet with them, to discuss 
the issue with them, as with the federal government. As I 
mentioned, this is unchartered territory we’re going into, Mr. 
Speaker, but certainly I look forward to discussions with all the 
stakeholders and with the federal government on this matter. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Treaty and Métis Rights and The Provincial Lands Act 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the treaty relationship in 
Saskatchewan continues to evolve. In the post-Daniels world, 
that also includes Métis rights. This government introduced its 
First Nation and Métis consultation policy in June of 2010 and 
the FSIN [Federation of Sovereign Indigenous Nations] 
immediately rejected it. They pointed out that it would create 
uncertainty and instability in the Saskatchewan economy. It has 
been said that “The proposed policy not only fails to take into 
account the First Nation commitment to honouring the spirit 
and intent of the treaties, it practically represents the antithesis 
of such a position.” 

Mr. Speaker, the introduction of the new provincial lands Act 
last week is a further example of this government’s continued 
failure to take into account the role First Nations and Métis 
people have when making decisions affecting treaty rights and 
Métis rights. It’s about respect — respect for the traditional 
users of the land. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will this government finally act in 
accordance with the duties it has to First Nations and Métis 
people? When will they deal fairly when making decisions 
which impact treaty and Métis rights? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
member for her question. The time has truly come for a 
modernization of this Act that was first enacted in 1930, and 
most recently updated in 1978. Much of the language in the Act 
is not representative of language used today; it’s gender 
inappropriate and so on. 
 
But an in-depth consultation process started in 2013 on 
revisions to this Act and included an updated call in the spring 
of 2016 for feedback from lessees, stakeholders, First Nations 
and Métis communities. The proposed PLA [provincial lands 
Act] is enabling legislation that will not impact the ability of 
First Nations and Métis communities to exercise treaty or 
aboriginal rights or to carry out traditional uses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Treaty Land Entitlement Agreement remains 
unchanged, and the PLA has no affect on it or its processes. 
There will be additional consultations when regulations are 
developed as this is enabling legislation and we look forward to 
those. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice to report Bill No. 25, The Wakamow Valley 
Authority Amendment Act, 2016 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Parks, 
Culture and Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request 
leave to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this 
bill and that the bill be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport has 
requested leave to waive consideration in Committee of the 
Whole on Bill No. 25 and that this bill be now read a third time. 
Is leave granted? 



June 21, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 617 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move to 
third reading. I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 25 — The Wakamow Valley Authority 
Amendment Act, 2016 

 
Hon. Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
the bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 25 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is 
the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — All those in favour say yea. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Yea. 
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed say nay. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 
 
The Speaker: — Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 14:40 until 14:41.] 
 
The Speaker: — All those in favour of the motion please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 47] 
 
Wall Stewart Morgan 
Wyant Duncan McMorris 
Boyd Harpauer Doherty 
Reiter Moe D’Autremont 
Weekes Beaudry-Mellor Cox 
Docherty Campeau Heppner 
Cheveldayoff Harrison Ottenbreit 
Tell Bonk Hart 
Steele Doke Hargrave 
Makowsky Marit Merriman 
Wilson Eyre Ross 
Olauson Kaeding Parent 
Nerlien Bradshaw Dennis 
Phillips Steinley Lambert 
Lawrence Carr Michelson 
Buckingham Kirsch  
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed please stand. 
 
 

[Nays — 10] 
 
Wotherspoon Chartier Belanger 
Sproule Forbes Rancourt 
Beck McCall Sarauer 
Vermette   
 
Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the third reading 
motion, 47; opposed, 10. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried. 
 
Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. In order to facilitate the work of committees later this 
day, I move that this Assembly do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:44.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 605 
  Wotherspoon ..................................................................................................................................................................... 605, 607 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 605 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 606 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 606 
  Chartier ............................................................................................................................................................................. 606, 609 
  Reiter ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 606 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 606 
  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 607 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 607 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 607 
  Fiaz ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 607 
  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 607 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................... 608 
  Steele .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 608 
  Eyre ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 608 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 608 
  Kaeding ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 608 
  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 608 
  Stewart ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 609 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 609 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 609 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 609 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 609 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 609 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 610 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 National Aboriginal Day 
  Parent ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 610 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 610 
 New Rental Housing Project Opens in Regina 
  Ross ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 611 
 Honouring the Treaties 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 611 
 Sweet Dreams Experiences Early Success 
  Merriman .................................................................................................................................................................................. 611 
 Signing of Social Infrastructure Fund Agreement 
  Steinley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 611 
 First Nations Provincial Spelling Bee Winners 
  Cox ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 612 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Canada Pension Plan Changes and Federal Funding for First Nations Education 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 612 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 612 
 Truth and Reconciliation Commission Recommendations and Funding for Education 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 612 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 613 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 613 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 613 
 First Nations Children in Care 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 613 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 613 
 Indigenous Languages and Funding for Heritage Language Schools 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 614 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 614 
 Cost of Ambulance Services for First Nations Seniors 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 614 
  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 614 
 Indigenous People in Custody and Aboriginal Court Worker Program 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 614 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 615 



 

 Suicide Prevention and Funding for Mental Health Services 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 615 
  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 615 
 Support for Aboriginal Workforce 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 615 
  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 615 
 Reaction to Daniels Decision  
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 616 
  Reiter ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 616 
 Treaty and Métis Rights and The Provincial Lands Act 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 616 
  Stewart ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 616 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
  Ross ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 616 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 25 — The Wakamow Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2016 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 617 
  Recorded Division ..................................................................................................................................................................... 617 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


