




















































Hansard: May 25, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 5A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 25, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Hon. Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Hon. Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Merriman, Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 51; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Maurice Riou http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 131 

 May 25, 2016 

 

[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 

 

[Prayers] 

 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Canora-Pelly. 

 

Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 

you and all the members of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce 

Mayor Garth Harris and all the people from Preeceville and 

area. Welcome here today on the west side. We understand you 

have some health concerns, and it’s nice to have you here today. 

Rural health in Saskatchewan’s a long-time problem and we’re 

working to fix it. And I understand your problems, and I look 

forward to not only meeting with you today but working with 

you all through this hard times. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 

with the member opposite and welcome the many, many, many 

guests from Preeceville and Sturgis and Endeavour that have 

joined us here today, many throughout the region that are 

certainly taking a stand for something in their community and 

to the lives of many. And certainly would like to welcome His 

Worship Mayor Garth Harris and just all of the people that have 

come here today to meet with us. I enjoyed the meeting, and 

we’ll see what kind of outcome we can find together. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — Today visiting us from Manitoba we have a 

school group in from Riverdale School. Could you get a wave, 

please? It is grade 6 . . . There are 12 students from grade 6 to 9, 

and their teacher, Darcy Wohlgemuth, is with the group. And I 

welcome everyone to please, to our neighbours, give them a 

warm round of applause for joining us today. 

 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 

again to present a petition today to improve PTS [post-traumatic 

stress] coverage for Saskatchewan workers. The petitioners 

point out that post-traumatic stress disorder can severely impact 

the lives of Saskatchewan workers, and the fact that a delay in 

diagnosis and treatment for PTSD can be detrimental to 

recovery and that PTSD is not on the list of workers’ 

compensation illnesses presumed to be work related in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: to cause the government to make the 

necessary changes to ensure that if Saskatchewan workers 

are exposed to traumatic events on the job and are then 

diagnosed with PTSD, it is presumed to be caused by the 

worker’s employment and the worker will subsequently be 

covered under workers’ compensation and receive the 

same benefits as others with work-related injuries. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens of 

Saskatoon. I so submit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon Centre. 

 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 

today to present a petition in support of funding for heritage 

languages here in Saskatoon. And many, many people are very 

disappointed that after 25 years, the Government of 

Saskatchewan is discontinuing all support for heritage language 

learning here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Since 1991, heritage language schools have depended on this 

modest funding from the Ministry of Education that helps 

sustain their programming. Now as a result of the 

announcement by the Ministry of Education, many of these 

non-profit heritage language schools will be faced with a 

difficult decision of whether they can continue to operate. In 

addition to providing language and cultural classes, these 

schools offer a welcoming environment and crucial support for 

newcomers who are searching for a way to feel at home in their 

new surroundings here in Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 

 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 

following action: 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 

to reconsider this decision and restore funding for heritage 

language education in Saskatchewan heritage language 

schools. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these people signing the petition today come from 

the city of Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Social Worker Receives Saskatchewan Order of Merit  

 

Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 

recognize Isabelle Impey from Prince Albert who was one of 

the recipients of the 2016 Saskatchewan Order of Merit which 

was awarded last night. 

 

Ms. Impey is a social worker and child advocate who has 

worked tirelessly in Prince Albert. She is active in indigenous 

traditional healing and First Nation and Métis child advocacy. 

She helped establish the Interval House, the first women’s safe 

shelter in Prince Albert, and an annual Prince Albert 



132 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2016 

community Christmas dinner which provides meals to the 

lonely and poor on Christmas Day. She operates the Second 

Harvest program which provides food to those in need. She’s a 

member of the Prince Albert Aid to the Homeless and the 

Hungry, and the West Flat Community Centre where first-hand 

outreach is done. 

 

Ms. Impey is a former member of both the Canadian and the 

Saskatchewan Human Rights. As well, she has been a board 

member of the Canadian Centre on Police-Race Relations, First 

Nations University, and the Saskatchewan Penitentiary citizen 

advisory committee. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Isabelle Impey has accomplished all of this in her 

quiet but determined manner and has earned the love and 

respect of the people of Prince Albert. I ask that all members 

join with me in recognizing Isabelle Impey’s contributions and 

in extending congratulations on receiving the Saskatchewan 

Order of Merit. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Gardiner 

Park. 

 

Hooping It Up With Best Buddies 

 

Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks. Mr. Speaker, today I rise in the 

House to talk about the Best Buddies Hooping It Up free throw 

competition. Last week, I had the pleasure of attending St. 

Marguerite Bourgeoys School in the heart of Gardiner Park to 

shoot some hoops with the students in support of the local 

chapter of Best Buddies. 

 

The Hooping It Up free throw competition is a national event 

held in schools across Canada annually — several were held in 

Regina that day — to raise funds and awareness for the Best 

Buddies program. The goal is to sink as many free throws as 

you can in 60 seconds and, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to put it on the 

record that I was able to sink 12 — somewhat mediocre, but it 

was a lot of fun. The students loudly cheered every one you 

managed to get. 

 

The Best Buddies is a program designed to foster relationships 

between those with intellectual disabilities and their peers. It’s 

the goal of the organization to help make schools and 

communities more inclusive and accepting of those with special 

needs. As their teacher, Amanda Labatt, said about the program, 

“A lot of the students have really jumped on board and the 

community has been very supportive. We start with recess 

buddies and the peer buddies came once a week to show my 

students how to play different sporting games.” 

 

Well this is the first year the Best Buddies program has run at 

St. Marguerite. Happy to announce it was a great success. I ask 

all members in the House to join me in congratulating the 

students at Marguerite on their successful event. It was a 

pleasure to join them as they concluded a successful year of the 

program. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 

 

North Central Family Centre Fun Run 

 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, for the last two years the North 

Central Family Centre, located in the heart of Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre, has hosted an event specifically designed 

to promote community pride and to build a stronger, safer, and 

healthier community. Some call it the Fun Run but you can 

walk, run, bike, rollerblade, or skateboard the 5-kilometre 

distance through the neighbourhood. Myself, I had a good time 

on two wheels.  

 

While it certainly was a fun time, there’s another, more serious 

purpose besides, and that is to serve as a memorial to the late 

Ivan Amichand. Along with Sandy Wankel, Ivan Amichand 

helped found the North Central Family Centre, and passed away 

at far too young an age a couple of years ago. 

 

The event provides an opportunity to honour Ivan’s memory 

and reflect on the many contributions he made to our 

community, but also how we ourselves might make our own 

contributions and to ask, what can I do as an individual that will 

make a positive difference in my community? Perhaps the 

largest lesson Ivan taught us is that individuals make all the 

difference. 

 

I want to thank Alliance Energy who sponsored the event, and 

the great number of people who participated: firefighters, police 

officers, University of Regina nursing students, Queen City 

Marathon staff and volunteers, as well as a tremendous turnout 

of folks and families from the neighbourhood. And of course, a 

big thank you very much to everyone at the North Central 

Family Centre for the day and the good work they do in our 

community each and every day. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 

Acres. 

 

Quilts of Valour  

 

Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On May 6th I had 

the honour and privilege of bringing greetings at a quilt 

presentation ceremony hosted in Regina by the Quilts of 

Valour - Canada Society. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Quilts of Valour is a registered charity through 

which quilters from across Canada make and donate quilts to 

comfort Canadian Armed Forces members and veterans who 

are suffering from physical and mental injuries. At the 

ceremony, four quilts were presented to recipients to help 

comfort them in their time of need and to honour their service 

and sacrifice. The recipients were W. John Sheppard, Janet 

Bennet, Eugene Bennet, and Andrew Hollick. 

 

This ceremony was held on the 71st anniversary of VE [Victory 

in Europe] Day, and those in attendance had the rare privilege 

of hearing World War II veteran John Sheppard read a letter 

that he wrote his mother on that day 71 years ago. Mr. Speaker, 

it was an incredible experience to hear John read his letter, and 

it served as a powerful reminder of our responsibility to 

preserve and honour the memory of those who sacrificed so 

much to protect our very freedoms. 

 

I’d ask all members to join me in thanking Cheryl Dvernichuk 

and all the volunteers who have given their time and talents to 

the quilts of valour program, and also thanking the quilt 

recipients for their service and sacrifice in defence of our great 



May 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 133 

country. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Rochdale. 

 

Sikh Parade Day 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 

honour to rise in the House today to celebrate our province’s 

first ever Sikh Parade Day. Over 3,000 people participated. It 

truly was a great party. We enjoyed bagpipes; the RCMP 

[Royal Canadian Mounted Police] in their red serge; men in 

orange carrying traditional swords; plus the beautiful, bright, 

traditional saris. The main parade float was beautifully 

decorated in rose petals and carried the holy scripture. Men 

sang, which were echoed by the crowds. 

 

The amount of participants is indicative of the growth of the 

Sikh community within Saskatchewan, but here in Regina. Mr. 

Speaker, it is estimated that the Sikh population in Regina has 

grown from just a few dozen that were here in the 1970s to 

hundreds today. This speaks to our province’s proud tradition 

and respect for multiculturalism and helps us to understand and 

live up to our motto “from many peoples, strength.” 

 

Celebrations like the Sikh parade help us build a better 

understanding that we can all foster more harmonious 

relationships with those with unique cultural and ethnic 

backgrounds. It helps us ensure that our communities are more 

beautiful places that we can all live together. I’d like to 

congratulate all the organizers and volunteers who participated 

in this wonderful, bright day. I look forward to many more in 

the future. Diversity is one thing we all have in common. Let’s 

celebrate it every day. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 

 

Saskatchewan Mining Supply Chain Forum 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 

Saskatchewan Mining Association, the Saskatchewan Ministry 

of the Economy, and the Saskatchewan Industrial and Mining 

Suppliers Association held their eighth annual Mining Supply 

Chain Forum this year at Prairieland Park in Saskatoon. The 

forum provided information to manufacturers, construction, and 

equipment service providers on how they can access mining 

supply opportunities. There was also a session providing 

information on engineering, maintenance, reliability, 

operations, and productivity. 

 

[13:45] 

 

Mr. Speaker, this forum has become the most successful natural 

resource supplier event in Saskatchewan. It brings together all 

major operating mines in Saskatchewan as well as local, 

national, and international suppliers. This forum continues to 

put Saskatchewan mining first and foremost on the international 

stage. Mr. Speaker, events like this are critical in spreading the 

word about our great province and what it has to offer. 

 

Of course events like this cannot be possible without the 

countless hard-working organizers and volunteers. I’d like to 

thank the Saskatchewan Mining Association, the Saskatchewan 

Industrial and Mining Suppliers Association, and the 1,100 

people attending for inviting me to speak and tour the 

convention floor. This forum is just one of the ways we’re 

letting the world know what Saskatchewan has to offer. Thank 

you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Wood River. 

 

Rural Municipal Administrators’ Association Conference 

 

Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week the Rural 

Municipal Administrators’ Association hosted their 96th annual 

convention here in Regina. The RMAA represents the senior 

administration of the province’s rural municipalities. 

 

Our government has always valued the strong relationship we 

have with rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We know the 

contributions of our rural municipalities and our rural 

administrators are a large part of why Saskatchewan remains 

strong. I am proud to have worked closely with the RMAA 

throughout my municipal career and my time as SARM 

[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities] president. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also wanted to recognize my friend, the 

RMAA’s executive director, Kevin Ritchie, who will be 

stepping down after 14 years with the association. Kevin has 

held several roles with the RMAA including division director, 

vice-president, president, and executive director since 2008, and 

sat on the SARM board ex officio. 

 

Kevin was the recipient of the Lou Jacobs Award at this year’s 

convention, Mr. Speaker. The Lou Jacobs Award recognizes 

outstanding service in municipal government and is the 

RMAA’s highest honour. Kevin joins the prestigious list of 

recipients, and some maybe not so prestigious, Mr. Speaker, 

like previous years’ recipients the Minister of Government 

Relations and myself, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I proudly have 

my Lou Jacobs Award hanging in my office in this building. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join in congratulating Kevin 

and thanking all rural municipal administrators for their 

outstanding work each and every day. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Rural Health Care Services 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, over a decade and a half 

ago, Dr. Ken Fyke was tasked with making important 

recommendations to change the health care system in 

Saskatchewan. Yesterday he said the government has “lost a 

tremendous opportunity in the last 10 years to make real change 

in the health system.” 

 

Mr. Speaker, hospitals are understaffed. ER [emergency room] 

wait times are staggering. Surgery waitlists are growing. Old 

infrastructure is crumbling, and the new buildings don’t suit the 

needs. Through all this the government is ignoring front-line 

workers and Saskatchewan families. And unless you count a 

specialist in car assembly lines, they’re ignoring what the 

experts are saying too. 

 



134 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2016 

Why has this government wasted their opportunity to 

implement the expert recommendations and bring meaningful 

and positive improvements to the health care that Saskatchewan 

people rely on? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I thank 

the member for raising the question, and I know we’ll be able to 

talk specifically about the situation in Preeceville. I want to 

welcome all of those folks to their Assembly as well and thank 

them for working towards better care for Preeceville and area, 

just as we have been trying to do for all of rural Saskatchewan. 

 

I would point out, in terms of the Leader of the Opposition’s 

questions however, there are some misstatements perhaps, or 

some facts that are in error. Number one, the Fyke Commission, 

Mr. Speaker, was commissioned by the NDP [New Democratic 

Party] government. The Fyke Commission’s recommendations 

were to the NDP government. So if he’s wondering why they 

weren’t implemented, he might want to consult with members 

on his own side of the House. 

 

And here are some . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Perhaps the 

member for Athabasca who wants to participate in the debate 

from his seat can explain why they ignored the commission. 

 

Here’s what our party did, Mr. Speaker. While we acknowledge 

there’s more work to do, when we took over from the NDP, 

Saskatchewan had lost 450 nurses and 173 doctors from 2001 to 

2006. Since the Saskatchewan Party was elected there are now 

650 more doctors practising, 3,000 nurses of every description 

now, more practising than under the NDP. And the member 

said there were fewer front-line workers. The Leader of the 

Opposition just said that. That’s not the case. 

 

We took over from a situation where the NDP had closed 52 

hospitals in the province of Saskatchewan. We’ve been opening 

facilities, long-term care facilities. We have been completing 

the build on hospitals like Preeceville and working hard to 

recruit doctors to rural Saskatchewan, including the 25 

communities we can discuss here later on in the debate. We’ve 

been able to stabilize, Mr. Speaker. We readily admit there’s 

more work to do. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, those lines are growing 

awfully tired. They’re pretty disrespectful to people like those 

that are here from Preeceville here today, Mr. Speaker. Just last 

week on behalf of a mother who is very concerned about access 

to critical health services for her son with a severe allergy, we 

asked the Minister for Rural and Remote Health what he was 

going to do to keep their hospital and its services open. He said, 

“All current systems and all current available services are still 

in place.” That is a smack in the face to the good people of 

Preeceville that are with us here today that know that in less 

than a week that government will be closing emergency and 

acute services at the Preeceville Hospital. 

 

Along with the Health critic, we met today with the mayor and 

the delegation from Preeceville. And let me tell you, they are 

understandably and rightly concerned and they’re taking a stand 

to keep their hospital open. Does the Premier stand with his 

minister or will he finally do the right thing and announce that 

the services at the Preeceville Hospital will remain open? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 

I want to thank the people from Preeceville and area for joining 

with us today. I want them to know that their interests indeed 

are the interests on this side of the House in terms of better 

health care for Preeceville and area. But right across rural 

Saskatchewan, they have a strong ally and a voice of support in 

terms of the member for Canora-Pelly and the Minister of Rural 

and Remote Health. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the situation in Preeceville is one born of the fact 

that doctor recruitment across rural North America is posing 

challenges. The government can’t force doctors to practise in 

certain places and neither can they force them to stay. What 

governments can do and what we’ve worked hard to do, Mr. 

Speaker, is recruit doctors to rural Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are 25 hospitals that I could list when we . . . 

that we inherited government, were having doctor recruitment 

and retention issues. We’ve been able to meet the challenges in 

those communities, and I believe we’ll do the same in 

Preeceville. And we want to work with the community to 

achieve that. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I hope it’s an indication of our support for the 

Preeceville facility and health care in the area that since 2007 

when we were elected, we have added to the nursing 

complement from six full-time equivalents to 14 full-time 

equivalents. Since 2010, five physicians have been recruited. 

We’ve been working hard to recruit doctors specifically to 

Preeceville . . . Well the member is shaking his head. These are 

earnest efforts on behalf of the government to deal with the 

issue. Four physicians have been offered contracts. 

 

I can tell the House that a rural locum is being currently 

provided, that we’ve recruited a full-time physician through 

SIPPA [Saskatchewan international physician practice 

assessment] who has decided to limit her practice only to clinic 

practice. We’ve also recruited another SIPPA doctor in May, 

just earlier this month. If successful, that recruitment will start 

in the fall of 2016. 

 

Mr. Speaker, our intention is that full services are provided at 

the Preeceville hospital. That’s why we moved to complete the 

facility. That’s why we’ve increased resources. Rural health 

care has been a priority for this side of House. It will remain a 

priority for this side. 

 

The Speaker: — I’d like to take the opportunity to remind our 

guests that we are thankful that you’re here today, but please do 

not take part in the debate, and that includes clapping. 

 

I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that answer clearly 

displays that that Premier is completely out of touch with 

what’s going on in Preeceville, and the people of Preeceville are 

here today. You know, that government has had a . . . 



May 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 135 

[inaudible] . . . and they’ve had record revenues, and all they’ve 

got is a whole bunch of excuses. Let’s be clear. When this 

government has a standard that it can’t meet, that it’s set, all it 

does is lower the standard. That’s what’s going on with 

Preeceville right now. The Sask Party is closing hospitals and 

shutting down services. One of those communities is 

Preeceville, and that’s why they’re here today. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this community raised an impressive $3.5 million 

for this very important facility. Their mortgage will proudly be 

paid off on June 24th. But as a sad disgrace, three weeks before 

that, this government will be closing down the services at that 

hospital, Mr. Speaker. You know, instead of more talk about 

ancient history, tired excuses, and spin, Mr. Speaker, will this 

Premier finally take some responsibility, will he stand up, and 

will he finally do the right thing and ensure that this beautiful 

new hospital remains open to the thousands of people and lives 

that depend on it? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wall: —Mr. Speaker, the short answer is yes, we 

have since 2007 been working to improve health care services 

in Preeceville. That’s why there is a larger nursing complement 

there, it’s why we’ve been able to offer four physicians 

contracts since 2010, and five physicians have been recruited. 

Mr. Speaker, I say to my hon. friend, and indeed to members of 

the community that are here, through you, Mr. Speaker, that we 

are working hard to recruit doctors so that full services are 

restored at Preeceville. 

 

We’ve done that in 25 other communities very successfully, 

communities that we inherited from the previous members 

when they were government, where there were doctor 

shortages, and service interruptions, and hospital closures. Mr. 

Speaker, at the end of the day we need doctors to cover for 

emergency service. And we cannot force a doctor to stay; 

neither can we force doctors to locate to a certain community. 

 

What we can do is provide incentives. We’ve added to those in 

bursaries. What we can do is train more doctors in the province. 

We have done that, Mr. Speaker. What we can also do is 

expand the number of countries from which we can recruit 

foreign-trained doctors. We’ve done that. We can add the 

nurses. 

 

I want to assure the members from Preeceville and area that we 

are going to work very hard to restore those full services, to 

recruit the doctors that are necessary, with one, an additional 

SIPPA doctor, starting in the fall in a rural locum under way 

now, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we have people here today 

that have fundraised, that have put together $3.5 million for 

their brand new hospital that serves a region, that serves 6 to 

7,000 people. Next week that hospital and those services are 

being closed by that government. 

 

My question was really clear to the Premier; the people here 

today deserve a clear answer. Will he ensure those services 

remain open? Will he ensure he scraps the closure, the 

shutdown of those services here today? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Rural and Remote Health 

minister. 

 

Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, I think the Premier has 

been very clear. And again, we do hear the concerns of the 

community. The local MLA’s been very vocal, and we are 

listening, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In fact some of the comments we heard even last week when the 

family was in. I met with them personally. One of their 

concerns and other concerns I’ve heard from community 

members over the past week and over the weekend where I’ve 

been contact with a few members, one of the challenges they 

say, the short-term challenges, has been access to the primary 

health clinic, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In that regard, I’ve been in contact with the CEO [chief 

executive officer] of the region. She’s committed to getting a 

locum in place. Won’t commit to ER services, but he’s 

committed to ensuring that primary health services and clinic 

time is increased, which will alleviate some of the stress that 

has been on the emergency services, Mr. Speaker. In fact a lot 

of the people I did talk to over the last few days have said that 

they were accessing the emergency room because they had a 

difficult time accessing primary health services. We’re going to 

ensure that that’s increased so it alleviates that pressure. 

 

In the meantime, while we’re recruiting physicians to bring 

back acute services, Mr. Speaker, we are increasing the 

coverage of the ER and we will be relying on the acute care 

paramedics in the area to deliver emergency services. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Note to that 

minister: he is the minister. He can make sure that ER services 

are open on June 1st. 

 

Almost a decade in government and they still won’t take 

responsibility. How can the Premier and his pair of Health 

ministers stand there, look these people in the eyes, and just 

make excuses? 

 

Last week, the minister said Preeceville doesn’t need a hospital 

because there are highly trained paramedics available. We’ve 

heard from the paramedics in the area and they say the minister 

doesn’t get it. He’s “missing the big picture.” 

 

Of course the paramedics in the area are very committed to the 

health of their community. Of course they are. But in their own 

words, “trying to replace an ER with ambulance services is like 

trying to fix an amputation with a Band-Aid.”  

 

After hearing from paramedics in Preeceville, does the Minister 

for Rural and Remote Health want to take the opportunity to 

admit he was wrong about the severity and the reality of the 

situation? 

 

[14:00] 

 



136 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2016 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister in charge of Rural 

and Remote Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, much of what the 

member just said is factually incorrect. You know, Mr. Speaker, 

at no time did I ever say Preeceville did not need a hospital. In 

fact, Mr. Speaker, with all due respect to the members across, it 

was the former NDP Health minister that said the suspension of 

hospital services in rural Saskatchewan is just a fact of life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, that’s not acceptable to us. That’s why we’ve 

committed to the many resources that the Premier has just 

talked about: doctor recruitment; doctor retention; the most 

generous compensation package in, I would argue, the country; 

the most generous recruitment and retention package for rural 

physicians in, I would argue again, in the country and many 

other jurisdictions, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We focused on specifically on Preeceville to this extent, Mr. 

Speaker. Since September 2015 when I visited with some other 

members that had issues in the area and wanted to bring to our 

attention, Mr. Speaker, 89 per cent of the regional locum 

coverage through Sunrise Health has been directed to 

Preeceville. That does not include locum coverage through the 

Saskatchewan Medical Association or the primary health teams 

that have been accessed from Yorkton, Mr. Speaker. It shows 

there is a commitment by this government and the region to 

focus on Preeceville and get services restored. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, allow me to quote the 

paramedics again: 

 

With no ER in Preeceville and no access to the ER in 

Canora every single night, transport to an ER is going to be 

at least an hour, not to mention the fact that now that crew, 

that ambulance is away from the service area and unable to 

respond for a minimum of three hours. 

 

Mr. Speaker, three hours. This time frame concerns paramedics. 

It concerns the people of Preeceville and surrounding area, and 

it should concern the Premier, the Health minister, and the 

Rural and the Remote Health minister. To the Minister of Rural 

and Remote Health: how can this government continue to 

ignore the community of Preeceville when it is clear they could 

be left for hours without an ambulance crew? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, one more fact I need to 

clarify from the member’s previous question, Mr. Speaker, is 

that emergency service cannot be opened without a physician. 

Mr. Speaker, we have one physician that is doing primary 

health services. We have another one that’s been recruited to fill 

the services when they do come, when they do get through the 

SIPPA program. We have other locums in the area that were 

helping do emergency coverage that are unable to do that 

service at this point, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But we are not replacing emergency service with advanced care 

paramedics and ambulances, Mr. Speaker. As any members will 

know in the House, in the case of a 911 call, if there is an 

emergent situation, the ambulance responds anyway. We have 

the advance care paramedics. We have full confidence in their 

ability. We have two cars in Preeceville. I’ve been assured by 

the provider too in Canora with four ACPs [advanced care 

paramedic] that are available between the two communities and 

they are confident that they can fulfil the services until we get 

the services restored in the fall. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, let me remind you that every 

chance he gets, that Minister for Rural and Remote Health 

claims that health care and health care in rural areas is the 

priority of the Sask Party — that’s what he says. But every 

chance he gets to save a rural hospital and health care services, 

he fails. 

 

The people of Preeceville and the surrounding area are 

concerned for the safety and health of their kids, their parents 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Outrageous. Outrageous. 

Absolutely outrageous, Mr. Speaker, the heckling. 

 

They’re concerned for their safety and health of their kids, their 

parents, their grandparents, and their neighbours. More than 

1,000 people have signed a petition. Although it’s not in order, 

Mr. Speaker, I think it speaks volumes. 

 

Will the Minister of Rural and Remote Health commit to not 

only meeting with the people of Preeceville but commit to 

meeting with them, listening to their concerns, and actually 

taking action to address them? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, again I just have to 

point to our record. I’m not going to go over the NDP’s record. 

That’s obvious; we talk about that quite often in the House. But 

our record with the commitment to training more doctors and 

focusing them on rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, directing 

them towards rural Saskatchewan. In fact directing through the 

Saskdocs recruitment program and the SIPPA program, the 

international physician practice assessment program, Mr. 

Speaker — 180 of those doctors, and 87 per cent of those have 

been directed to rural health care. 

 

When we look at nurse practitioners, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 

doubled the training of nurse practitioners in this province. We 

have doubled them practicing and 75 per cent of those serve in 

rural facilities, Mr. Speaker. That’s the work of this 

government. That’s the commitment of this government to rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

We can point to again the incentive programs, all the different 

programs we’ve put in place when it comes to rural 

Saskatchewan; the commitment to building new facilities that 

serve rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker; the STARS [Shock 

Trauma Air Rescue Society] program that has been very 

popular that helps to supplement rural health care and 

emergency situations in the province, Mr. Speaker. So I know 



May 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 137 

we have more work to do, but I’m proud of our record when it 

comes to rural health care. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — More work to do is the biggest 

understatement I think I have ever heard, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we have spoken to many residents of Preeceville and 

surrounding areas and we have listened. We’ve heard about 

$1,200 ambulance bills, a tragic death, and we have heard 

stories of folks living with chronic conditions such as asthma 

and diabetes. Many of these conditions, as you know, are 

manageable and complications can be avoided if proper primary 

care is available. 

 

The Minister of Rural and Remote Health likes to claim that 

closing ER and acute services allow for better access to primary 

care from doctors. But even if you follow that logic, it still takes 

the people of Preeceville from four to six weeks to get an 

appointment with a doctor. Mr. Speaker, without regular care 

from a doctor, complications from these conditions are allowed 

to grow and people are even more likely to need acute care 

services and the emergency room. To the minister: how does 

this make any sense? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 

Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, a couple more 

clarifications I have to do. But one answer I never gave with the 

last question was in fact a meeting with the representatives, and 

we’re happy to meet with the representatives of the community, 

Mr. Speaker. In fact, we met with the family last week. I’ve 

been on the phone with a number of different residents over the 

week. A few in the area have my cellphone and they called me 

and texted me over the weekend to voice their concerns, as well 

as at a wedding I attended in town here with some local area 

residents that voiced their concerns. So we’re happy to meet. In 

fact, I believe shortly after question period I have a meeting 

scheduled with the Premier, the MLA [Member of the 

Legislative Assembly] for Canora-Pelly, and some area elected 

representatives to talk about the situation there, Mr. Speaker. 

 

But again a clarification, we are not looking, and it was never 

the plan of this government or this ministry or this minister to 

replace emergency services with primary health care. Primary 

health care is a foundation of our health care system. Any 

medical professional . . . Talk to the SMA [Saskatchewan 

Medical Association]. They will tell you that primary health 

care is the foundation. Focusing on primary health care will 

reduce the pressure on emergencies while we address those 

concerns with the emergency services physicians, as well as 

ambulance services, Mr. Speaker. That’s a chain; that’s a strong 

link in the chain of our health care system when it comes to 

emergency services in Saskatchewan, rural Saskatchewan, and 

we will continue to focus in those areas. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the minister talks about services 

that are available to the people of Preeceville that are hundreds 

of kilometres away. We know that even when they arrive at 

these larger centres, they will have issues accessing these 

services. Throughout the last month, RQHR [Regina 

Qu’Appelle Health Region] was consistently over capacity with 

upwards of 20 people who were admitted without a bed. 

Yesterday in Saskatoon, for just RUH [Royal University 

Hospital] and St. Paul’s, there were 74 overcapacity beds in use. 

Today we have seen that number jump to 87. 

 

So we have a government that is closing rural hospitals and 

taking away services from smaller centres, all the while our 

larger centres are bursting at the seams. To the minister: what is 

the plan to fix this and when will timely access to health care be 

a priority of this government? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, we are not closing hospitals in this province under this 

government. That was the record of the former government, the 

NDP. That is not the record of this government, Mr. Speaker, 

and as I think my colleagues have demonstrated, Mr. Speaker, 

we have worked very hard over the last two terms of this 

government to increase the supply of physicians in this province 

so that we can ensure that we do have services across this 

province, Mr. Speaker. 

 

In terms of capacity pressures in the cities of Regina and 

Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, in part that problem was caused 

because we had bed closures under the NDP in Regina and 

Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, we have in fact opened beds in Regina 

and Saskatoon. There were rooms in our hospitals in Regina 

that I have visited that, under the former government, were used 

for storage closets. They are now used for hospital beds, Mr. 

Speaker, in fact a 12 per cent increase in hospital beds in those 

two cities under this government, Mr. Speaker. We have a long 

way to dig out where we were left by the NDP government but 

we’re going to keep doing the work. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — The irony is incredible, Mr. Speaker. June 1st 

they lose their ER and acute services. June 24th they burn their 

mortgage. It’s an awful irony, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in February the capacity levels for Saskatoon 

hospitals were at a, quote, “critical state.’’ It was so bad that 

health region officials said, “We . . . felt like we were one 

patient away from being in a bad situation.” Well hospitals 

continue to be so full that patients’ lives are at risk. 

 

And on top of being dangerously full they are also understaffed. 

Overcapacity issues also mean that surgeries have to be 

postponed and people are shuffled to other regional facilities. 

But we see this government making cuts to regional facilities. 

The people of Preeceville are losing their acute care services 

and can’t even get in for a doctor’s appointment in the same 

month. Everywhere in this province people are struggling to get 

the health care they desperately need. To the minister: what will 

it take this government to recognize that our health care system 

is in crisis? 

 



138 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2016 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I want to be very clear 

about this. There have been no cuts when it comes to health 

care in this province. Mr. Speaker, in fact every single health 

region in this province in the past budget have received an 

increase in their budget, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We are seeing more doctors practising in this province. We are 

seeing 3,000 more nurses of all designations practicing in this 

province. Mr. Speaker, we’ve increased the seats for training 

nurses and doctors. We’ve put incentives to ensure that we do 

have a good supply of nurses and doctors practising in rural 

Saskatchewan. 

 

I can’t imagine what the health care system would be like in 

this province if the members opposite would still be the 

government, where we would be losing nurses and losing 

doctors because that is their record, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’re going the other way in this province, where we are 

ensuring that we have a proper complement of physicians and 

ensuring that we do have the right number of beds in the 

province, Mr. Speaker. And we’re also putting investments into 

the community to ensure that we are doing things like 

repatriating patients back to their home hospital more quickly, 

which is a good use of resources and a good use of those 

resources in their regional hospitals, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member of Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 

 

Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, enough with these tired lines. 

Will this minister, will this pair of Health ministers commit to 

these people from Preeceville today that they will still have ER 

services and acute care services on June 1st? 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 

 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, what I will commit to, to these people and to the 

people of this province, is that this government will continue to 

act as the way we have in the past, and that is to ensure that we 

have more doctors practising in Saskatchewan as opposed to the 

members opposite who lost doctors when they were the 

Government of Saskatchewan, to ensure that we have incentives 

in place like the comprehensive rural program that provides a 

ten point five per cent boost to a rural physician’s payment if 

they practise to a full complement of skills. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’re going to put other incentive plans in place 

to ensure that we can attract those physicians to rural 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, ensuring that we have a 

made-in-Saskatchewan training program, an assessment 

program for foreign-trained doctors, unlike the members 

opposite who used to buy seats from Manitoba if they had seats 

available, Mr. Speaker. 

 

They totally neglected rural health when they were the 

government of the day, Mr. Speaker. That’s not the record on 

this side and we’re going to continue to work hard to ensure 

that we have services all across this beautiful province. 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 

Bill No. 8 — The Summary Offences Procedure  

Amendment Act, 2016 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 

move that Bill 8, The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment 

Act, 2016 be now introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Justice 

and Attorney General that Bill No. 8, The Summary Offences 

Procedure Amendment Act, 2016 be now introduced and read 

the first time. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next reading, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 9 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments 

Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur 

l’exécution des jugements canadiens 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move that Bill 9, The Enforcement of Canadian 

Judgments Amendment Act, 2016 be now introduced and read a 

first time. 

 

[14:15] 

 

The Speaker: — It is moved by the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General that Bill No. 9, the enforcement of Canadian 

judgments be now introduced and read the first time. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 

Attorney General. 

 

Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Set for next reading at the next sitting, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 



May 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 139 

Bill No. 10 — The Forest Resources Management 

Amendment Act, 2016 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 10, The Forest 

Resources Management Amendment Act, 2016 be now 

introduced and read a first time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader that Bill No. 10, The Forest Resources Management 

Amendment Act, 2016 be introduced and read for the first time.  

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read the second time? I 

recognize the House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 

Speaker. 

 

Bill No. 11 — The Forestry Professions  

Amendment Act, 2016 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, I move that Bill No. 11, The Forestry Professions 

Amendment Act, 2016 be now introduced and read for a first 

time. 

 

The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Government House 

Leader that the Bill No. 11, The Forestry Professions 

Amendment Act, 2016 be introduced and read the first time. 

 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Speaker: — Carried. 

 

Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 

this bill. 

 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 

recognize the House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, next sitting of the House. 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Buckingham, seconded by Ms. 

Carr, and the proposed amendment to the main motion moved 

by Ms. Sproule.] 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Well thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

First off, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that I certainly support the 

Throne Speech and I do not support the amendment. So I 

figured I’d get that in before the end, just in case I forgot for 

some reason. 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate you on your 

election as Speaker, and I want to thank the previous Speaker 

for the fine work that he did during the last session. I’ll tell you 

what: you couldn’t pay me enough to do that job. So you guys, 

honestly you people do a great job, and I thank you for putting 

your names forward for doing that. 

 

I also want to thank and congratulate all the new members of 

the House, on both sides of the House. It’s something; it’s an 

honour and a privilege to come and serve in this House, to serve 

your constituents. And it’s really something when you first 

walk up the stairs; I know for the new members it’s very 

exciting. It takes a long time to learn all the different procedures 

of the House. I’ve been here for eight and a half years. I haven’t 

figured it out yet, but it’s coming. I figure, you know, give me a 

few more years, I might get it. 

 

I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, to the new members on the 

other side that sometimes I may get just a little carried away. 

And in this place you have to have a little bit of a thick skin, so 

you know, don’t hold it against me too much if I say something 

that could be just a little derogatory. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the people of Carrot River Valley 

for electing me again for the third term. It’s great to be back 

here representing them. Like I said before, it’s a humbling 

experience. And you know, I was actually quite surprised 

because I . . . that I made it in by a fairly large margin, because 

the more, the longer I’ve been in, the more people I have met, 

and that was getting a little shaky on whether I was going to get 

back in or not. But surprisingly, it even went up in the polls. 

 

And I want to thank of course my executive for helping me on 

the election, Mr. Speaker. You know, it’s not just done by us as 

members. We all know that we have great executives back 

behind us to help us along. And the other thing, the other people 

I want to thank, obviously, are my constituency assistants 

who’ve been with me a long time. And as everyone knows here, 

the constituency assistants are the ones who do a lot of the 

work, especially when we’re away. They do a fantastic job, and 

I really want to thank, I really want to thank them for the work 

that they do. 

 

Of course I also have to thank my family, my wife. My wife has 

to be without me a lot of times when I’m down here. I can see a 

few people looking and smiling. Apparently they’ve met my 

wife, and they know that she actually doesn’t mind it when I’m 



140 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2016 

down here for quite a while. But anyway I do want to thank her 

for allowing me to continue on this job. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I can go back to when I first decided to run. I 

know I’ve told this story before, but a lot of the new members 

haven’t heard it. But when I decided to run, I had to ask my 

wife’s permission, and she kind of questioned me a little bit on 

it. She said, well what’s the deal here? And I said, well I said, 

you know, our kids are getting older and, you know, they were 

going to be coming out of school. Actually Morgan was in 

university at the time. And I said, I’m getting tired of seeing our 

kids being given a suitcase basically when they graduated. I 

wanted to see our kids working in the province. 

 

And she said, well what’s the remuneration for this job? I 

already had a good business. I said, you know, I don’t have a 

clue. And honestly, I did not have a clue. And she says, you’re 

going to apply for a job and you have no idea what the 

remuneration is? And I said, yes. Nobody said I was that 

brilliant. I said, yes. And she said, well why? And I said, 

because it’s the right thing to do. And to this day, Mr. Speaker, 

I believe it is the right thing to do. 

 

We have in this province, we have a Premier that is willing to 

stand up for Saskatchewan. And the Premier has a love for this 

province that nobody, nobody would believe that he has this 

great passion for Saskatchewan and wants to see Saskatchewan 

moving forward and to keep it strong. 

 

And a real good example of how good this is — compared to 

the other side of the House, which I like to call the shuffled 

deck, Mr. Speaker; they lost the race but they’ve still got a 

couple of the jokers — Mr. Speaker, you know, they went to the 

great federal NDP convention and there the Leap Manifesto 

came out. 

 

We all know Saskatchewan is a great exporting province. 

That’s what we do here in Saskatchewan. We’re exporters. We 

make things the rest of the world wants: food, potash, uranium, 

oil, diamonds possibly, all sorts of things. And the Leap 

Manifesto wants to basically shut down trade all the way across. 

I can’t believe that members on the other side of the House 

didn’t stand up to their federal cousins and say, this is wrong. 

Even the Premier of Alberta stood up to them and said, no, this 

isn’t a good idea. That’s the difference between the 

Saskatchewan Party and the NDP. 

 

Mr. Speaker, you know, as we go through on our Throne 

Speech, we didn’t make a ton of promises that we couldn’t 

keep. And you know, when I take a look at what has been 

happening within Saskatchewan, with what has been happening 

just within Carrot River Valley . . . We just heard the story that 

members over there were questioning the health system. When I 

was first elected in 2007, we used to get probably three calls a 

day on our health system because, you see, they had shut down, 

under the NDP, the hospital in Arborfield, the hospital in Carrot 

River. Who knows? They were probably going to get ready to 

shut down the one in Nipawin. There were only four physicians, 

four physicians in Nipawin. We have 12 physicians in Nipawin 

now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is a good outcome. This is being done under 

the Saskatchewan Party, not under the NDP, where they were 

just going around closing down, as has been said many times, 

the hospitals. They had no foresight. They didn’t want to keep 

Saskatchewan strong. They didn’t want to keep Saskatchewan 

moving forward. Mr. Speaker, as I was saying, we would get 

about three calls, three calls a day on the health system. Now 

we maybe get one a week into our office. This is the difference. 

 

Then you hear the Education critic the other day and was 

complaining about the education, after they shut down 176 

schools in the province, Mr. Speaker. Now in Carrot River 

Valley constituency, we have a brand new school we just 

opened at Hudson Bay. My seatmate’s constituency just had a 

brand new school open — what was it, three years ago? — in 

Porcupine Plain. What a difference. What a difference. And 

they sit there and say, well you know, these teachers, these poor 

teachers, what are they going to do? Hey, now the teachers have 

a job. They were the ones that were firing the teachers. They 

were the ones that were getting rid of them. What do you think 

happened when they closed those schools? Where do you think 

those teachers went? 

 

An Hon. Member: — Alberta? 

 

Mr. Bradshaw: — Alberta, BC [British Columbia], various 

different places. But I’ll tell you one thing, it wasn’t here in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can go on and talk about different things in 

here, and I want to talk a little bit about Carrot River Valley and 

some of the things that have been happening up there. You 

know, Carrot River Valley, and I’ve said this many a time, I 

still think . . . And I know every MLA wants to say this, they 

think they have the best constituency. I do. I’m sure I do 

because I’m right at the end of the Great Plains and the 

beginning of the forestry. So we have great agriculture. We 

have very forward-thinking farmers up there which will grow 

just about anything. And then we have the forest industry, and 

we’ve got the lakes where we’ve got our tourism, you know, 

with great fishing. For some of the people that go up there and 

know how to fish, Tobin Lake. We won’t mention any names; 

some people can catch fish there, some can’t. 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, our forest industry has moved forward. Now 

when did the forest industry kind of shut down? The forest 

industry shut, the forest industry shut down under the NDP. 

Now we have the forest industry back up and running, making a 

great contribution to our province. In Hudson Bay, we have 

Weyerhaeuser going in with their mill there. And then we had a 

brand new company come in from British Columbia, Edgewood 

Forest Products, bought up the old Weyerhaeuser mill in Carrot 

River. Not only did they just buy up the mill, they have enough 

confidence in this government and in this province that they 

built a $25 million expansion just this past summer, and it’s up 

and rolling here now. 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are all good things for our communities. It 

puts people to work in Saskatchewan so they can be out there 

paying taxes, raising families and having a great life. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s something that my good friend brought up 

from Melfort, the MLA from Melfort, and he was talking about 

the agriculture end of it and how the critic for the Environment 

likes to bring up about the carbon footprint per capita in 



May 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 141 

Saskatchewan. They forget that Saskatchewan is a very large 

province. We have to travel over large miles and the other catch 

is, Mr. Speaker, we have very large farms. 

 

[14:30] 

 

And I can tell you right now, coming from the farming 

community, our diesel fuel has gone down, usage per acre has 

gone down. One of the reasons is up in northeastern 

Saskatchewan we almost invented no-till seeding. I have land 

on my farm that hasn’t been summerfallowed for 30 years and 

. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The Premier obviously doesn’t 

come from a farming background. The Bourgault Industries, 

which is in the Melfort riding, were the chief developers of the 

no-till seeding equipment, and is a very large employer there. 

 

Now all of this taken into account, all of this farm land taken 

into account is a huge carbon sink. This happens every year and 

that has never ever been brought forward by the people on the 

other side because, well first off, none of them know anything 

about agriculture. And it’s never ever been brought forward. 

And then we have our carbon capture plant which they criticize 

but yet is a world leader. There are people coming from all over 

the world to look at the carbon capture plant. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we got talking here a little while ago about . . . Or 

I shouldn’t say we. The former Highways minister, the member 

from Athabasca, was talking about our highways, and 

admittedly our highways are a problem. It’s something we’ve 

been working on but it’s a heck of a lot better than what they 

ever did. You know, he went on to say that all we were going to 

do is spend $70 million on our highways in four years. Mr. 

Speaker, we have spent record amounts on our highways. This 

government will invest $2.7 billion on highways and 

transportation in the next four years — $2.7 billion. 

 

Now we made in our proposal, our election proposal, we put it 

forward that we would put an extra $70 million in. For some 

reason apparently the member from Athabasca didn’t read the 

whole thing and he doesn’t understand that it’s not just $70 

million, it’s 2.7 billion. Now that’s a big difference, Mr. 

Speaker. Obviously the member there . . . Like I think maybe 

when he was Highways minister, he maybe spent $70 million 

over the 16 years he was over there. By the look of the 

highways, I think that’s what happened. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I could go on here but also another thing that I 

wanted to talk about, what we’ve done is with our revenue 

sharing with the different RMs [rural municipality] that we 

have, with our different rural municipalities . . . This 

government believes in rural Saskatchewan and that’s why 

we’re working, Mr. Speaker, that’s why we’re working on our 

health care systems out there. Rather than closing hospitals, 

we’re building them. I could bring up about the long-term care 

that we just finished opening up in Tisdale. You know, after 

they shut down 1,200 beds, we’re building. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we can keep on going around on all these different 

things, these schools that I just talked about. The NDP wasn’t 

building them. We’re building them. But under the revenue 

sharing, when you start looking at the differences, in 

2007-2008, the RM of Connaught, which happens to be in 

Carrot River Valley, went from 131,000 to 290,000. The RM of 

Moose Range went from 245,000 to 417,000. RM of Nipawin, 

216,000 to 383,000. Now that was for last year. That’s not 

saying on this year’s. Now okay, we take a look at this. This is 

what we’re doing for our communities, plus our various 

different towns and whatnot. 

 

Now the member from Athabasca was sitting there saying, well 

we never did anything for the North. Let’s just take a look. 

Creighton, Creighton went from 452,000 to 1.247 million. La 

Ronge went from 634,000 to 1.719 million. Air Ronge went 

from 322,000 to 978,000. Beauval, 382,000 to 764,000. Buffalo 

Narrows, 541,000 to 1.222 million. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we are working for people all across this province 

and, Mr. Speaker, this is one of the reasons that I’m going to be 

supporting the Throne Speech and will not be supporting the 

amendment. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Last 

Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

certainly a pleasure to enter into the Throne Speech debate. I 

guess I have to admit I have lost count on the number of throne 

speeches I’ve been part of. I guess it’s 16. The Deputy Premier 

has reminded me, although I may not have spoken to all of 

them, but it’s been a while. And it’s always a privilege to stand 

and share some thoughts and some comments with other 

members and with our vast viewing audience, Mr. Speaker. 

 

First of all, Mr. Speaker, I’d be remiss if I didn’t congratulate 

you on your election as Speaker, Mr. Speaker. I certainly look 

forward to working with you during the term of this legislature. 

And I’d also like to congratulate all the newly elected members 

on both sides of the House. I haven’t listened to all of the new 

members’ speeches but the ones that I have caught, listened to, 

and been present for, I must say you’ve been outstanding and 

you’ve set the bar very high. So that puts a lot of pressure on 

those of us that have been around here for a while, you know, 

because we sometimes leave things to the last moment before, 

in preparation, and so sometimes when we get up here and 

when we stand we really don’t know what’s going to come out. 

And that sometimes can get a little exciting and a little 

unsettling, I must say. 

 

I have some thank yous, as other members. We need to thank 

our families and I certainly thank my wife, Marlene, for all the 

years that she’s put up with me and enabled me to be here. We 

do have — and I’ve mentioned this a number of times and I’ll 

mention it again — since 2010 we have two granddaughters 

that are living with us and going to school. The oldest one 

graduated from high school last year, finished her first year 

university at the U of R [University of Regina], and is currently 

a summer student over here at the Royal Museum here, just 

down Albert Street. And we’re very proud of her. The second 

one is 14, going on 17, causing Grandma quite a few grey hairs, 

and I think Grandpa got a little greyer too. But we certainly 

enjoy her and it makes our life interesting, and people keep 

telling us that it keeps us young. And we’ll let you know in 

about another five, six years how that’s working out. There are 

days I’m not so sure that that’s going to work. 

 

I should also, Mr. Speaker, and I need to thank the constituents 



142 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2016 

and voters of Last Mountain-Touchwood for once again placing 

their trust in me to represent them. It is always a humbling 

experience during an election when the polls or the ballots are 

counted and you realize that you have been re-elected again. 

And that is something that, you know, I don’t think, no matter 

how many elections that an individual runs in, that you’ll never 

quite take that . . . or you should never, and I don’t think you 

will, and no one in this House takes that for granted. It is a real 

responsibility. 

 

And I guess one of the things, you know, when you serve in this 

House for a number of years, there are things that will stick 

with you for the rest of your life. And one of the things that will 

stick with me was maybe the first or second year after I was 

first elected and sitting on that side of the House in the back 

row. And I did get into the Chambers early which that’s 

amazing because quite often I’d just sort of be just-in-time 

arrival or a little late. 

 

And the visitors’ guide was talking to the group of students 

above us and pointing down to the floor and saying — at that 

time there was 58 members — and telling the students that the 

members in the seats, they are the people that speak for us. So 

what she was telling the students, we speak for our constituents. 

But when students are involved, it kind of drives that point 

home. And so I, like I said, I certainly would like to thank the 

voters and the constituents of Last Mountain-Touchwood for 

once again putting their trust in me. 

 

I’d like to just make a few comments about our most recent 

campaign in Last Mountain-Touchwood. We had a full slate of 

candidates. We had the representatives from the four major 

parties — of course Sask Party, New Democrats, Liberals, and 

Green Party. We had a candidate for the Western Independence 

Party and we also had the Saskatchewan Progressive 

Conservative Party. We had a candidate in the . . . The 

candidate happened to be their leader, Mr. Rick Swenson. I 

have to say that the other candidates, besides Mr. Swenson, 

really weren’t visible a lot during the campaign. 

 

The New Democrat candidate had signs, had a campaign office. 

I did see her vehicle with her signs on the vehicle and so on, but 

I can’t honestly say, and I don’t recall voters in various 

communities saying that they had seen Mary Ann. But I would 

like to certainly congratulate her because she certainly did, you 

know, in the manner of her campaigning, you know, conduct 

herself in what I think was a very, you know, very fair and 

honourable way. 

 

The other parties were virtually not present, other than names 

on the ballots, but I think there was no one else besides the New 

Democrats, ourselves, and the PC [Progressive Conservative] 

Party. None of them had any mailouts and so on. 

 

The one candidate that did put a fair bit of effort into the 

campaign besides myself was Mr. Swenson, the leader of the 

Progressive Conservative Party. He was out and about. He had 

a team working with him, did the mailouts, all those kind of 

things, held some open houses, and, you know, worked quite 

hard. You know, I must say that in my years . . . Of the five 

elections I’ve run in, you know, this was the only campaign 

where I think things got a little personal between Mr. Swenson 

. . . mostly with Mr. Swenson making some comments about the 

incumbent and so on. But I mean that’s fine. That’s all part of 

the game, and you roll with the punches and so on. 

 

And I guess probably the one thing I will remember from this 

past campaign is I was out in one of my small communities 

because that’s all Last Mountain-Touchwood has. We’re a very 

rural constituency with all our communities are less than 1,000 

people living in them. But anyway, this one day I was in a small 

community and we got talking about the campaign and the 

candidates, and this older gentleman says to me, he says, what’s 

with that Swenson fellow? What’s he doing here? He lives in 

Moose Jaw and running in Last Mountain-Touchwood. And I 

was way over on the east side of the constituency near Melville. 

And he says, does he think we’re going to elect him? He says, 

well I’m going to tell you something, the old gentleman said. 

He said, you know what we’re going to do? He says, he thinks 

we’re going to send him to Regina but we’re going to send him 

back to Moose Jaw. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s what the voters of 

Last Mountain-Touchwood did. And I might add, $100 poorer 

also, Mr. Speaker. So it was an interesting campaign as all of 

them are. And we’ll always remember parts of the campaigns 

that we’ve run in. 

 

Something else that I’d like to just spend a few minutes on, as 

other members have done, is give a bit of an update as to the 

happenings in their constituency. As I mentioned a few 

moments ago, Last Mountain-Touchwood is largely a rural 

constituency with quite a number of small communities. There 

is though one part that I refer to as a suburban area, and that’s 

made up of the resort areas along the east side of Last Mountain 

Lake and the north side of the Qu’Appelle Valley, communities 

like Katepwa, Sask Beach, and Kannata Valley and Island 

View, and a whole host of resort communities. And there is 

certainly a difference in their issues, as one might expect, 

between the resort communities and the rural communities of 

say, Balcarres and Strasbourg and Ituna and Southey. 

 

And of course agriculture is certainly the most important and 

probably the only industry that we would have in the 

constituency. We have a number of small manufacturers and so 

on, but by and large agriculture is the main industry. 

 

[14:45] 

 

And this year, unlike last year, we had very little runoff, which 

is a good thing because last year particularly the west side of 

the constituency had excessive runoff and massive flooding and 

some major issues. There’s still a lot of water from the 

excessive moisture that we’ve had in the last five years, but I 

see they’re getting a little smaller. We didn’t have any flooded 

highways or anything this year and the farmers are out there. 

The producers are out there well into seeding and in fact in 

many areas in the wrap-up stage. So you know, with the 

moisture coming I think, you know, producers I think are fairly 

happy as opposed to last year where we had an extended dry 

spell and there was, for the late-seeded crops, some problems 

with germination. 

 

But there is a new and exciting thing happening in Last 

Mountain-Touchwood, and that is a proposed solution potash 

mine that is being proposed by a company called Yancoal 

Canada. This company has done their exploration over a 

number of years and have submitted their environmental impact 



May 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 143 

statement. In fact, that statement is now in the public review 

and comment period. And so I have met once or twice with 

some of the senior people with the company and the impression 

I get is that they are quite intent on building a mine, and they 

are well into the process. There’s been no actual construction 

activities, but they are well into the regulatory process. 

 

As you can imagine, this proposal, there are a large number of 

people that view it very favourably, but there are also some 

people who have some concerns, and that’s legitimate, Mr. 

Speaker, you know, and they do have an opportunity to raise 

their concerns. I’ve certainly listened to them, worked with 

them, worked with the local municipality. Last July 

municipalities had an information meeting in the evening where 

I helped them make sure that we had the appropriate officials 

there to answer questions and so on. The company was there. 

And there’s been a number of public meetings about this 

project. I guess we’ll see where it goes once they go through the 

regulatory process to see whether a permit is issued and then go 

from there. Something else, Mr. Speaker . . . I think that 

basically sort of gives the highlights of what’s happening in 

Last Mountain-Touchwood. 

 

A couple of things I’d like to make a few comments about the 

. . . Well perhaps I should go back. I missed one thing, 

highways, of course. Highways is always a problem in Last 

Mountain-Touchwood, as it is in many rural constituencies. The 

very first highway that I dealt with, had to deal with that was in 

very desperate condition, was Highway 310 between Balcarres 

and Ituna. Over a period of years since we formed government, 

we managed to get that one upgraded and repaired, and it is 

now in good driving condition. Particularly the residents of 

Ituna are very happy about it because when they’re coming to 

Regina it makes their lives a whole lot easier. 

 

The second highway was Highway 22, and some members may 

remember that highway was another very bad highway with 

excessive moisture and so on. School buses would get stuck in 

the middle of the highway and so on. That highway between 

Southey and Earl Grey has been upgraded significantly and 

there’s an excellent highway serving those two communities. 

 

We do have some problems on the very west side of the 

constituency in the resort areas of Saskatchewan Beach, 

Kannata Valley, Silton, all the way up to Rowan’s Ravine, 

Highways 322 and 220. And I’m very pleased that in this 

Throne Speech, reference is made to the additional $70 million 

surge fund that our government is putting in place to help 

address some of these situations. And I’m very hopeful in next 

week’s budget that there may be some funding to address some 

of these challenges that we have. So I guess we’ll wait and see. 

That’s a week from today. But like I said, I’m hopeful that we 

will see something. 

 

I’d like to now turn my comments to, I guess, partly stemming 

from my role as the Deputy Speaker, also since I was Deputy 

Speaker in the last legislature. It seems when one is placed in 

the position of a presiding officer you tend to take a lot more 

interest and take your responsibilities quite seriously. 

Particularly I think it’s very helpful and very useful to attend 

the presiding officers conference which happens at the end of 

January every year. There are presiding officers from across 

Canada, from the House of Commons and the Senate and all the 

legislatures all across Canada including the territories, and you 

quickly find that I think the experience that you go through 

when you’re first put in the position, most members, presiding 

officers of other legislatures go through this where they realize 

that it’s up to the presiding officers to make sure that the 

legislature, in our case, operates according to the established 

rules and proceedings that have gone before us to preserve the 

integrity. I know Speakers from across Canada, it’s quite a 

fraternity where they depend on each other when they get into 

difficult situations, and I know they call one another and ask for 

advice from their counterparts. And I, you know, I think this is 

something that is important and every presiding officer should 

consider this. 

 

I should comment, I guess, on where I sit in this legislature, 

which is new. This is the first time since I’ve been here that we 

have had two seats over here. And I have to admit, the day that 

we were sworn in and I took my seat here and I sat and I looked 

across, first of all I thought I might need binoculars to see the 

member from Carrot River Valley. And then the thought 

popped into my head, well that’s maybe not such a bad thing, 

you know, although I appreciate him. And then I kind of 

thought, you know, here you are off against the wall. It’s a little 

bit like being in the orphan pen, you know. But then I reflected 

on it a bit more and there are other legislatures, at least two that 

I am aware of, where their practices are somewhat different 

than ours. They’re older legislatures and have more members, 

and that being the legislature in Victoria and the one in Toronto, 

where they have Deputy Speakers from both sides of the House. 

So you’ll have two Deputy Speakers plus the Deputy Chairs 

and so on, and their seats are separate from the rest of the 

members. And when I asked them about that they said, well that 

is not only for them to be non-partisan but to show that they’re 

non-partisan. They sit separate from the other members, but 

they also do wear the gowns that our Speaker and the Clerks do. 

So that’s the context that I take this in. It is actually quite 

comfortable here, so I think it’s not a bad idea. 

 

The other thing that I would like to comment is on the role of 

the legislature and parliament and such. For some reason I 

guess, when we got the list here last week of new books in the 

library, one caught my eye. It’s called The Constitution of 

Canada: A Contextual Analysis, by Jeremy Webber, published 

in 2015. And I have to admit, I just looked at certain sections. 

But one of the sections that did catch my eye, when he talked 

about parliamentary sovereignty. And there’s just a very brief 

history on how, you know, through the British parliamentary 

system, how parliament eventually became sovereign and so on. 

 

And it talks about, of course, the very parts of what we call 

government: you know, the legislative branch, the executive 

branch, and the judicial branch. But it also talks about the 

importance of following precedents and established procedures 

and rules that parliaments and legislatures have set out for 

themselves. 

 

And today we saw that when we had first reading of a number 

of bills, where the Speaker, where the minister rises and moves 

first reading of a bill. And then once it’s agreed upon to accept 

the first reading of the bill, then the Clerk stands up and simply 

says, first reading of the bill. And you know, I mean, I 

wondered for years too, why do we have to do these things in 

that sort of order? Because it’s part of our precedents. 



144 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2016 

And I think what I’d like to do, if I can find the quote here, I’m 

going to quote one paragraph that perhaps explains this as to 

why it’s important that we as a legislature follow the rules and 

precedents. And I’m quoting now: 

 

Parliament’s ostensibly absolute power is, however, 

subject to important internal limitations. First, Parliament 

must follow its own procedural rules in order to make 

laws. This follows from the fact that Parliament is not a 

natural entity; it is only when it is duly constituted and 

following procedures that its enactments deserve 

recognition as Acts of Parliament. As a result, in Canadian 

law, Parliament can bind itself for the future when it comes 

to questions of procedure. This means that it must follow 

the procedural rules it creates, although it can modify or 

repeal those rules if it follows the prescribed procedure. 

 

But I think there’s a lot of wisdom in this. I just wish that the 

font was somewhat larger. It makes it a bit difficult to read with 

these progressive glasses. And I do intend to spend more time 

on this, and if members are interested, it is from our library 

here, and it does offer some insight as to why it is we do the 

things we do. 

 

So having said that, Mr. Speaker, I know other members would 

like to enter into the debate and so I think I will, fairly soon 

here, bring my comments to a close. So if I just check my notes 

and make sure that I have covered the things that I intended to 

do. 

 

I guess maybe I might conclude with this, Mr. Speaker, nothing 

profound. Yesterday afternoon a group of members after recess 

had the opportunity to take a tour of the dome on the exterior. 

And it is quite amazing what work was done there, the 

craftsmanship. It really drives home the craftsmanship of the 

original builders of this legislature, and particularly the dome. 

And I would highly recommend — I understand there is another 

tour tomorrow — and I’d highly recommend to members who 

are interested, definitely take the tour. One word of caution: if 

you’re afraid of heights, it’s not bad, but you may want to be a 

bit careful. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will say that I will be supporting 

the motion, and thank you for giving me this opportunity. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Biggar-Sask 

Valley. 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First I’d like to 

congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, on your election as Speaker, and 

also thank the other two candidates who ran for the position, 

and also the Deputy Speaker who was unopposed. So thank 

you. Congratulations to him as well. Obviously I’d like to 

congratulate all our colleagues and candidates who ran in the 

last election. You know, it takes a special person to commit to 

this job and I believe you’ve got to hand it to everyone who has 

made that commitment. 

 

And I’d just like to thank my team in Biggar-Sask Valley. It’s a 

new constituency, which I assumed the Sask Valley part. So 

communities like Hague, Dalmeny, Hepburn, and Waldheim 

were new to me, and that joined with most of the old Biggar 

constituency that I represented. I lost — to me it’s a loss — 

because it was interesting the last time I went to communities 

like Wilkie and Vanscoy and Delisle and Perdue that went to 

two other constituencies, it was actually . . . I felt quite, I don’t 

know, emotional actually at the Remembrance Day services 

because I always went to Delisle and Wilkie to the 

Remembrance Day service. I told the people that’ll be the last 

time I’ll be, as their MLA, be going to their Remembrance Day 

services. So it was an interesting . . .  

 

But you know, it’s just a joy to have the new part of the 

constituency, very solid support for the Saskatchewan Party, 

and quite humbled by the vote and the response I get obviously. 

 

[15:00] 

 

You know, a lot of . . . Most of the credit has to go the Premier 

and our government, and to the former member that represented 

that area, the member from Martensville-Warman. 

 

First of all, I better not forget my family: my wife, Cindy, who 

is my business manager; my eldest daughter Lacey who is 

going to be having a baby early July; my youngest daughter 

Alexandra who is going to university; and my son Marshall 

who works in Saskatoon. So I want to mention them and thank 

them for their support. 

 

My campaign team, my campaign manager was Janet Hanson 

who is also my constituency assistant. She’s been with me now 

for four years and is a very excellent constituency assistant and 

worked hard doing the campaign. She staffed the campaign 

office, which was in Hepburn, and she worked very hard and 

did a great job helping me get elected. 

 

Some of the other people I need to mention is the mayor of 

Biggar, Ray Sadler, who is my constituency president. He 

helped as much as he could. He runs a restaurant, so it’s 

difficult for him to get away. But he took time off from his 

restaurant to go help me put up signs, and we had lots of fun. 

 

Taking signs down was even more exciting and fun because it 

was raining and snowing and high winds. And Ray’s just a little 

guy. He’s about half as big as I am or at least weighs half as 

much as I do. And we joked about him blowing away in the 

wind, and I swear when he had a 4-by-8 sign that he actually 

did leave the ground. But anyway, I got him home, so that was 

fun. 

 

And on the leaders’ debate, we held a function in his restaurant. 

It was closed; it was a private function. We invited many 

supporters and friends over to watch the debate in his restaurant 

and ate pizza and drank some pop. 

 

Other people that I need to mention is someone that’s new to 

my constituency and my team, Joe Whittaker. Joe’s a veteran. 

He was in Bosnia, and actually he does suffer from PTSD. I 

don’t think he’d mind me saying that. And so he has some 

challenges, but a very nice guy. So he helped me put up signs 

too and take signs down. So we had lots of fun again during 

that, and he came out to my grand opening and things like that. 

 

Another person that did a lot of work was Larry Trischuk from 

Borden. Larry’s 70 . . . I think he’s 73 years old. He’s obviously 

a political animal, and he’s worked in federal campaigns and 



May 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 145 

volunteered to help in mine. So he helped me. He put up signs 

and was at the returning office when the results were coming in 

and helped a lot. So he and his wife came down to the Throne 

Speech last week, and brought his wife who had suffered a 

stroke about a year ago. So they have some challenges, but 

they’re doing well. 

 

One other person I want to . . . I’ll just move on to some of the 

things in the constituency. In Biggar, we have one of the 13 

new long-term care homes. So it was attached to the hospital, 

and so it’s basically an integrated facility. So it’s very 

rewarding to have that in Biggar; it’s helped the people a lot 

there. So we’ve had some challenges with having doctors, and 

that was looked after a few years ago. We need three doctors 

and we always had two, so we finally got the third doctor, came 

out of Manchester, England. She and her husband and small 

child came to live in Biggar. She’s had another baby since she’s 

in Biggar. So we have three doctors. 

 

It’s interesting right now. There’s always a challenge in rural 

Saskatchewan to keep physicians and nursing staff. And we’ve 

always had an adequate number of nursing staff, but we, in the 

last year or two, we’ve been a little short on nurses. And so the 

hospital has been on bypass occasionally. So I’ve got to give a 

thank you to the health region for getting adequate nursing staff, 

and now the hospital, other than the odd time that it’s on 

bypass, it’s open and servicing the community very well. 

 

You know, I can go through the Throne Speech. My colleagues 

have done an excellent job of quoting and reading many parts of 

the Throne Speech into the record. But there’s one thing, one 

area I just would like to enter into my speech, and it comes 

under the part about, you know, the number of companies that 

have announced major new investments and expansions in 

Saskatchewan. 

 

And so in Biggar there’s a company called AGI Envirotank Ltd. 

So they’re a company that, at its peak before the price of oil 

dropped down, they had about 85 to 90 people on the road 

installing tanks, delivering tanks in the oil patch around 

Western Canada. And they had another 70 to 80 manufacturing 

in the town of Biggar. So yes, they had some job losses when 

the oil price went down, but they received an award. 

 

And I just want to read this award from the website into the 

record, you know, just to highlight what a fabulous employer 

this company is. And you know, they do such a great job, 

obviously, because they won this award. 

 

Just before I read this in, I’d just like to say that they got a 

contract with K+S and they’re building the mine shaft for K+S. 

So a lot of workers from Biggar are going out there and 

working their shifts and installing the mine shaft. But this award 

goes to them. It’s about their work with tanks. So it’s: 

 

AGI Envirotank Ltd is humbled to announce that AGI has 

won “Shop Fabricated Tank of 2015” as awarded via the 

Steel Tank Institute.  

 

And in brackets it says, “This is the Grammys for tank 

geeks.” 

 

The Steel Tank Institute is an international association of 

Tank Fabricators, Tank Erectors, Pipe Manufacturers and 

Pressure Vessel Fabricators. The Association was formed 

in 1916 and has around 380 members. 

 

Each year the members vote on who should receive the 

award. AGI received the award for an Amine Storage Tank 

that . . . [we] built for SaskPower’s Carbon Capture 

Facility. 

 

When I say we, it’s a quote from their website: 

 

We are proud to participate in a carbon capture facility. We 

believe the facility is good for the environment and 

Saskatchewan. Amine is one of the liquids that attaches 

itself to the CO2 and captures it so that the CO2 can 

become a sell-able product rather than an environmental 

waste. 

 

We do big things in Saskatchewan and AGI fabricates big 

plate works in Biggar. AGI built the largest shop-built, 

double-wall stainless steel tank we believe that has ever 

been built and transported in one piece. The tank was 33 

feet in diameter and 65 feet tall. We built it on a very tight 

schedule and delivered 4 days early. 

 

AGI would like to thank our peers for voting for us and we 

are already working on next year’s tank. (38 feet in 

diameter and 70 feet high. So watch out, Saskatchewan, 

you will see us coming.) 

 

So I’d just like to congratulate the Burton family from Biggar 

and AGI who are a very important part of the Biggar 

community. 

 

And it’s interesting, Dave Burton, the founder or the father, he 

really likes hockey, so he has donated much time, energy, and 

finances to keeping the Biggar Nationals hockey team, to 

resurrect the Biggar Nationals hockey team. He employs people 

from all over Canada and, some of them, the question is, do you 

play hockey by any chance? And if they’re good enough to play 

for the Biggar Nationals — and they also need to weld and 

fabricate products — he will hire these mainly men and bring 

them to Biggar. So he’s quite an interesting guy. 

 

But just in closing, like I say, I won’t read everything in the 

Throne Speech that other colleagues have spoke to. Obviously 

it’s a very important Throne Speech. It speaks to our campaign 

and our campaign promises: and you know, I mean keeping 

Saskatchewan strong, better quality of life, and jobs. That’s 

what keeps this province going and keeps families going 

healthy and strong, is jobs and well-paying jobs. And our 

government and our Premier is dedicated to job creation and 

keeping the economy going. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the Throne Speech, and I 

will not be supporting the amendment brought down by the 

opposition. Thank you very much. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 

Park. 

 

Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is a 

privilege and honour to be able to stand in the House today and 



146 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2016 

respond to my first Throne Speech as a member of the 

Legislative Assembly. It’s a particular honour, Mr. Speaker, to 

be one of the youngest women elected to this Assembly and 

presently, to the best of my knowledge, the youngest member 

elected in the most recent election. I am gracious and mindful 

that this meeting takes place on Treaty 4 territory. This treaty 

was first signed in 1874, almost a decade before the colonial 

settlement of Regina began. 

 

I would like to extend warm wishes to all the new members of 

the Legislative Assembly on both sides as they undertake a new 

role to best represent and to be accountable to their constituents. 

Mr. Speaker, we know that to take a seat in this House does not 

come without hard work. A special shout-out to the two new 

members sitting with me on this side of the House: the members 

for Prince Albert Northcote and Regina Lakeview. Three new 

women added to a small yet mighty caucus. I think our 

reference to a canoe versus a battleship is apt, and I couldn’t be 

paddling with a better group of colleagues. 

 

Speaking of our caucus, Mr. Speaker, I must also make note of 

our caucus’s election of Leader of the Official Opposition. The 

member for Regina Rosemont has a great deal of respect across 

the province, and I could not think of someone more suited for 

the job. His strengths in building bridges is one of the reasons I 

am able to speak before you today. Without our leader’s 

encouragement and commitment, as well as the encouragement 

of our former leader, Cam Broten, I would not have ever 

thought myself appropriately fit for this role. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss not to congratulate you on 

your election to your post, and to the member from Last 

Mountain-Touchwood for his election as Deputy Speaker. 

 

In lead-up to my response to the Throne Speech today, Mr. 

Speaker, I find it of utmost importance to thank some very 

important people who have helped me find my seat here in the 

Assembly today. I did not make this journey on my own; in 

fact, it’s a journey that started long before I even thought of 

seeking the nomination for my party in Regina Douglas Park. 

 

First, I want to thank the residents of Regina Douglas Park for 

giving me the opportunity to represent them. The responsibility 

of representing their interests in this Legislative Assembly is 

one I do not take lightly or take for granted. I had the 

opportunity to meet many of the constituents while door 

knocking over the past 16 months, and I’m looking forward to 

meeting many more at barbecues and annual general meetings, 

at the constituency office, and on the doorsteps. 

 

The community is very diverse and passionate, as most 

communities are in Regina. They care about their neighbours 

and the area they live in. I humbly look forward to working for 

them in the future. 

 

I would be remiss not to thank my campaign team. The 

hundreds of folks on our team were second to none. I’ve never 

seen a group of volunteers so hard working and passionate. We 

had such a mix of people: students, retired folks, professionals. 

We had party stalwarts and brand new activists engaged right 

from writ drop through to election day. It was truly inspiring for 

me to see. I was particularly humbled to see some of my lawyer 

colleagues come to the campaign office right after work, take 

off their blazers, roll up their sleeves, and door knock with me. 

 

I also want to especially thank the former MLA for Regina 

Douglas Park, Harry Van Mulligen, and his wife, Judy Young, 

for their long hours volunteering on the campaign. It meant a lot 

to me to have them by my side, and having Harry as my mentor 

and guide has been invaluable and continues to be. 

 

Our campaign leadership was young; dare I say, the youngest in 

all the province. Not only was it young, Mr. Speaker, but it was 

queer and women leaders who are taking on these roles. I am 

honoured to have worked so closely with such a great, young, 

professional team. The key folks on my team speak to the type 

of community we’ve begun to cultivate in Douglas Park, and 

the type of movement New Democrats are building across the 

province. 

 

I do not wish to name everyone’s names as it may take up my 

entire time, but I will thank Ben Diaz as my campaign manager 

for coming in and filling in the role last minute, and for his 

time, and doing so as if he had been doing campaigns for 

dozens of years. I also want to thank Carly Greco and Dave 

Currie for their hard work, passion, and sound volunteer 

management. Lastly I want to thank Krystal Lewis for her 

wealth of knowledge and calm, steady hand on election day. 

 

[15:15] 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I also want to give a special mention to 

my former fellow trustees at the Regina Catholic School 

Division. Elected in 2012, I had the opportunity to work and 

learn from the trustees — some have been at the table for over 

30 years — about public service and local grassroots politics. I 

feel I have grown a lot as a public servant over the past three 

and a half years, and I hope to bring these lessons to the 

legislature and to my constituents in Douglas Park. 

 

I need to also thank my family and especially my parents, 

Donna and Owen. When thinking about lessons I had from 

them growing up, many came to mind. But the ones that really 

stuck with me are, when trying to sneak backstage at a concert, 

always act like you’re just lost and looking for the bathroom, 

and make sure you always steal a set list for the band to sign 

after the show. I also can thank my parents for exposing me to 

some great poets of their time like the ones who said, “If you 

don’t like what you got, why don’t you change it? If the world 

is all screwed up, rearrange it.” That would be the great poets 

called Trooper, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for those who didn’t catch 

on. Those are the life moments that have helped shape who I am 

today. All kidding aside, I’m honoured to have the family I 

have, and I realize how lucky I am. They are my rocks and were 

my best volunteers throughout the entire campaign. I know not 

everyone is given that head start in life. We all don’t begin at 

the same starting line. Words cannot express how grateful I am 

to them. 

 

And I also want to give special mention to my sister Stacey, 

who wasn’t in town for most of the election but certainly helped 

to keep me sane and level headed. She is an inspiration to me as 

she works as an engineer in a profession that is still heavily 

male dominated, and she steps out on to those construction sites 

like the boss she is every single day. 

 



May 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 147 

I want to thank my friends who supported me through this 

process, many of who are not traditionally politically active but 

who were great volunteers for me. Several of them are currently 

on maternity leave, not planned on their part to be off work 

during my election campaign, but I was grateful to take 

advantage of it. 

 

I do, however, want to name a very close friend of mine, Erin 

Lawrence who lost her life when we were both 20 and 21 

respectively to a very sudden and hard battle with stomach 

cancer. If you ever heard of the non-profit, Teddy Bears 

Anonymous, that was the silver lining born out of her death. It’s 

been almost 10 years since we lost her, but not a day goes by 

when I don’t think of her. Losing her when we were all so 

young instilled in me to never take tomorrow for granted, never 

put off accomplishing your goals and dreams, and that a life of 

service to others is a life worth living. I hope she’s proud. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve already spoke of it, but I am unbelievably 

proud to represent Regina Douglas Park. This constituency 

extends west to the edge of downtown Regina, the heart of the 

city, the vibrant commercial and cultural core. In the north, it 

straddles the CN [Canadian National] rail line, a traditional 

artery and historical lifeline connecting the city to the rest of 

Canada. Regina Douglas Park’s eastern border is the Ring 

Road, and finally the southern border of my constituency is the 

northern shores of the beautiful Wascana Lake, the lake on 

which shores this Assembly sits. 

 

Within these boundaries is the place I represent, including 

wholly or partly the communities of Heritage, Eastview, Al 

Ritchie, and Boot Hill. The communities themselves are very 

diverse. Some of our city’s poorest and our city’s wealthiest call 

Regina Douglas Park home. Young professionals and retired 

folks call Regina Douglas Park home. Single-parent families, 

nuclear families, mixed families, and multi-generational 

families call this area home. People from a host of cultural 

backgrounds call Regina Douglas Park home, including peoples 

from many of our indigenous nations and peoples with ancestry 

like mine, from German and eastern European communities. 

 

Douglas Park has many commercial districts that serve my 

constituents well. I’m pleased that our new constituency office 

will be opening soon on the 1200 block of 15th Avenue in a 

small yet vibrant commercial area: along with our office, Hemp 

Haven, Frank’s Barber Shop, and the soon opening Hunter 

Gatherer Vegetarian Diner. Across the street a unique space 

with T + A vintage and vinyl, 33 1/3 Roasters, and Malty 

National have turned this neighbourhood into a vibrant hub of 

activity. 

 

As I turn to the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, it’s clear to me 

that it lacks in any sort of inspiring vision, which is truly a 

missed opportunity. Third terms are usually an opportunity for a 

government to really be visionary. Even in tighter financial 

times, there are countless governments who have made real 

progress for their electorate in later terms. It’s unfortunate that 

this isn’t the case here. I’m humbled to have been given the 

duty of being critic for Justice, Corrections and Policing, 

Immigration, women, and SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and 

Gaming Authority]. All of these are busy and exciting files and 

I’m sure I’ll have a lot to touch on in my time on these issues. 

 

Justice is an area I have the most personal experience with, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. I have some big shoes to fill in stepping into 

the role after John Nilson, our former MLA for Regina 

Lakeview, who came into the role with decades of experience, 

both as a critic and as a former Justice minister. Although he is 

retired, luckily for me he’s still readily available as a mentor, 

and I’m grateful he takes time out of his days for me. 

 

I’ve been working for the last five years as a lawyer in the area 

of access to justice in the legal system in Saskatchewan, and I 

have to say that there’s so much work to be done. This province 

is filled with kind and generous lawyers. And I know that those 

adjectives are not normally used with lawyers by some but I 

stand proud by my statement. These lawyers give of their time 

to help those in our community who fall between the cracks. 

And those numbers are huge, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There are 

thousands in the province who have to struggle their way 

through the legal system on their own or who are unable to 

address their legal issues at all. 

 

I, on a regular basis, provided legal advice to many people, 

typically women, who were fleeing situations of domestic 

violence but weren’t able to access legal aid because they were 

working. Women trying to make ends meet on minimum wage, 

working full time at places like restaurants or cleaning agencies, 

with three or four kids, don’t qualify for legal aid in this 

province and are left on their own. Situations like these are too 

common and they break my heart. 

 

Domestic violence is another issue that has been woefully 

ignored by this government. In fact, it was only a few short 

months ago when the government stated that they would deal 

with this issue once the economy improved, in terms of funding 

dollars. Strange how this issue goes ignored while the 

government has no problem addressing what they consider 

more pressing issues like home bakeries or KFC buffets during 

tight economic times, while ignoring a threat that historically 

gets significantly worse when families are struggling to make 

ends meet. 

 

We have the highest domestic violence rate among the 

provinces in the country. That is a sobering fact. And if one 

needs to be so callous as to put dollar figures on this issue to see 

progress, we save money in terms of Health and Social Services 

spending and time spent outside of the workforce when we 

address this issue. 

 

There are some great examples in our neighbouring provinces 

to the east and west of some legislative address that, while they 

will not solve the issue of domestic violence itself, will help to 

ease some of the unaddressed consequences of our high 

domestic violence rates, and cost no or very little money for our 

government to implement. 

 

This is an issue that is not just one for my Justice role but also 

an important one in my role as critic for women. One thing that 

I think is apt to point out is that this is the 100th-year 

anniversary of women having the right to vote in Saskatchewan. 

I would be remiss not to point out that this doesn’t mean that all 

women were granted the right to vote in 1916. Indigenous 

women were not given that right until much later. This is a sad 

part of the story that cannot be forgotten. 

 



148 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2016 

Despite this milestone, women are still woefully 

under-represented in places of leadership and authority in our 

society, and this legislature is no exception. Despite being over 

50 per cent of the population, women only make up 26 per cent 

of those elected today in this House. And I think that might be 

the best we’ve ever done here. Canada is right now 46th, as of 

2013, in the world in terms of equality in representation. 

 

Why does this matter? The United Nations has emphasized time 

and again that a critical mass of women in decision-making 

roles is needed to create change in areas of public policy that 

women traditionally have carried the torch. When more women 

are at the table, more creative and collaborative decisions are 

made. Women have a unique perspective on problems and 

solutions that must be utilized on behalf of this province. 

 

Studies show that one of the reasons why women are 

under-represented is because they do not run for office. One of 

those reasons why, many studies show, is because there is a 

gender gap in ambition to run for office. Women do not have 

political ambitions at the same rate as men do. Why do men see 

political life as a realistic career goal while women do less 

frequently? The recent emergence of female political leaders 

has not done anything to change this gap. In fact studies have 

found that it is widening. 

 

So when we celebrate this 100th-year anniversary, Mr. Speaker, 

of the vote for non-indigenous women, let’s make sure we 

aren’t patting ourselves on the back on how far we have come 

and wiping our hands of the need for this discussion. The 

conversation is needed, and without a concerted shift in how 

society operates, will we see any gains in this 

under-representation? That being said, I’m so proud to be a part 

of a caucus that has achieved gender parity. 

 

One of the reasons why I ran was because of the increasing 

inequality I saw in our communities. While some are more 

successful, many others are simply not able to get ahead and are 

falling through the cracks in our system. I saw these people 

every single day in my previous work. We strove to improve 

access to justice in a system as one of those barriers for those 

who are struggling to get ahead as an ability to try to take one 

hurdle away from those who have more hurdles than anyone 

here could ever imagine. 

 

Another issue that was not touched on in the Throne Speech, 

Mr. Speaker, is the rate of missing and murdered indigenous 

women in this province. This is an issue of colonialism, sexism, 

and racism, one that affects many families and loved ones in 

this province. Nobody should be discarded as less than in our 

society, but that is the unfortunate reality for some. I need to 

pause and point out that comments that the members opposite 

said yesterday about women needing to stop playing the victim 

narrative and just pull themselves up by their bootstraps should 

maybe have a conversation with those families and stop the 

regressive rhetoric that ignores systemic barriers that exist in 

our society. 

 

Corrections and Policing, Mr. Speaker, is another file I inherit 

from Mr. Nilson, and I am again glad to have his wisdom 

guiding me. I look forward to meeting with the stakeholders in 

this area in the coming months. Maclean’s magazine came out 

with a very powerful investigative report in February of 2016 

that shed light on some of the issues in Canada’s prisons, 

calling them the new residential schools. Much of their article, 

despite being Canada-wide, zeroed in on issues in 

Saskatchewan. It mentioned that, while Canada’s rate of crime 

is decreasing, our remand rates have skyrocketed. Jails are 

overcrowded and our hard-working correctional staff are being 

forced to work in more and more precariously dangerous 

situations. The use of segregation in jails is increasing and is 

resulting in inmates leaving prison not rehabilitated but more 

damaged than before. I want to highlight one quote in particular 

that hit home with me from that Maclean’s article: 

 

The main reason Indigenous women — who account for 78 

per cent of all self-harm incidents in prison — are moved 

to higher security levels is due to self-harm, including 

suicide attempts, according to a 2008 report by the Ontario 

Women’s Justice Network. 

 

Kinew James, who died months before the end of a 15-year 

sentence while incarcerated in Saskatchewan, is frequently 

compared to Ashley Smith, who strangled herself to death 

at Grand Valley Institution for Women in 2007 as guards 

watched. Both were incarcerated as teens. They struggled 

with mental illness and self-harm, were frequently moved, 

and spent long stretches in segregation in a system that 

didn’t know how to deal with them. 

 

We are failing so many people, Mr. Deputy Speaker. These 

aren’t souls that should be forgotten. I agree with Jimmy Carter 

who once said that a society is measured by how it treats its 

most vulnerable. 

 

Gang violence is also on the rise, Mr. Speaker, and those living 

in Regina in particular can attest to this and speak to their own 

concern for their safety. But the solution is not any of those 

mentioned above. We need to reinvest in preventative measures 

and anti-gang strategies. Putting people in prison does not make 

anyone less inclined toward gang life, but addressing the root 

causes of why someone would fall into a gang is where the 

solution lies. And there are many experts in the community with 

the answers. We simply need to tap into that resource. This is 

another issue left out in the Throne Speech. 

 

I haven’t even begun to speak about the recent issues 

surrounding the state of the prison food and the flippant 

statement of the Premier that those who do not like the food 

should stay out of prison, or the closing of the Yarrow Youth 

Farm. 

 

Moving on now to my role as Immigration critic, I am always in 

awe of how diverse our province has become. I had the pleasure 

of coming across a family of Syrian refugees while door 

knocking a few months ago and their openness, despite us not 

sharing a common language, in welcoming me into their home 

was truly inspiring. I met many individuals with immigration 

challenges in my previous work, particularly in the struggles 

surrounding the long reunification of families and the issues 

around temporary foreign worker designation in the province. 

 

Last but certainly not least is my critic portfolio with SLGA. I 

am encouraged by all of the activity in the province over the 

last few years in the areas of craft brewing and distilleries. It’s 

great to see so many local folks creating businesses and 



May 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 149 

supporting the community. I will work to ensure that their 

businesses thrive. 

 

I will also strive to keep the government to account in their 

work. I will work to ensure this government will be open and 

transparent throughout their process and ensure their word in 

keeping everything cost and revenue neutral. 

 

[15:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, if you would for a moment indulge me in 

revealing to you and all members my age in this Chamber, I 

wish to make reference to the maiden speech of the former 

member for Saskatoon Nutana, delivered to this House the year 

I was born. Pat Atkinson, a fellow New Democrat, also took her 

seat in this Chamber in opposition to the Progressive 

Conservatives in 1986. I had a chance to read over her very first 

remarks to this House, Mr. Speaker, and the government of the 

day was criticized for many of the same socio-economic issues 

as the government today. 

 

Ms. Atkinson said much of the repercussions of unemployment 

at the time. The government can trot out old and outdated 

statistics about the resilience of the Saskatchewan economy as 

they did then, but statistics do little for the un- and 

underemployed people of this province. She spoke of how the 

economic downturn has a disproportionately adverse impact on 

women and young people. Women and young people are more 

likely to be in precarious lines of work and as human services 

jobs disappear, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the incomes many families 

rely on have dwindled or disappeared. 

 

Minimum wage earners, once again most commonly women 

and youth, have seen their purchasing power continue to 

decrease to the point that their income is a fraction of a living 

wage. We had record use of our province’s food banks in the 

1980s, and 30 years later we witness again unprecedented use. 

Even during the much-lauded boom, food bank use skyrocketed 

along with the amount of children living in poverty in 

Saskatchewan. We can do better, and our government needs to 

do better. Our producers feed mouths around the world, yet 

many of our own do not have enough. 

 

As I continue my work in this legislature, I will endeavour to be 

reasonable to work with, motivated by my passions, and 

accountable to my constituents. And I will close in a way 

similar to my colleague opened 30 years ago. If the members 

opposite deal with the challenges of governing our province in a 

manner that is fair and reasonable, then I’ll be an ally to the 

members opposite. However, if they don’t, if the rights of any 

individual or group is threatened, then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll 

be a critic. And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as my remarks 

indicate, I will support the amendment moved by my colleagues 

to the Throne Speech. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Cannington. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 

pleasure to rise here today after five years of not being able to 

speak on behalf of Cannington, and I think it’s time that 

Cannington’s voice was heard. But first I would like to 

congratulate the new Speaker in his new role. It’s a challenging 

position. It can be a lonely position because the Speaker’s 

position is to be impartial and fair to both sides of the House. 

And in doing so, quite often neither side of the House is 

impressed with the decisions of the Speaker. 

 

I would like to thank the Clerks-at-the-Table for their support 

while I was the Speaker in the last parliament. And I would like 

to thank the member, the Deputy Speaker. So if I was the Andy 

Griffith of Speakers, that would make the Deputy Speaker 

Gomer Pyle.  

 

I would like to thank the support of Cannington. We had a very 

tight race there in this past election, but the voters in 

Cannington did come through again for the seventh time in 

sending me to this legislature. You know, at the rate of increase 

in the percentage of the vote, I will need another two elections 

to get 100 per cent. I’m not sure that the people of Cannington 

or the members of this House are prepared to put up with that. 

 

So I’d like to talk a little bit about Cannington. Cannington’s 

main industries are both agriculture and the oil industry. 

Agriculture is doing very well. We’ve had sufficient rain this 

spring to get the seeding done. We’re probably in the 

neighbourhood of 80 to 90 per cent complete, and the crops that 

are up are looking very good. 

 

The oil industry, on the other hand, is struggling. There are a 

number of businesses whose doors have closed because of the 

lack of business, and a number of employees have been let go. 

That’s one of the reasons why this government was promoting 

extending EI [employment insurance] benefits and asking the 

federal government to provide that kind of support for those 

employees that have lost their jobs. We have the lowest 

capacity or capability for EI across the country. 

 

Previously, if you were in the Maritimes or in other locations in 

Canada, you could get EI with a much lower amount of work 

and those benefits extended for a great deal longer time. Well in 

my area those benefits are needed and would be appreciated if 

the federal government would come through. And I applaud the 

Premier for raising that issue with the Prime Minister and with 

the federal cabinet in seeking to extend those benefits. 

 

But it’s not all doom and gloom in Cannington. Our schools are 

full. There have been new schools built. Oxbow comprehensive 

high school was built since we formed government. It’s a great 

new school and a great community centre for that community, 

which invested additional monies to expand the gymnasium 

theatre to be utilized by the entire community. 

 

You know, in the last census everybody across rural 

Saskatchewan was concerned how the numbers would turn out, 

whether their constituencies would shrink or grow. Well in 

Cannington’s case, it grew. So the net result of that was I lost 

some parts of my constituency that went to Weyburn which, 

while I regretted that happening, there was some compensatory 

territory that came into Cannington. And that was some 

townships on the west side of Lampman that Cannington 

received from the Estevan constituency. While it covered 

territory, there were very few people actually living there. But I 

did gain one new constituent over the last five years. The 

Minister of Health now resides in Cannington, so I would like 

to thank him for his financial support in the last election. 



150 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2016 

An Hon. Member: — Tomorrow check your records. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — I did. You paid. 

 

You know, it’s sort of like the Roughriders that can never win a 

Grey Cup while the NDP are in power. In Cannington, we can’t 

get a new hotel while the NDP are in power. In the late 1960s, 

the last hotel was built. But in the last eight years, there are six 

new hotels built in this constituency because the Sask Party was 

in power. And they have been full until this past year. 

 

So new hotels in Stoughton, Arcola, Carlyle, Redvers, Wawota, 

Carnduff, and Oxbow, and some of those communities have 

more than one new hotel. So it’s been . . . The Saskatchewan 

Party being in power has represented huge economic 

opportunities for my constituency and for the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Now there is a note here about the Minister of Advanced 

Education that he stuck in here. Something about him being a 

rock. Okay, I’m not sure what that’s about. 

 

An Hon. Member: — A pet rock. 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Maybe it’s a pet rock. That’s true. 

 

You know, we had the discussion today in question period 

regarding acute care services and long-term care. In the 

community of Redvers where I was actually born, we now have 

a new long-term care facility to replace the old one. It’s 

integrated into the acute care facility. Now that acute care 

facility was built in the 1990s with 100 per cent community 

money, but the former minister of Health Judy Junor showed up 

for the ribbon cutting while her and her government did not 

contribute a single red cent to that construction. But yet they 

went around the province and closed 51 hospitals. 

 

This government has not closed a single hospital. Yes, there 

have been hospitals that could no longer provide acute care and 

emergency coverage for a period of time. Redvers was one of 

those. But the local community went to work in conjunction 

with the Ministry of Health and brought in doctors recruited by 

the local community to reopen that acute care facility. And now 

that facility and its doctors are providing community care, not 

only to Redvers and the immediate surrounding area which was 

its normal drawing area, but has also, in discussions with the 

Carnduff health foundation, has opened up clinics and is now 

providing doctor services to the community of Carnduff and 

that surrounding area. Plus they are opening discussions with 

some of the other communities in that area to provide that 

support to them as well. 

 

So it’s a growing health base in the very southeast corner of the 

province, yes. Do we need more doctors? Absolutely. But 

doctors have changed their work habits over the last 20 years. 

Previously Dr. Murphy and Dr. Pesenti in Redvers would work 

24 hours a day, 7 days a week. That’s no longer the case. Now 

doctors, like every other profession, want to have family time. 

They want to have free time. Therefore we need more doctors to 

provide the coverage that we previously had. But the new 

programs that this government has put in place is bringing more 

doctors into the province. I think we have, what, 650 more 

doctors now to provide that kind of service, and those numbers 

are growing, along with new training facilities and new training 

capabilities at the U of S [University of Saskatchewan]. 

 

You know, I listened to the member for Saskatoon Centre and 

his comments today about health care, and it does raise some 

concerns that it was acceptable when he was in government and 

the NDP was in government to close 51 hospitals, to close the 

Plains hospital in Regina, and yet when . . . And those facilities 

were indeed closed. Plywood was placed over the doors and 

two-by-four over the windows, and two-by-fours across the 

doors so they would never, ever be open again. 

 

Yes, we have some facilities that are on bypass. Those facilities 

will open as soon as doctors are available to work in those 

facilities. Just as Redvers was closed for approximately a year 

and is now reopened with three doctors, so will Preeceville. 

 

The member for Saskatoon Riversdale was talking that in 10 

years this government has never taken responsibility for its 

health care decisions. She kept repeating that — 10 years, 10 

years. Then I realized that was typical NDP math. The election 

was in November of 2007 when the government changed. 

Today it’s May of 2016. That’s eight years and six months. I 

recognize that it feels like 10 years to her, but it’s really only 

eight and a half. 

 

[15:45] 

 

The member for Regina Douglas Park commented on a hunter 

and gatherer restaurant. That kind of caught my eye, my ear. I 

went to a place like that in Africa. It was called Carnivore and 

served wild game, African game. So hopefully that’s what 

hunters and gatherers restaurant will be like. 

 

This building is a historic monument. It’s a heritage place for 

the province. The dome renewal has taken place, and I look 

forward to the scaffolding coming off so we can really see the 

brilliance of the new copper on the repaired dome. 

 

You know, it’s up to us as members of the Legislative 

Assembly to maintain and sustain this heritage building. The 

members of the past and the people of the past in this province 

have allowed us to have a say on how this building will be 

maintained and sustained into the future. And it’s incumbent on 

us to accept and take that responsibility to ensure that this 

building will be here in a beautiful condition in 100 years. 

Penny-pinching and failing to carry on the maintenance that 

needs to be done here condemns us to failing in that need. We 

need to continue to repair and maintain and sustain this 

Legislative Building. 

 

You know, as my colleague the Deputy Speaker was saying, 

that there are three branches of government: the legislative 

branch, the executive branch, and the judicial branch. We need 

all three of these branches of government, but they need to 

operate independently of each other.  

 

So even though the Lieutenant Governor in Council, the 

cabinet, usually has a position in this Chamber as MLAs, it is 

the fact that they are MLAs that generally gives them the ability 

to be in cabinet. It is possible to be a cabinet member and not be 

an MLA, but it’s the fact that this Chamber is here, the fact that 

members are elected by popular vote to represent their 



May 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 151 

constituencies is the reason we have a Legislative Building. If it 

wasn’t for this Chamber, if it wasn’t for the legislative branch, 

if it wasn’t for elected members, we could simply have a 

Premier’s mansion where governing would take place from.  

 

It’s the fact that the members who sit in this Chamber and vote 

to determine what the law of Saskatchewan is, is the reason that 

we have a Legislative Building and we have a legislative 

democracy. Each of those branches need to operate 

independently. The legislature does not tell the judiciary what 

to do. The judiciary does not tell the executive what to do. We 

all need to operate separately. 

 

I knew that was going to take some time, so I only have three 

areas of comment from the Speech from the Throne, which is 

why we are here. Keeping promises — $70 million surge for 

highway repair. If you drive across Saskatchewan today and 

compare it to what the situation was like in 2007, there is no 

comparison. It’s umpteen times better than what it was back 

then.  

 

However, there are still a few roads that need some 

consideration. And so I am imploring my colleagues to give 

some consideration to Highway Nos. 318, 361, and 47 . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . I recognize none of them go to 

Weyburn, but Weyburn already has some very, very good 

highways. So there are some areas in my . . . where the oil is 

hauled. 361 and 318 have the main terminal for oil in southeast 

Saskatchewan, all goes there. So if we’re getting resources and 

taxes from that oil, maybe a little bit of it could help out. 

 

On Highway 361, we also have a gas plant east of Alida where 

they haul one to two tanker loads of propane a day down to the 

US [United States] and get paid in US dollars, which are more 

valuable today than an equivalent number of Canadian dollars. 

So again, we need to make sure that this economic activity 

continues. 

 

Also in the Speech from the Throne, under “Keeping our 

economy strong,” is a comment that Crescent Point Energy has 

announced it will spend $800 million of its projected 950 

million capital budget in Saskatchewan in 2016. So the member 

for Weyburn and I share Crescent Point’s activities in our 

constituencies. I think most of it’s in mine; he might disagree 

with that. But Crescent Point has a lot of wells and a lot of 

property to develop yet in that area, and it’s great to see that 

happening. It needs to be encouraged and continue to facilitate. 

 

One of the things that Crescent Point has done, has created an 

oil loading terminal for loading oil onto the trains that come 

from Stoughton up to Regina and then across the continent. 

This has been a great investment for the people involved in that 

area and certainly does a lot to maintain the economy in 

southeast Saskatchewan and all of Saskatchewan. 

 

Finally, standing up for Saskatchewan, I think that’s the role of 

government. And I think that’s the role that the Premier has 

played very well since becoming Premier in 2007. People still 

comment about his role of supporting Saskatchewan on the 

BHP takeover of potash. They still remember that and 

recognize the importance that has to the economy of 

Saskatchewan. But it’s also members’ responsibility to help 

promote and protect Saskatchewan and our economic activities 

as we tour, as we visit other jurisdictions. 

 

I had the privilege to go down to Toronto a few weeks ago and 

meet with the leadership of, I think it was seven US states in the 

Midwest and four provinces. There, the newly elected MLA, 

one of the newly elected MLAs for Alberta, an NDP member, 

was promoting their ideas of climate protection: increasing 

taxation, more restrictions and restraint on their industry. So I 

pointed out to him that there are other ways to accomplish the 

same goals — such as BD3, Boundary dam 3, and carbon 

capture and sequestration — that rather than just simply taxing 

people, we were actually taking carbon out of the atmosphere, 

where it would have been expelled, and injecting it 

underground which is saving hundreds of thousands of tonnes 

of CO2 from going up to the atmosphere. So that was an 

alternative to simply taxing businesses to the extent they could 

no longer produce, they could no longer work, and therefore 

there was less carbon being expelled because the industry was 

shut down. 

 

It was very interesting to note at that conference that the 

American leaders that were there took the NDP member for 

Alberta to task, and it didn’t really matter what their politics in 

the US was. Both the Republicans and the Democrats took that 

member to task for trying to destroy their own industry. 

 

So you know, I think that when you look at some of the ideas 

that come forward such as the Leap Manifesto, which is not that 

a big a leap from the Regina Manifesto, I think it’s our job as 

elected members in government to protect our industry, our 

economy, and the people living here from ideas which would 

destroy this province. 

 

I will be supporting the main motion and not the amendment. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 

 

Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

I’d like to start today by congratulating all of the re-elected 

members on both sides of the floor, as well as first-time 

members. And I want to congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, on 

being elected to your new role and to the very important role 

that it is. And I also want to thank our previous Speaker who 

served us with distinction for his term in the Speaker’s chair. 

 

There are many people to thank, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank 

my constituents, the constituents of Lumsden-Morse and 

formerly Thunder Creek, for entrusting me to represent them 

for a fifth term. It’s an honour and a privilege to represent them 

always, and I will do my level best to do that in a way that will 

justify their continuing support of me, our Premier, and our 

government. 

 

Mr. Speaker, only a sprinkling of the population of this great 

province ever have the opportunity to serve our constituents and 

our province in this beautiful, historical building. There is rarely 

a day that goes by when I don’t take a few seconds to appreciate 

the building, to reflect on the history that has been made here in 

over 100 years, and to consider the responsibilities that I have 

been granted and to be thankful for the opportunities that have 

been granted to me by the good, honest, hard-working people of 

Lumsden-Morse, people that I am proud to serve. 



152 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2016 

There are always so many to thank after an election. My 

constituency assistants, Terry Lynn Carefoot and Bev Leaman; 

my constituency executive, all of them who all worked so hard 

during the election campaign as well as year in and year out 

running the affairs of Lumsden-Morse; numerous volunteers 

from across my huge constituency; and those that donate money 

to the constituency and attend fundraising events to generate 

funds that it takes to run a successful campaign. Are those 

people at my door the morning after the election with requests 

of one sort or of another? Certainly not. They all do it to make 

our democratic process to work and to provide the best 

government possible for our beloved province. 

 

I want to take a short time to brag about my family, Mr. 

Speaker, something that I haven’t done enough in the past. 

First, Mr. Speaker, my wife, Linda. Linda has always supported 

me, whether in my efforts on the school board, RM council, 

farming in Canada and the United States, hockey, stock car 

racing — all the things that I’ve been able to do because of her 

support. And I try to give her opportunities to pursue her 

interests as well, but I could never repay what she has given me. 

 

My two daughters are the oldest of our three children, and 

unfortunately they left the province before 2007 when the 

economy and prospects here were dismal indeed. They were 

bright and ambitious, and I can’t blame them for going 

elsewhere in those dark days here under the cold, hard hand of 

socialism, like most young people of that era did. Now they 

want to come back, but it’s difficult when they have spouses, 

children, and careers in Ontario. Stewart and Jack are Stephanie 

and Gabe’s boys, and Liberty is Alison and Shawn’s daughter. I 

wish they were closer, and I will never forgive the NDP for 

chasing them away. 

 

[16:00] 

 

Our son Lee is a few years younger and we managed to keep 

him here until he could see opportunity for himself after the 

2007 election. Lee is the boss on the farm now. And Lee and his 

lovely wife, Jessica, have a daughter Josie and a brand new son 

named Sam who was just born in the middle of the most recent 

election campaign. 

 

This will be the first speech that I have made in here that my 

dad will not be watching on TV. He passed away February 

22nd, just four days short of 101 years of age. He is missed 

every day. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the industry that I have 

been part of since birth — the agricultural industry. There is 

good news throughout the industry, Mr. Speaker. In 2015 

Saskatchewan producers exported a record $15.3 billion worth 

of agricultural products. That’s the fifth consecutive year of 

record exports. We led the nation again in 2015. Under the NDP 

in their last year of 2007, Saskatchewan was able to export only 

$6.4 billion worth of agricultural products. That’s a 139 per 

cent increase in exports in agricultural products since 2007, Mr. 

Speaker. Canola was the top export commodity in 2015 at 2.6 

billion. And Saskatchewan, for interest’s sake, exports nearly 

25 per cent of Canada’s total agri-food exports of $61.6 billion. 

 

Cattle prices, Mr. Speaker, have softened some but in 2014 

were very strong with $2.7 billion in exports. Highest on record, 

64 per cent above the five-year average. The growth plan goal 

for 2020, for instance, was to produce $2 billion worth of cattle 

by then and we beat that by $700 million, five years early. Crop 

production, the second-largest crop ever last year, in 2015, at 32 

million tonnes. That’s 13 per cent above the 10-year average. 

The growth plan goal of 36.6 million tonnes was actually 

topped in 2013 with a crop of 38.4 million tonnes, Mr. Speaker. 

That’s seven years before the deadline of 2020. Realized net 

farm income in 2014 was $3.1 billion. That’s 53 per cent above 

the five-year average. 

 

Trade agreements, Mr. Speaker. The European economic trade 

agreement and particularly the Trans-Pacific Partnership, Mr. 

Speaker, I want to talk about today a little bit, and specifically 

the Trans-Pacific Partnership, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan is 

Canada’s top agri-food exporting province. In 2014 — here’s 

another statistic, Mr. Speaker — 95 per cent of agricultural 

products from Saskatchewan were exported. Only 5 per cent of 

our agricultural products produced in this province are 

consumed in Canada. In 2014, agricultural exports to TPP 

[Trans-Pacific Partnership] countries were $6.2 billion, 

representing 45 per cent of Saskatchewan agri-food exports. 

 

The Asia-Pacific region is of critical importance to 

Saskatchewan. Japan is among our top five export destinations. 

The region contains about 800 million people who each year 

become more prosperous than the year before. Their standard of 

living is increasing. Their disposable income is increasing. And 

they’re demanding the things that we can produce, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s absolutely critical to the economy of Saskatchewan that we 

become signatories, Canada becomes a signatory to the TPP. 

 

Saskatchewan’s largest value-added gain would come from 

canola with canola oil access to Japan under the TPP. Canadian 

canola growers indicated that the TPP commitment to eliminate 

tariffs on canola over five years would provide $780 million 

annually in additional oil sales. 

 

Beef cattle. If we don’t move toward TPP, Mr. Speaker, our 

ranchers will lose footing in markets like Japan where we 

would be stuck at 38.5 per cent tariff on beef while our 

competitors, principally the US and Australia, would move to a 

tariff of 9 per cent. Pork. The Canadian Pork Council estimates 

that its sector could lose at least $330 million in export sales if 

Canada is not part of the agreement. 

 

Wheat. Saskatchewan will gain from the Canada-specific quota 

for food wheat into Japan starting at 40 000 tonnes and 

increasing to 53 000 tonnes in six years. And barley, our 

producers will gain from the TPP-specific quota for food barley 

into Japan which starts at 25 000 tonnes and grows to 65 000 

within eight years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, if we are not signatories to the TPP, there’s no 

going back to the status quo. We will be virtually frozen out of 

those markets by tariffs. It’s the most important thing. It’s 

probably more important to Saskatchewan than NAFTA [North 

American Free Trade Agreement], and NAFTA’s been a boon 

for trade for this province. 

 

I want to talk about some of the things now that I’ve covered. I 

think our most important pending trade deal, TPP. Some of the 

initiatives of our government in agriculture, Mr. Speaker: 



May 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 153 

International Trade Centre here in Regina, $22 million; 

Livestock and Forage Centre of Excellence near the University 

of Saskatchewan, $10 million; the Food Centre in 

Saskatchewan, $13 million; Western livestock price insurance 

program, a program that started in 2014 that’s been very 

successful and gaining popularity every year; western crop 

insurance coverage of $216 an acre for this crop year, Mr. 

Speaker, and a crop insurance budget of $166 million. That 216 

million, or dollars an acre now is best appreciated when 

compared to the $86 an hour, or dollars an acre, under the last 

year of NDP government in 2007. 

 

Increased crop insurance unseeded acreage benefit options for 

50, 70, 85, and $100 per acre versus a maximum of $50 an acre 

under the NDP government in 2007. Committing to fully fund 

fed-prov programs upfront, which the NDP always refused to 

do. Increased irrigation capacity to help to drought-proof our 

province, programs to increase market access for our products, 

farm and ranch water infrastructure program, compensation for 

livestock killed or injured by predators. The NDP wouldn’t do 

this, Mr. Speaker. 100 per cent wildlife damage compensation, 

and it was 80 per cent under the NDP. Increased agricultural 

research funding by 96.3 per cent over the NDP’s record of 

2007. Beaver control program which was not available under 

the NDP. Our government, Mr. Speaker, brought AgriStability 

administration to Saskatchewan, improving processing 

timelines and turnarounds. The NDP didn’t want to bother. 

 

Increased funding for rat control, $1.4 million. That’s 159 per 

cent increase over what the NDP did in their last year, 2007. 

The largest education tax reduction in Saskatchewan history, 

record revenue sharing with RMs. We’re keeping Saskatchewan 

strong by keeping agriculture strong, Mr. Speaker. 

 

Pierre Cléroux, VP [vice-president] and chief economist for the 

Business Development Bank of Canada, spoke at a conference 

in Saskatoon on May 2nd and he calls Saskatchewan agriculture 

our province’s bright spot. Demand for Saskatchewan products 

is still very strong around the world and that’s the reason the 

prices are up and demand is strong. So this sector is moving up, 

growing, and creating jobs. According to the chief economist, a 

lot of thanks has to go to the provincial government who 

apparently had a great plan throughout the recession. 

Saskatchewan was in a very good financial position to face this 

challenge. The debt ratio was one of the lowest in the country 

so the government had some room to manoeuvre. End of quote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I agree with much of what he said except that the 

credit for our agricultural success goes to our producers and 

agribusinesses. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Leap Manifesto, it reads like this: 

 

Moving to a far more localized and ecologically-based 

agricultural system would reduce reliance on fossil fuels, 

capture carbon in the soil, and absorb sudden shocks in the 

global [food] supply — as well as produce healthier and 

more affordable food for everyone. 

 

We call for an end to all trade deals that interfere with our 

attempts to rebuild local economies, regulate corporations 

and stop damaging extractive projects. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve never read two paragraphs which voice more 

ignorance of a subject than these two in my whole life. They 

couldn’t have gotten it more wrong. This is absolutely the 

opposite of the truth, Mr. Speaker, and I’m going to go on and 

give you some facts to support that. But the NDP support the 

Leap Manifesto. They do. The member from Nutana’s the Ag 

critic, and she supports it. I have the greatest personal respect 

for her but it’s a disgrace that the Ag critic in this province 

supports the Leap Manifesto, a socialist document that would 

kill agriculture as we know it in Western Canada. It wouldn’t 

harm it; it would absolutely wipe it out, not to mention, not to 

mention resource extraction. 

 

They’re laughing over there, Mr. Speaker. They think it’s 

funny. They think it’s funny that they’re openly against our 

major industries in this province and the industries that employ 

most of the people in this province. I think they missed the 

point of the last election, Mr. Speaker, but they’ll get the smiles 

wiped off their faces in four more years. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when it comes to climate change, Saskatchewan 

farmers and ranchers have been leaders for decades in adapting 

practices which reduce greenhouse gases and increase carbon 

sequestration. In 2013, Saskatchewan soil sequestered 10.9 

million tonnes of carbon. This can be attributed mainly to the 

adoption of zero-till. 

 

Thirty years ago, Saskatchewan was a net emitter of carbon and 

released 700 000 tonnes of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere, 

and now it sequesters 10.9 million tonnes. Outside the Prairies, 

agricultural soils are emitters of carbon still. Without 

Saskatchewan and the good practices of our farmers, Canadian 

soils would release approximately 3.5 million tonnes of carbon 

into the atmosphere still. 

 

Farmers have virtually eliminated the practice of 

summerfallow. Thanks to improvements in feed efficiencies 

and gains in productivity, greenhouse gas emissions from beef 

cattle have declined significantly over the past 30 years. From 

’81 to 2011, greenhouse gases from beef cattle declined by 14 

per cent for methane, 15 per cent for nitrous oxide, and 12 per 

cent for carbon dioxide, due mainly to better knowledge of 

nutrition and the use of growth hormones. 

 

The addition of pulses to crop rotations has had a significant 

impact on the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. Research 

shows that growing one pulse crop in a four-year rotation can 

reduce greenhouse emissions from the cropping system by 13 to 

25 per cent, and many farms grow one pulse crop in three. 

 

In 2011, the use of biotechnology reduced CO2 emissions 

enough that it was like taking 10.2 million cars off the road for 

a year. Agriculture is a leader and plays a valuable role in 

caring for our environment and producing cheap, healthy food 

for Canada and tens of millions of people around the world. 

 

The Leap Manifesto is wrong-headed because widespread 

starvation, increase emissions, and abandon the practices that 

are restoring our environment. 

 

[16:15] 

 

Let’s talk about the NDP record in agriculture. They closed 31 



154 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2016 

agricultural offices, Mr. Speaker, cut extension services, 

eliminated the GRIP [gross revenue insurance program] 

program after farmers had signed the contracts — tore them up. 

Increased crop insurance premiums without increasing 

coverage, refused to address education property tax, cut spot 

loss hail coverage twice, ignored agriculture disasters; lost 

taxpayers’ money in private investments — SPUDCO 

[Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company], 

Navigata, and the beat goes on. Closed 52 rural hospitals, 

closed rural schools, 176 I think. Am I right? Ignored rural 

roads and highways. Off-loaded costs to RMs and farm 

families. 

 

Same old NDP, stuck in the past. No plan for growth, no desire 

for growth, no understanding of growth. Didn’t believe growth 

was possible. Didn’t want growth. Here’s their idea of how to 

run an economy, Mr. Speaker. In agriculture alone, they had a 

little thing called the Agri-Food Equity Fund which carried on 

from ’94 to 2002 under some illustrious NDP leaders and 

members opposite. They invested over $31 million in private 

agri-businesses, Mr. Speaker. To date, they’ve lost 24 million of 

that. 

 

They made 25 investments: Thomson Meats, $8.1 million 

invested and 7.9 million written off; Dura-Fibre, 7.13 million 

invested, 7.1 written off; Schneider’s Popcorn Parties — 

anybody ever hear of that? — 350,000 invested, 316,000 

written off; World Wide Pork, 4.3 million invested, 1.5 million 

written off; Canada Livestock Services, 750,000 invested, 

750,000 written off; Northern Lights Gourmet Mushrooms, 

$250,000 invested, 240,000 written off; Notukeu Processing, 

$700,000 invested, seven hundred . . . That’s not even half the 

list, Mr. Speaker, but I’m running out of time. I’d love to finish 

it, but . . .  

 

And they, you know, didn’t restrict their foolishness to 

agriculture, thank goodness: 15 million lost, Channel Lake; 2 

million lost in Guyana which was a South American power 

company — that was a wise investment . . . [inaudible 

interjection] . . . yes. 16 million lost in NST Chicago, a US 

Midwest fibre optics company, another brilliant investment; 

$9.4 million lost in Persona Inc., a Newfoundland cable 

company. Mr. Speaker, the beat goes on: 24.7 million lost in 

Retx.com, an Atlanta-based dot-com company; 6.7 million lost 

in tappedinto.com, a Nashville-based dot-com company; 3 

million lost in clickabid, a failed internet auction business; 5.6 

million lost in Soft Tracks Enterprises Ltd., a wireless 

electronic payment company; 90.8 million lost in Navigata 

Communications, a BC telecom; 10 million lost in Craig 

Wireless, Manitoba internet company. Seventeen point . . . Oh, 

I’m depressed, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to have to stop this for 

my own mental health. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve made my point. I think, and the voters 

in the most recent election, they agreed with me and my other 

colleagues that have spoken in this debate. And, Mr. Speaker, 

accordingly I will be supporting the Speech from the Throne 

and not the amendment. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 

Northcote. 

 

Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 

participate in this Throne Speech debate. May I begin by 

congratulating you on your election as Speaker of the 

Assembly. I have confidence that you will lead the House with 

discipline and respect and look forward to working with you. 

 

May I also congratulate all members on their re-election and 

election to this House. I’m sure that we all realize the 

importance of the task ahead, and we will work to serve the 

people of Saskatchewan to the best of our abilities. I am proud 

to stand with my fellow caucus members. We come from all 

areas of the province, have diverse backgrounds, and are the 

first ever caucus with gender parity. 

 

Before I begin my remarks on the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, 

I want to thank the constituents of Prince Albert Northcote for 

the faith that they have placed in me to be their representative in 

this legislature. I will approach my duties with as much 

principle and honour as possible, and I promise that any 

decisions that I make will have their best interests in mind. 

 

I also, Mr. Speaker, want to thank the workers who helped me 

get elected in this Legislative Assembly. They worked 

especially hard on phones, computers, baking, knocking on 

doors, and putting up signs. Whatever there was to be done, no 

matter how big or small, my very dedicated team found a way 

to get it done. Without their support and countless hours of 

volunteer work, I would not be here representing Northcote. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to thank my constituency assistant, 

Rose. Rose is well respected by members of this Legislative 

Assembly and, most importantly, the people of Prince Albert 

Northcote. Rose has many years of experience serving 

constituents in Northcote, and through the years I have heard 

stories from the constituents about how Rose has helped them 

in the past. Rose always has a welcoming smile, compassionate 

heart, and works hard to come up with solutions for 

constituents’ issues. Her passion is to help people, and it’s 

evident in her work ethic. I am thankful that Rose has decided 

to return to work as the Northcote constituency assistant, and 

I’m excited to work with her. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would also like to thank my family for their 

never-ending support for me to pursue my dreams of serving 

the people in this beautiful province. I think many members 

here can relate to having spent many days and evenings away 

from home and, despite the demanding schedule, my wonderful 

family does not complain. They were also dedicated workers in 

my campaign and would offer many words of encouragement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are two particular family members that I feel 

the need to be recognized for their hard work during my 

campaign. First is my daughter Melissa. My daughter is a 

young single mother that was working two jobs and finishing 

her first year of university when the election was called. But 

that did not stop her from coming into the campaign office as 

often as she could to help canvass or bringing baking for the 

election workers. Melissa was an excellent canvasser and was 

knowledgeable on the issues related to constituents, and she 

especially enjoyed visiting with the more senior constituents. 

 

Also, Mr. Speaker, my partner, Darren, was extremely busy 

with the election campaign. Darren would spend hours putting 

up, fixing, and replacing signs. He handled most of the 



May 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 155 

household chores and watched our grandson so Melissa could 

help out and provided an abundance of encouragement. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I have lived in Prince Albert the majority of my 

life, and prior to moving to Prince Albert I grew up in St. Louis, 

a village 20 minutes south of Prince Albert. I am the youngest 

of eight children and have learned a lot about teamwork and 

compromise with such a large family. My parents raised their 

children to be respectful to all people, work hard, and have 

social democratic values. My parents instilled in us the belief 

that all people in our society deserved to live with dignity and 

respect, and I believe it’s important to continue to share that 

belief system with my children. 

 

My parents also believed that you should be a member of the 

local credit union, shop at the local co-op, and support small 

local businesses. The importance of serving your community 

was also important in our family, Mr. Speaker, which included 

volunteering for many organizations in the community. It also 

resulted in my mother becoming a school board member, my 

father becoming an alderman for the village of St. Louis, and 

my brother serving as the mayor of St. Louis, and now myself 

serving as the member of the legislature. 

 

Politics was always discussed in our home, and as children, we 

were encouraged to know about local issues and how our 

government was managing them. Election time was an exciting 

time since both my parents usually spent a lot of time 

volunteering. And on election night, the regular bedtime routine 

was disrupted so that I could watch the results. My father would 

especially get excited when he would see women candidates 

running for office and would often tell me that he believed more 

women needed to be involved in politics. My father passed 

away seven years ago so was unable to help with my campaign, 

but I know he would have been extremely proud of my 

accomplishments. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I was very happy to have my 81-year-old mother 

attend my swearing-in ceremony. This was her first time at the 

legislature and she was impressed with the history, decor, and 

the fact that her youngest daughter can now call this her 

workplace. Much of my success is the result of my mother’s 

upbringing and role modelling. My mother is very independent, 

determined, dedicated, loyal, and hard-working. And I work 

hard to exhibit those traits as well. 

 

Life hasn’t always been easy, Mr. Speaker. I was a young lady 

when I discovered that I was pregnant with my first-born. I was 

scared when I thought about providing for a young child but 

lucky for me, this all happened when we had an NDP 

government in power, an NDP government that believed in 

investing in families. 

 

At this time in my life, the NDP invested in a program designed 

for disadvantaged people that provided them an opportunity to 

receive a post-secondary education. I jumped at this opportunity 

to receive a hands up and went to further my education by 

receiving my business administration certificate at SIAST 

[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology]. 

Furthering my education was a challenge with a young child but 

it was the best thing I could do to become independent and 

show my children that hard work will pay off. 

 

After I completed the certificate, I was fortunate enough to get 

employment with Crown corporations, SaskTel and SaskPower. 

Being employed with these Crown corporations showed me 

how important Crown corporations are for our province. It 

showed me how important it is for the province to invest in 

good-paying jobs for Saskatchewan people and how 

province-owned businesses invest back into communities. 

 

When I was employed at SaskPower, I was involved with the 

union and occupational health and safety committee. I learned 

how important this was to ensuring that standards in the 

workplace were fair, equitable, and safe. I have since always 

been employed in unionized jobs and see how unions set 

standards not only in the workplaces they represent, but because 

of the standards set, other workplaces benefit as well. 

 

Having a career where I can be a voice to people that are 

disadvantaged has always been a goal of mine, Mr. Speaker. 

This is what led me to pursue my education in social work. And 

previous to this election, I was employed with the Prince Albert 

Parkland Health Region and worked as a social worker at the 

mental health and addictions outpatient centre. Using the skills I 

learned from being a social worker will help me with 

advocating for Prince Albert as I feel strongly that Prince Albert 

needs more from this government and deserves more. I also 

believe that my experience as a social worker in the community 

has provided me insight to some issues that the constituents 

regularly deal with. 

 

My partner, Darren, and I have a busy, blended family with two 

sons, two daughters, and two grandsons. Darren has been an 

educator for over 20 years and works for Prince Albert Grand 

Council. Darren and I have discussed issues in education and in 

particular First Nations education. Darren is passionate about 

providing quality education to First Nations children, and I 

admire the hard work and dedication he demonstrates. Darren 

and I support as many local events as we can. And, Mr. 

Speaker, I admire Darren’s dedication for Prince Albert with his 

involvement with the local Kinsmen Club and their hard work 

with fundraising and investment in many important projects for 

Prince Albert. Darren and I are also very sports minded and 

enjoy playing sports ourselves as well as watching our children 

participate in sports. 

 

It is an honour to stand here today to represent Prince Albert 

Northcote. And now if you don’t mind, Mr. Speaker, I would 

like to tell you a little bit about what makes Northcote so 

special. Prince Albert Northcote is entirely within the city limits 

of Prince Albert and is on either side of the North Saskatchewan 

River. North of the river, it goes as far east to the 

previously-functioning pulp mill, which has many acreages that 

enjoy the country lifestyle just minutes outside of the city. 

 

[16:30] 

 

Northcote includes the city airport, many parks, the downtown 

core, post-secondary education, the hospital, First Nations 

reserve land, and much more. Prince Albert Northcote is home 

to people from a wide variety of socio-economic backgrounds, 

race, religion, and culture. 

 

According to historians, Prince Albert Northcote is referred to 

as Old Prince Albert because it was the starting of the 



156 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2016 

settlement of Prince Albert, and many Victorian-style homes 

are still used including my house that was built in 1909. First 

Nations and Métis people used to meet on the North 

Saskatchewan River bank which was called kistapinānihk, the 

gathering place. It is still a gathering place for residents in the 

community. 

 

This year is a special year in Prince Albert as we are celebrating 

150 years as a settlement. Prince Albert developed from a 

missionary settlement, then into a lumber town, and now it is 

more known as a jail city since it is home to a federal 

penitentiary, a women’s, men, and youth correctional centres. 

 

Now, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the residents of Prince Albert 

Northcote, I want to discuss some of the issues that the 

constituents are concerned about. While canvassing for the 

election, I had the chance to talk to residents about issues they 

are facing due to poor decisions this government has made. 

When I asked people if they feel that they are in a better 

position now than they were in 2007, I get an overwhelming 

response of no. 

 

The cost of living continues to increase and people are left with 

less and less every month. This concerns me, and this concerns 

me more knowing that the province was booming and had 

record revenues for multiple years. But why are our food banks 

being used more and more? And why do we think it’s okay that 

almost half of the people using the food bank in Prince Albert 

are children? This is wrong. 

 

This government has alienated the most vulnerable and 

disadvantaged people in this province. Prince Albert has one of 

the highest unemployment rates in the province but yet more 

and more jobs are being eliminated. Many people were left 

unemployed when laundry services and food services were 

privatized, which had a major impact for Prince Albert and area 

residents. 

 

This government has simply ignored or forgotten about Prince 

Albert. What have they been doing to support us? Residents are 

concerned that since this government has mismanaged their 

money that there will be more jobs lost. This government can’t 

solve their financial mismanagement by selling off good 

mortgage-paying government jobs. These decisions have a 

major impact on the economy in Prince Albert and impact 

Prince Albert families. 

 

The other issue, which isn’t a new issue, is the fact that Prince 

Albert needs a second bridge. This is not only a city of Prince 

Albert issue, but a provincial issue that needs to be addressed. 

Prince Albert is a primary access point for individuals travelling 

to northern communities or resort areas. The northern part of 

this province is rich in tourism, mining, forestry, agriculture, 

and many other industries. Every spring and summer there are 

issues with regards to wait times for crossing the bridge because 

much needed repairs are being completed. If this government is 

serious about wanting to invest in business, they will assure that 

businesses north of Prince Albert were accessible. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to be one of the loyal, hard-working 

opposition members in the current legislature, and was 

honoured when our leader appointed me to be the critic of 

Social Services, community-based organizations, municipal 

relations, provincial disaster assistance program, and forestry. 

All of these areas are so important. And this will be a big task, 

but I will work hard to provide proper representation and, when 

needed, provide constructive criticism. 

 

Social services, Mr. Speaker, is a service that is often provided 

to the most vulnerable in our community. And I believe that 

people accessing services from Social Services deserve to be 

treated with respect. This includes the many youth that are in 

care and foster parents that work so hard to provide a 

structured, healthy lifestyle for youth in their care. I think that 

the Children’s Advocate, Mr. Bob Pringle, was accurate with 

many of the suggestions he listed in his report, and I plan to 

hold this government accountable to implementing his 

suggestions. 

 

I have had the opportunity to meet with many community-based 

organizations in Prince Albert and look forward to meeting with 

organizations in other regions of the province. One issue that 

seems to be familiar to most of the organizations is the lack of 

funding that this province provides so that these organizations 

can provide the services that the community needs. 

 

Prince Albert Mobile Crisis has been one of those agencies that 

has suffered due to a lack of funding from this province, which 

is resulting in them needing to eliminate their daytime crisis 

services. This is going to have a negative impact on many other 

agencies in the community, including but not limited to Social 

Services, Prince Albert Parkland Health Region, and the police 

services. Having to reduce crisis services available in a 

community that is well known for many social issues — 

including drug and alcohol use, high rates of domestic violence, 

and high rates of suicide — just doesn’t make sense, Mr. 

Speaker. Crisis does not have a time frame and can happen in 

the evening and daytime. And when issues arise, the people of 

Prince Albert deserve to have trained crisis workers attending to 

help reduce the level trauma to the victim and anyone else 

involved. 

 

This government needs to look at the long-term effects of their 

decisions. I’ve already started discussions with municipal 

leaders and look forward to developing relationships with 

leaders in this province. Issues in small and large communities 

seem to be abundant and have been ignored by this government 

for far too long. 

 

Also being the critic for the provincial disaster assistance 

program will be a great complement since many of these 

communities worry about having to use the provincial disaster 

assistance program because the government fails to address 

issues before they become an emergency. The residents of 

Prince Albert and the northern communities experienced this 

last summer with the devastating forest fires that displaced 

thousands of children and families and put communities in 

harm’s way. Some wonder if the cuts to fire management had 

an impact to the extent of the devastation, and if there was more 

invested in prevention and early detection, would we have had 

the devastation that occurred? 

 

Prince Albert has a history of being a lumber town, but our 

forestry sector has been mismanaged and abandoned by this 

Sask Party government. Much more needs to be done to invest 

in the abundant forestry sector and the workers affected by the 



May 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 157 

decline. Even though this government has been provided many 

different options for utilizing this sector, nothing is getting 

done. Mr. Speaker, I look forward to being a strong voice for 

the forestry industry. 

 

Mr. Speaker, due to all the issues that have not been addressed, 

I will not be supporting this empty Throne Speech, and I 

support the amendment. I look forward to the challenge of the 

next four years. Thank you. 

 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Rosthern-Shellbrook. 

 

Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 

thank you to the members in the Assembly here today who are 

sure going to be in for a thrilling speech here for the next 23 

minutes or so. But, Mr. Speaker, as is customary in a reply to 

the Speech from the Throne, I do want to extend some thank 

yous and some congratulations. First of all, I think 

congratulations to each and every member that was elected to 

represent the people from their respective constituencies across 

the province wherever that may be. I do want to congratulate, 

on both sides of the House, all of those that ran their campaigns 

and were successful and are now down in our provincial capital 

for the next number of years to represent their constituency and 

their people with the issues that are important to them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to take a minute and congratulate you 

on your successful election to Speaker, Mr. Speaker. It was a 

first order of business as we come to this Assembly for the next 

four years, and I want to take a minute and congratulate you and 

look forward to serving with you in your capacity as Speaker 

over the next number of years. 

 

As many others have done, they’ve extended thank yous to 

those that have helped them get there, get to this seat to 

represent the constituents in their constituency, Mr. Speaker. 

And in Rosthern-Shellbrook, it’s no exception, Mr. Speaker. 

There’s many, many individuals that helped on our 

Saskatchewan Party campaign in that constituency in the 

months leading up to the election, and in particular during the 

writ in the last month, Mr. Speaker. 

 

You know, I think of names like Bevra Fee, my campaign 

manager, Mr. Speaker, and the effort that she made. And many 

of these people as well are in their jobs, their careers during the 

day and helping on weekends and evenings and taking days off 

when they can: Mr. Speaker, Grant Hladun, Lyle Banda. Mr. 

Speaker, we have Brent Miller. We have Lyle and Rose Fox, 

Mr. Speaker, Jason Ranger. We have a number of youth that 

came out, Mr. Speaker, as well, and I just cannot thank them 

enough on behalf on myself. And I think all of the constituents 

in Rosthern-Shellbrook for the effort that they made, Mr. 

Speaker, in running a successful campaign and a successful 

election in our constituency. 

 

I do also want to take a moment, as many in this House do, to 

thank our families, Mr. Speaker. As we all know, serving in this 

Assembly is not an individual effort. It’s an effort of people that 

help you during your election and help you with input and 

guidance during the time that you’re here. 

 

But it’s also, Mr. Speaker, indicative of the effort that our 

families make as many of us serve away from home days at a 

time and weeks on end from time to time. And I want to thank 

my family, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank my wife, Krista. I want 

to thank my two kids, Carter and Taryn for the effort, for 

allowing me to serve in this constituency on behalf of the 

people in Rosthern-Shellbrook.  

 

And, Mr. Speaker., I’d also like to thank my father-in-law, 

Garry Thiel, as well as my parents, Don and June Moe, Mr. 

Speaker. They have given us a great grounding in our family 

and allowed us some good guidance in becoming the family 

that we are. And they have given, along with my late 

mother-in-law, Karen Thiel, Mr. Speaker, they have given us 

great role models to model ourselves after in raising our 

children in the community of Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with respect to the Throne Speech that was 

presented to this Assembly and to the people of the province 

here just a short while ago, Mr. Speaker, I would like to enter a 

few comments. And there has been some comments about the 

vision of that Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, and I think the 

vision represents very much where we are as a province at this 

point in time. But, Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech, if you will, 

is setting out the direction of the government over the next 

number of weeks, days, and months, Mr. Speaker, and is really 

a rung in the ladder, if you will, in The Saskatchewan Plan for 

Growth that we have released as a government a number of 

years ago, Mr. Speaker. And this Throne Speech again is one 

more rung in that ladder to achieving those goals in The 

Saskatchewan Plan for Growth that we released on behalf of 

the Saskatchewan people. 

 

And I think it’s important to remember that document, Mr. 

Speaker, that came about. It wasn’t plucked off a shelf or out of 

a number of people sitting in a room, but it came about through 

an extensive consultation process with Saskatchewan people 

across the province. And I was part of that consultation process, 

Mr. Speaker, as the member in Rosthern-Shellbrook at that 

time. And I met with a number of people, and I think we even 

sent out questionnaires across the constituency to the number of 

communities, the 11 villages, the five towns, the 15 RMs, Mr. 

Speaker. And we had some reasonable input that came back to 

us on how the people of Saskatchewan would like to see their 

province and their communities in the year 2020 and beyond. 

And, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to remember that this Throne 

Speech was just part of that plan for growth. 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we had, you know, a number of visitors to 

their legislature, Mr. Speaker, voicing their concern with 

respect to a challenge in their community of health care. And, 

Mr. Speaker, this is not the first time or the first community in 

rural Saskatchewan that has had challenges in relation to access 

to medical professionals and relation to access to the medical 

needs that they may have in their community, Mr. Speaker. I 

can think of a number of communities in my constituency that 

have had those same challenges over the last decade or a little 

bit longer even. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have three communities that offer health 

services to a degree in the constituency of Rosthern-Shellbrook, 

the first being Rosthern, Mr. Speaker, where we’ve fluctuated 

between eight and ten physicians in that community. They have 

a fully functional hospital in that community and they continue 



158 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2016 

to function quite well. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have the community where I live in Shellbrook 

where we do have a new facility, Mr. Speaker, one of the 13 

new facilities that was announced by this government and 

delivered on by this government. And it’s paid for, Mr. 

Speaker, and it’s functioning quite well, Mr. Speaker, with a 

number of medical professionals that are available, and not 

without its challenges over the last number of years with some 

of the framework that we were required to work with over the 

last number of decades. 

 

[16:45] 

 

And we have Spiritwood, Mr. Speaker, that lost their services in 

2006 in the community of Spiritwood and are just now able to 

regain some of those services, Mr. Speaker, with an up and 

running daytime model, a collaborative emergency centre, Mr. 

Speaker, which was new and introduced by this government. I 

think a lot of the work was done by the member from 

Biggar-Sask Valley, Mr. Speaker, and continued by the current 

Rural and Remote Health minister. And the community there 

now is up and running with six medical professionals operating 

in that community, Mr. Speaker, from a low of zero just a few 

short years ago. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this is indicative of many communities across the 

province where there has been challenges, Mr. Speaker. I think 

back to the days of trying to recruit physicians and other 

medical professionals into our community, the days when we 

had the CAPE [clinicians’ assessment and professional 

enhancement] exam, for example, Mr. Speaker, and we were 

trying to recruit physicians from basically the seven 

Commonwealth nations around the world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it was this government that consulted with 

communities across the province and made some significant 

changes, significant changes to our international medical 

graduates and how we can bring them into the province of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And it came through consultation 

with the Saskatchewan Medical Association and others in the 

sector, Mr. Speaker. And we were finally able to bring in the 

SIPPA program where now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve run enough 

international medical graduates through that program where we 

are actually now able to recruit physicians from not just the 

seven Commonwealth nations around the world, but we can 

now bring them in from a number of different nations all over 

the world, Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I can think of people from Niger and other areas of Africa, 

as well as the UK [United Kingdom], that are working now in 

the community where I live, Mr. Speaker. And much of that is 

due to the change in the way that we’re able to certify our 

medical professionals in the province of Saskatchewan and in 

our communities. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, that 

program is very much a part of why we have now 650 more 

physicians working in Saskatchewan, working in communities 

across the province of Saskatchewan, including communities 

like Rosthern, Spiritwood, and Shellbrook. 

 

Mr. Speaker, another change that has been made with respect to 

recruiting physicians into our rural communities, Mr. Speaker, 

has been a number of incentives that have been paid to 

physicians, Mr. Speaker, as a return for service, for them to 

practise in our rural communities, Mr. Speaker. And I know a 

number of physicians personally that have made use of the cash 

incentive that is available for a five-year return for service in 

rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, returning their services to not 

only the primary health care model but also to the emergency 

services that we all want to offer in many of our communities. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in addition to the changes that were made to the 

old CAPE examination, to now the SIPPA process, there’s been 

some changes made, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the number of 

physicians that we’re training within our own institutions here 

in the province of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, at the College of 

Medicine at the University of Saskatchewan, we were at a point 

where we were training 60 undergrad medical students, Mr. 

Speaker. We’ve now increased that to 100, Mr. Speaker. And 

on the residency positions we were training, we had 60 

positions open, Mr. Speaker, for residency positions. We’ve 

now doubled that to 120, Mr. Speaker. This is the long-term 

sustainability that we need in our communities, large and small, 

across the province, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to medical 

professionals being available to the people of Saskatchewan, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

And I couldn’t help but think of that today as we had a 

community in here concerned with the medical access that they 

have in their community, Mr. Speaker. And I can only say this: 

there’s been other communities that have been challenged with 

this, and they’ve worked together with the regional health 

authority, Mr. Speaker. They’ve worked together with their 

MLA. And I know they have an MLA here today, Mr. Speaker, 

that is representing their views and their wants and their needs, 

Mr. Speaker, in their community. And I know that we’ll be able 

to find . . . that we will be able to be successful in that 

community in sustaining our services like we have in many 

other communities across the province of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, maybe a couple of comments with respect to the 

file that I work in, Mr. Speaker, the Advanced Education file 

here in the province of Saskatchewan. Maybe before I start that, 

Mr. Speaker, I’d just address a couple of comments that came 

up earlier with respect to investment in the area that I service 

and maybe some of the neighbouring areas, some of the 

neighbouring areas, Mr. Speaker. 

 

We’ve had a substantial investment in the constituency that I 

serve, Mr. Speaker. I mentioned the new Parkland integrated 

health facility that was built there, Mr. Speaker — $21.4 million 

of provincial money went into that facility, another 5 or $6 

million from the local community, Mr. Speaker. As I 

mentioned, that’s bought and paid for. They continue to 

fundraise for needs that they’ll have going down the road. I 

know they bought an ultrasound machine here not too long ago, 

Mr. Speaker. 

 

I think of the No. 11 Highway, the twinning the No. 11 

Highway between Prince Albert and Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, 

opening that community up to the South and to the markets that 

I know the agricultural producers need to the South, Mr. 

Speaker. Other industries, such as uranium industry, Mr. 

Speaker, the forestry industry, all utilizing that road as a 

gateway to the South out of Prince Albert. We often think of 

Prince Albert as a gateway to the North, but very much, Mr. 



May 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 159 

Speaker, they need access to the southern markets as well to 

export our resources out of our northern communities. 

 

I think of the long-term care centre in Prince Albert. I was at the 

grand opening a couple years ago at Pineview Terrace, Mr. 

Speaker. I think of the planning dollars for the Victoria Hospital 

that were supplied, Mr. Speaker, as that is my hospital, living 

about 25 miles from the community of Prince Albert. And when 

my . . . I think I mentioned this a number of different speeches, 

but when my son breaks his ankle, that’s the hospital that we go 

to to put a cast on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, there was additions to the correctional centre in 

Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker. And all of the communities . . . As I 

mentioned, I represent about 15 RMs across the province. I 

represent 11 villages now, Mr. Speaker, as well as five towns. 

And all of those municipal governments, Mr. Speaker, are 

thankful for the increases in municipal revenue sharing that 

have occurred. It was long asked for. It was even promised from 

time to time. But, Mr. Speaker, it was this government that took 

action and provided that for our municipal governments across 

the province, whether they be a city, a village, a town, Mr. 

Speaker, or a rural municipality. And we are thanked for that 

each and every time I sit down with those individuals. 

 

Mr. Speaker, with respect as I said to the file that I serve on 

with the Advanced Education, I have the distinct honour to 

serve and to work with some of our best and brightest across the 

province, Mr. Speaker, whether that be boards or deans or other 

individuals at our universities, at our Saskatchewan 

Polytechnic, at our regional colleges, some other institutions 

such as the Gabriel Dumont Institute, Mr. Speaker, the SIIT 

[Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies], and a number 

of others, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a true honour to work with 

those individuals in a productive manner to ensure that we are 

able to train our best and brightest in our communities’ future, 

our province’s future so that we can ensure that we will have a 

strong economy and strong communities in a strong province 

well into the future. 

 

Mr. Speaker, and I’m proud to say that since the Saskatchewan 

Party has been in charge of the people of Saskatchewan’s 

investment, that we have supplied a full six and a half billion 

dollars of investment to our post-secondary education sector. 

Mr. Speaker, as I said yesterday, I had an opportunity . . . This 

represents a 61 per cent increase in funding to our 

post-secondary education sector. 

 

It includes almost a half a billion dollars in infrastructure 

funding, Mr. Speaker. It includes things, investment in the 

Academic Health Sciences Building at the College of Medicine 

at the University of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, a very 

important part in ensuring that that college is successful into the 

future, that it’s able to expand from 60 to 100, Mr. Speaker, in 

undergrad seats, as I said, or 60 to 120 in the residency seats, 

but also able to expand other colleges there, Mr. Speaker, as 

we’ve expanded our nursing training seats in the province of 

Saskatchewan by some 300. Mr. Speaker, it’s all necessary to 

have the infrastructure to house those types of expansions. 

 

As I said yesterday as well, this includes about a 350 per cent 

increase in student supports and includes the Saskatchewan 

Advantage Scholarship, Mr. Speaker, $500, a $500 scholarship 

to each and every person for four years that’s attending a 

post-secondary institute. Mr. Speaker, it includes the 

introduction, a promise made, I might add, and a promise kept 

by this government, of the Saskatchewan grant for education 

savings. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it also incudes $1 billion, over $1 billion now 

invested in the graduate retention program. This, Mr. Speaker, 

is almost 115,000 people in the province of Saskatchewan are 

partaking in that graduate retention program. Mr. Speaker, 

almost 10 per cent, almost 10 per cent of our population in this 

province is now enrolled in that program, Mr. Speaker. That 

means that a number of people in this room right here, Mr. 

Speaker — we have about 60 people; there’s quite likely six of 

us that are enrolled in that program. I’m not one of them; 

hopeful my son will be. 

 

Mr. Speaker, again, as I said, this has been a true and distinct 

honour to work with these institutions across the province of 

Saskatchewan in furthering our efforts and working to ensure 

that our children and our students, as they attend our 

post-secondary institutions, are not only having access to that 

quality education that we all want but they’re also, Mr. Speaker, 

receiving a quality education across the province. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I think back. I have the opportunity . . . And we’re 

getting close here again to graduation and convocations season, 

if you will, in the province of Saskatchewan. And we have the 

opportunity to see some of the convocations at our institutions 

such as the University of Regina, the University of 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, Sask Poly. 

 

But I would say this, Mr. Speaker. Some of the most moving 

graduations that I get to attend, and I know a number of other 

individuals will attend them as well, are some of our regional 

college graduations, Mr. Speaker. And you see somebody my 

age or sometimes older, with two or three children . . . 

[inaudible interjection] . . . Maybe they’re grandchildren. But 

with two or three children that come off the stage — on a 

serious note, Mr. Speaker — and they’re getting their grade 12 

diploma. 

 

And you have a chat with them and you ask, why are you 

getting your diploma now as opposed to earlier? And there’s 

stories there, Mr. Speaker. And the fact of the matter is, is the 

determination that you see in those individuals’ eyes, Mr. 

Speaker, when they receive that diploma. And you ask them 

where they’re going, and they’re going on to some further 

education or they have a job or a career lined up in the 

workforce, Mr. Speaker. It’s truly rewarding, and I think it’s 

very indicative and reminding, reminds me why we’re doing 

this, Mr. Speaker, is to improve people’s lives, to improve their 

outcomes, and to improve family lives. And that’s how we 

break this cycle, Mr. Speaker. It’s through education and it’s 

through encouraging individuals to improve their career 

choices, their family opportunities, and their life in general. 

And it’s something I look forward to in the next number of 

days. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, I maybe would just chat a little bit about, 

with respect to the Speech from the Throne, on where we’re 

going with the file that I have the honour to serve in, and that is 

the Advanced Education file. And it has to do with the graduate 



160 Saskatchewan Hansard May 25, 2016 

retention program, Mr. Speaker, and the expansion of that, the 

expansion of that graduate retention program and allowing 

those individuals to use $10,000 of their graduate retention 

benefits to be able to purchase their first home. Mr. Speaker, 

when you think of individuals coming out of whatever the 

program may be, one of our polytechnic programs, our regional 

colleges, our universities, Mr. Speaker, it is a real opportunity 

for them to have access to that kind of capital to put towards the 

purchase of their first home. And, Mr. Speaker, I think this truly 

completes some of the circle, if you will. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we have individuals coming out of our education 

systems, our best and brightest, our children quite often, our 

friends that are coming out with the determination that I spoke 

of earlier and giving them the opportunities to set up shop in 

one of our great Saskatchewan communities, Mr. Speaker. Set 

up shop just not for the short term, but to find a career in that 

community, to own a home in that community for their family, 

Mr. Speaker, and to ensure that they’re able to become part of 

that community and ensure the success of that community, 

whether it be Shellbrook, whether it be Strasbourg, whether it 

be Alida, or whether it be Weyburn for instance, Mr. Speaker. 

 

This is just another rung in the ladder, if you will, if I could 

relate back to our Saskatchewan plan for growth, to ensure that 

our communities are the strongest and filled with the best and 

brightest that we can possibly have here in the province of 

Saskatchewan. And I think in doing that, Mr. Speaker, that 

ensures that if our communities are strong in this province, that 

in turn the province of Saskatchewan will remain strong. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, that is the goal of the Saskatchewan plan for 

growth. That’s the goal of the members on this side of the 

House, and in fairness I think it’s the goal of the majority of the 

people of the province of Saskatchewan, is to ensure that our 

communities are filled with our best and brightest, ensure that 

they’re strong into the future so that we can ensure that our 

province will be strong and vibrant, a strong economy, strong 

communities so that we’re able to partner with our government, 

whether it be on a integrated health centre, Mr. Speaker, like we 

did 13 of them not long ago, whether it be able to partner in a 

Moose Jaw Hospital, Mr. Speaker, whether it be able to partner 

with foundations to furnish facilities like the Saskatchewan 

Hospital, Mr. Speaker, the children’s hospital. These are all 

important facilities, not just to the communities that they’re in 

but to the province as a whole. So, Mr. Speaker, it’s a true 

honour for me on behalf of the people of Rosthern-Shellbrook 

to serve in this Assembly and to bring their wishes to the 

government side, Mr. Speaker, and to all in this House. 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, with those comments I would like to indicate 

I will be supporting the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker. I 

won’t be supporting any of the amendments that have been 

made, but I will be supporting the Speech from the Throne. And 

I thank you very much for the time here this afternoon. 

 

The Speaker: — It now being 5 p.m., this Assembly stands 

adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

  Dennis ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 131 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 131 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 131 

  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 131 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 

 Social Worker Receives Saskatchewan Order of Merit  

  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 131 

 Hooping It Up With Best Buddies 

  Makowsky.................................................................................................................................................................................. 132 

 North Central Family Centre Fun Run 

  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 132 

 Quilts of Valour  

  Steinley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 132 

 Sikh Parade Day 

  Ross ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 133 

 Saskatchewan Mining Supply Chain Forum 

  Merriman .................................................................................................................................................................................. 133 

 Rural Municipal Administrators’ Association Conference 

  Marit .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 133 

QUESTION PERIOD 

 Rural Health Care Services 

  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 133 

  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 134 

  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 135 

  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 135 

  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 137 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 

 Bill No. 8 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2016 

  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 138 

 Bill No. 9 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2016 

 Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 138 

 Bill No. 10 — The Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2016 

  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 139 

 Bill No. 11 — The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2016 

  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 139 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................... 139 

  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 141 

  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 144 

  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 145 

  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 149 

  Stewart ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 151 

  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 154 

  Moe ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 157 

 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


