






















































Hansard: June 16, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 18A  THURSDAY, JUNE 16, 2016, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Hon. Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Hon. Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Merriman, Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 51; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Maurice Riou http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 569 
 June 16, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave for an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Recognize the Minister of 
Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you, I would like to introduce a visiting 
delegation from the Federation of Indian Chambers of 
Commerce and Industry. FICCI, as it is known, is the largest 
apex business association in India. Established in 1927, it is 
also the oldest business organization and 20 years older than the 
Republic of India itself. 
 
FICCI is a non-government, not-for-profit organization that acts 
as the voice of Indian business and industry. Its role is to 
influence policy and encourage debate. FICCI’s extensive 
membership includes private and public Indian corporations as 
well as multinational companies and local chambers of 
commerce and industry from all 36 Indian states and territories. 
 
In total, FICCI represents more than 250,000 companies. FICCI 
is the first port of call for any international company wanting to 
do business in India, as I discovered during my recent trips 
there. FICCI is also a strong supporter of international trade in 
general and Canadian trade in particular. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan and India have strong trade ties and 
those ties are growing stronger every year. For example, 
Saskatchewan exports roughly 1.4 million metric tons of pulses 
to India annually. Last year we set a record for pulse exports to 
India. Canola is another example of a Saskatchewan staple that 
is rapidly growing in popularity among Indian consumers. 
India’s canola oil imports, although still relatively small, grew 
by nearly 50 per cent between 2014 and ’15. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are just some examples of the trade between 
India and Saskatchewan. There are many other examples and 
even more untapped opportunities. And that is why the FICCI 
delegation is in Saskatchewan. They’ve had a busy few days 
since arriving in Saskatoon on Sunday, so I’ll only give you a 
bit of their schedule. 
 
Monday included a meeting with the Ministry of Economy for a 
presentation on Saskatchewan’s agricultural machinery 
manufacturing, and a trip to the Saskatchewan Food Industry 
Development Centre. On Tuesday they were in Outlook for a 
tour of the Canada-Saskatchewan Irrigation Development 

Centre, and then visited Simpson Seeds in Moose Jaw. On 
Wednesday they were at CanMar Grain Products here in 
Regina, and today they are visiting us. And they will be off to 
Canada’s Farm Progress Show tomorrow which includes a 
meeting with AgWest Bio, and then back home to India. 
 
It’s a busy schedule but one that will surely contribute to the 
growing economic relationship between Canada and 
Saskatchewan and India. 
 
So now, while they are here, I would like to introduce the 
delegates to this Assembly and thank them for their interest in 
Saskatchewan. And I would ask the individuals to give a wave 
if they recognize my pronunciation of their names, and if they 
don’t, I’ll beg forgiveness. 
 
Ashwani Kumar is joint secretary, Ministry of Agriculture and 
Farmers Welfare with the Government of India. Jasmeet Singh 
is head of agriculture for FICCI and leader of the delegation. 
Duvoor Subramania Reddy represents Farm Implements (India) 
Pvt. Ltd. Thekkepat Raman Kesavan represents TAFE, Tractors 
and Farm Equipment Ltd., which sells Massey Ferguson and 
other farm equipment brands as well as its own line of 
equipment. Ruchira Saini is FICCI’s deputy director with 
responsibility for agriculture. And finally, Joginder Singh, who 
represents Bankura Precision Agriculture Equipment, a 
manufacturer of high-tech agricultural tools and equipment. 
 
Thank you ladies and gentlemen for your time and your 
continued focus on trade with Saskatchewan. And I look 
forward to our meeting after question period this morning. I 
hope you’ve had a productive and enjoyable time here in 
Saskatchewan, and I hope to see you back here in years to come 
as I hope to return to your beautiful country. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s pleasure to 
join with the minister and welcome this very important and very 
valued delegation from India here today of business leaders that 
are strengthening relationships from an economic perspective 
with our province. The program that was laid out by the 
minister seems to be a very impressive, rigorous program with 
some exceptional businesses and innovators here in 
Saskatchewan. I’m glad you’re taking in the Farm Progress 
Show as well. 
 
It’s fair to say that we all value the very important relationship 
that we have with India. It’s important to us on so many levels, 
whether that be from an economic perspective, also from a 
democratic perspective and an educational perspective, where 
there’s an important relationship in place. 
 
And Saskatchewan has not just benefited from a trade 
relationship with India. We have benefited with the 
immigration. Upon generation of generation of Indo-Canadians 
who have come to Canada to build and shape our province and 
have contributed to all facets of our province from health care 
through academia, through business, education, civil society, 
and beyond. So it’s indeed my pleasure to join with the minister 
and welcome this delegation from India. We wish you 
productive meetings and thank you for your presence here 



570 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2016 

today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And while on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I see a very special guest in 
your gallery, someone by the name of Kat Norton, along with 
baby Isla, that’s here today. Kat is somebody who’s served our 
caucus in the official opposition for many years as a staff. She’s 
on maternity leave right now. It’s a pleasure to have her here 
today. She’s just a wonderful individual who gives so much, not 
just to the official opposition in her work, but to her community 
and our province as a whole. So it’s my pleasure to welcome 
Kat Norton and baby Isla to their Assembly. 
 
And while still on my feet, it’s a pleasure to welcome Trevor 
Peterson to his Assembly with his children here today. Trevor is 
an exceptional teacher down in Assiniboia. He grew up on a 
farm just outside of Moose Jaw. He’s an all around good guy 
who cares about his province and the future of our province. 
He’s highly involved in the Wood River NDP [New Democratic 
Party] and ran as a candidate federally as well. He’s a good 
person and it’s a pleasure to welcome him to his Assembly. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to welcome these 
very fine guests to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask leave for an extended 
introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
thank you to members of the legislature for granting leave here. 
I’m honoured to introduce a number of guests, Mr. Speaker, in 
this gallery, Mr. Speaker, from the College of Agriculture and 
Bioresources as well as the Edwards School of Business at the 
University of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, they are visiting the 
legislature today. As I said, they’re members of the University 
of Saskatchewan, but they’re also members of the Canadian 
Agri-Marketing Association, or CAMA, Mr. Speaker, and they 
competed in the national agri-marketing conference in Kansas 
City recently where they placed second of 29 entries from 
across North America, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[Applause] 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Absolutely. We’re going to hear more about 
it in a member’s statement shortly, Mr. Speaker. This is the best 
that CAMA has performed at NAMA [National Agri-Marketing 
Association], Mr. Speaker, if you will. And I would just like to 
introduce each of them. We have with us Shayla Hertz — back 
to her in a moment — Brayden Connor, Ty Kehrig, Megan 
Crone, Ryley Cozart, Jackson Campbell, Paige Connor. We 
have Erin Cote, Mr. Speaker, who was a previous constituent 
near the community of Leask in the constituency of 
Rosthern-Shellbrook. Now I believe lives and helps her parents 
with Tierra Del Sol just outside of Saskatoon. 

We have Mason Ballek. We have Bailey Ogilvie. We have 
Derek Moses and Warren McAuley from the fine community of 
Vermilion, Alberta. We have Aftyn Campbell. We have 
Jackson MacMillan. We have Bailey Wilson, Bayley 
Blackwell. We have Chad Scott. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also have with them their professor, Eric 
Micheels from the University of Saskatchewan, who has 
informed me that he did not lead this group, although he was 
the adult along for the ride if you will. But very much the 
members of the group took control of this. They not only went 
down and competed — and competed well — and represented 
our province, our institution, and agriculture well, Mr. Speaker, 
but they raised all of the money to attend the event and 
self-funded their effort. 
 
Mr. Speaker, joining them are some very proud parents: Steven 
Connor, Bobbi-Jo Connor, Kim Kehrig, Albert Kehrig, Chelsea 
Richter, Lorna MacMillan, Justine Ogilvie, and Alanna Koch, 
Mr. Speaker, the mother of Shayla Hertz. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members in this Assembly to join 
with me in welcoming these fine, I won’t say . . . They will be 
future leaders, but already leaders in our province of 
Saskatchewan, to their Legislative Assembly and wish them all 
of the best as they enter their careers in the agriculture and 
agri-marketing industry in Western Canada. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 
want to join with the minister in welcoming these students, 
these parents, these leaders in education, and certainly in the 
agricultural business sector to their Legislative Assembly. I just 
want to add to the congratulations on the second-place finish at 
the competition in Kansas. And of course, Mr. Speaker, this is, 
as the minister says, this is not just the future; this is right now 
in terms of the way that people like this are leading the way 
forward here in Saskatchewan and holding their head high and 
recognized, not throughout North America, but the world over. 
 
So just to join with the minister in welcoming and 
congratulating these individuals on behalf of the official 
opposition. And of course it’s always nice to see someone 
named Warren McAuley doing good work and . . . 
 
An. Hon. Member: — For once. 
 
Mr. McCall: — For once, for once, my leader adds. But again 
to join the minister in welcoming these individuals to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, I ask for leave to make an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from 



June 16, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 571 

Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you. To you and through you, I’d like 
to introduce to you, sitting in the east gallery, this year’s 
nominees for Saskatchewan’s Outstanding Young Farmers. 
 
Andrew and Laura Vander Kooi are dairy farmers from 
Dalmeny. They were both born in Chilliwack, BC [British 
Columbia]. But, Mr. Speaker, they were not satisfied with their 
career paths so they moved their family to Dalmeny in 2011, 
buying a dairy farm. They have two sons, Ty, age 5, and Wyatt, 
age 3. They own Legend Dairy Ltd., milking 200 Holstein cows 
three times a day. 
 
Seated next to them are Dan and Chelsea Erlandson, 
third-generation vegetable growers from Outlook. They’re 
co-owners of Spring Creek Garden Ltd. Daniel took over the 
family farm at the age of 16 and married Chelsea in 2010. 
Spring Creek Garden grows over 50 different varieties of 
vegetables and attends eight farmers’ markets weekly. Spring 
Creek grows, packs, and markets 150 acres of fresh vegetables 
for the wholesale market. They also market some of their 
produce through the co-op system. 
 
With them today is Elaine Pruim. The Pruims were 2009 
winners, transitioned from BC to Saskatchewan where they now 
own a 380-cow dairy and a cage-free egg barn in Osler. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Canada’s Outstanding Young Farmers program 
recognizes the contributions of young agriculturalists under the 
age of 40 exemplifying excellence in their profession. The 
winners of tomorrow’s event will represent our province in the 
national competition held this November in Niagara Falls. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my wife and I have a special connection to this 
award. In 1999 we were selected as Canada’s Outstanding 
Young Farmers. I would like all members to join me in 
welcoming this year’s nominees for Saskatchewan’s 
Outstanding Young Farmers to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to you and 
through you and on behalf of the official opposition, I also 
would like to take the moment to welcome these outstanding 
young professionals to their Legislative Assembly and offer 
them a hearty congratulations on being nominated for this 
award and for representing us in Niagara Falls in the upcoming 
event. 
 
So we’re very proud of you and I think your communities are 
probably very proud of you as well. And we’re very lucky to 
have professionals like yourselves leading the way in 
agriculture here in Saskatchewan. So on behalf of the official 
opposition, I’d also like to take this opportunity to welcome you 
to your Legislative Assembly. 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar-Sask 
Valley. 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great pleasure 
to introduce a group of 44 students from Lord Asquith School 
in Asquith, Saskatchewan. They’re grade 6, 7, and 8, and 
they’re seated in the west gallery. Please give us a wave. And 
accompanying these students are Ms. Gale Stack, Ms. Melissa 
Bachmeier, and educational assistants Debra Anderson and 
Kristy Campbell. So I look forward to getting together with you 
later for a photo and a bit of a question-and-answer period. So 
please welcome this group of students from Lord Asquith 
School from Asquith, Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you, a very special class from St. 
Edward School in Saskatoon. This is the ecojustice students — 
if they could give a wave — and they’re a pretty special group 
of students from across the city of Saskatoon. And they apply 
and they’re part of this program that’s been going for seven or 
eight years. But this year these students have really focused on 
poverty as an issue to study throughout the year. 
 
Now I have to tell you that during the campaign I was brought 
in to discuss our party platform. I know the member from 
Sutherland was brought in to discuss their party platform, and 
so was the Green Party. They’re very intense students and 
actually, in many ways when we talk about future leaders, these 
folks are the future leaders up there. 
 
So I’d like you to welcome the students from St. Edward 
School, the ecojustice class, who are here with their teachers: 
Mr. Dustin Kasun, Mr. Mel Sysing, and Mrs. Nancy Baum. 
Thank you. Mrs. Baum is the parent accompanying them. 
Thank you. Thank you very much. I ask all members to 
welcome them to their Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with my colleague across the floor in welcoming St. Edward 
School here. I had the opportunity to meet with them in their 
classroom on March 17th during the election. It’s a very unique 
classroom, Mr. Speaker, set up with couches, beanbag chairs, 
very relaxed environment. It was somewhat like going into a 
coffee shop from the movie, Friends.  
 
But I wanted to thank them for their great questions, and I know 
that they’re excited to meet with the Human Services 
Committee after proceedings today. So I just wanted to 
welcome them to their Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to this Assembly, it’s my pleasure to introduce in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker, a constituent of the Rosetown-Elrose 
constituency, but also not only a good friend of mine but a good 
friend of all members on this side of the House, Patrick 
Bundrock. 
 



572 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2016 

Patrick is the executive director of the Saskatchewan Party, and 
he does an absolutely outstanding job. Mr. Speaker, he’s 
accompanied today — and this is what makes today special — 
he’s accompanied by his parents, Gunter and Marianne 
Bundrock who are visiting from Peine, Germany. I’m told it’s 
just a little bit outside of Hanover. It’s great to have them here. 
And I’m sure they’re very proud to be here with Patrick who, as 
I said, is just doing an outstanding job for us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In light of the fact that they’re visiting from Germany, I’m 
going to do my best on this, Mr. Speaker. I had counselling on 
this from the Agriculture minister, so I’m sure it’ll be good. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to say to Patrick and his parents, herzliche 
Willkommen. So, Mr. Speaker, I hope I didn’t screw that up too 
bad. I got the thumbs up. Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members 
on both sides of this Assembly to welcome Patrick, Gunter, and 
Marianne Bundrock to this Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
the minister in welcoming Patrick and his parents here. Patrick 
and I have been very good friends for over 10 years, and it’s 
always good to see him here. 
 
I’d also like to welcome Sean Wilson. He is part of the G.W. 
Construction group. They have been building highways in this 
province for over 60 years, one of our many amazing 
road-building companies that we have in this province. He’s 
also the past Chair of Saskatchewan Heavy Construction 
Association. And I want to thank him and his family for their 
dedication to this province and what they’ve done to literally 
build our province, and ask all members to welcome him to his 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just briefly I’ll 
join with members opposite . . . And the minister’s heckling and 
her delightful self here today. But I would like to welcome Mr. 
Sean Wilson to his Assembly here today and certainly 
recognize the contributions of his business, his family’s 
business to our province for many generations. So welcome to 
your Assembly. 
 
And to Mr. Bundrock, welcome to your Assembly of course as 
well. Nice to have your parents here, and we’re wishing that 
maybe you’d take an extended vacation for a period of time, 
maybe four years or so. But I welcome these members to their 
Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition to improve PTSD 
[post-traumatic stress disorder] coverage for Saskatchewan 
workers. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that 
post-traumatic stress disorder, or PTSD, can severely impact the 
lives of those who have it, Mr. Speaker, and that the delay in 

diagnosis and treatment for PTSD can be detrimental to 
recovery. They’re simply asking that if you experience 
traumatic events on the job, Mr. Speaker, and then get a 
diagnosis of PTSD, that those traumatic events should be 
presumed to cause the PTSD unless proven otherwise. I’d like 
to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Saskatchewan government to 
make the necessary changes to ensure that if Saskatchewan 
workers are exposed to traumatic events on the job and are 
then diagnosed with PTSD, it is presumed to be caused by 
the worker’s employment, and the worker will 
subsequently be covered under workers’ compensation and 
receive the same benefits as others with work-related 
injuries. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed from citizens from 
Strasbourg, Govan, Lashburn, Maidstone, and Saskatoon. I so 
submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise to present a 
petition to the Legislative Assembly. The individuals who have 
signed this wish to bring to our attention the following: The 
Surface Rights Acquisition and Compensation Act is an old and 
outdated piece of legislation that remains largely unchanged, 
despite amendments over the years. It is in desperate need of 
modernization to reflect the current challenges that farmers and 
ranchers are facing today. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Government of Saskatchewan to introduce legislation 
that would modernize The Surface Rights Acquisition and 
Compensation Act, classify land valued as industrial rather 
than agricultural when oil and gas development takes 
place, remove pipelines and flow lines from the surface 
rights Act, and establish a new maximum in compensation 
to be paid for damages. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the individuals who have signed this are 
from Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition in support of funding heritage 
languages here in Saskatchewan. And we know that after 25 
years, the Government of Saskatchewan is discontinuing all 
support for heritage language learning in Saskatchewan. Since 
1991 heritage language schools have depended on this modest 
funding from the Ministry of Education to help sustain their 
programs. As a result of the announcement by the Ministry of 
Education, many of these non-profit heritage language schools 
will be faced with the difficult decision of whether or not they 
can continue to operate. In addition to providing language and 
cultural classes, these schools offer a welcoming environment 
and crucial support for newcomers who are searching for a way 
to feel at home in their new surroundings. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 



June 16, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 573 

to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: wherefore your petitioners humbly pray 
that your honourable Legislative Assembly call on this 
government to reconsider this decision and restore funding 
for heritage language education in Saskatchewan heritage 
language schools. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition today are from the 
city of Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 

Saskatchewan Population Figures 
Reach All-Time High 

 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning 
Statistics Canada released their latest population figures. There 
are currently 1,146,655 people living in Saskatchewan as of 
April the 1st, 2016. This is an all-time high for our province. 
Since January our population has grown by just over 4,000 
people, and we are up over 16,000 people since last year. We 
are continuing to experience sustained population growth that 
we haven’t seen in decades. In the last 10 years, Saskatchewan 
has welcomed 155,000 new people and our population has 
grown every quarter. That is the most growth in any 10-year 
period in 85 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our sustained population growth is a far cry from 
what was happening when the NDP were in government. From 
1996 to 2006, our population dropped by 26,000 people leaving 
Saskatchewan in search of opportunities elsewhere. Young 
people were leaving the province for greener pastures, but that’s 
not happening anymore. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to expanding and 
diversifying our economy. Our continued growth shows the 
strength and resilience of our diverse economy even during 
times of resource sector downturn. I ask all members to join me 
in welcoming our new citizens to this great province. 
Saskatchewan truly is the place to be. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Moose Jaw Pride Parade 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, June is Pride Month in 
Saskatchewan. Pride Month recognizes gender, sex, and sexual 
minorities, including but not limited to the LGBTQ [lesbian, 
gay, bisexual, transgender, queer and/or questioning] 
communities.  
 
On Saturday, June 4th, I attended the first official Moose Jaw 
Pride parade, along with many New Democrats and hundreds of 
participants. It was a beautiful day, a perfect day to take to the 
streets to celebrate with the Moose Jaw Pride family. Joe 

Wickenhauser, the executive director of Moose Jaw Pride, 
worked tirelessly along with others to make this event a 
success. 
 
Although this was the first official Pride parade in Moose Jaw, 
the same parade route down Main Street was taken almost 40 
years ago. In 1978, anti-gay crusader Anita Bryant came to 
Moose Jaw on her Save Our Children tour, a well-known 
hate-fuelled, bigoted campaign. In response, 85 gay and lesbian 
activists took to the streets in protest and later 150 met in 
Crescent Park to speak out against Bryant. One of the original 
participants, Roger Carriere, was honoured to be selected as the 
grand marshal for this year’s parade. 
 
Although many years have passed since Bryant’s crusade across 
North America, the recent horrifying events in Orlando prove 
that there is work yet to be done for justice, equity, and 
acceptance. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating Joe 
Wickenhauser, Roger Carriere, and Moose Jaw Pride for their 
years of hard work and activism that laid the path for this 
historical Main Street Pride Parade. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

University of Saskatchewan Agri-Marketing Team 
Places Second at Conference 

 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Here with us today 
is the University of Saskatchewan chapter of the Canadian 
Agri-Marketing Association, or CAMA. This past April, the 
CAMA team competed at the National Agri-Marketing 
Conference in Kansas City. They competed against 29 other 
universities from across North America. I’m proud to report 
that the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] placed second for 
their product, the Go-Fer-It Oatmeal Smoothie. In addition to 
making a product, the team also came up with the marketing 
plan for their smoothie that targeted children living a busy and 
active lifestyle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was the best showing of the U of S 
Agri-Marketing team in recent history. With team members 
from the College of Agriculture and Bioresources and the 
Edwards School of Business, this competition gave team 
members a chance to show off their leaning in a very practical 
way. And from what I hear about the students, Mr. Speaker, this 
opportunity has given many of them a foot in the door with 
summer jobs and future careers. 
 
I would ask all members to join with me in congratulating the 
U of S Canadian Agri-Marketing Association team, as well as 
wishing them all the best in their careers moving forward. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Sanctum Survivor Fundraiser 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Sanctum Care Group is an organization in Saskatoon that is 



574 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2016 

doing outstanding work supporting those living with HIV 
[human immunodeficiency virus] and addressing the 
transmission of the illness in Saskatchewan. One of their new 
initiatives is a 10-bed prenatal care home for women with HIV. 
This care home will improve access to prenatal care for 
vulnerable women, improve health outcomes for both moms 
and babies, and help keep children in their families and out of 
foster care. 
 
Tomorrow I will be taking part in the Sanctum Survivor 
fundraiser, the proceeds of which will go towards creating and 
funding these new prenatal care beds. Over the course of the 36 
hours, my teammate and I will be given a number of tasks and 
obstacles to overcome on the streets of Saskatoon, obstacles 
similar to those faced by people living with HIV in our 
province, like trying to get access to the basics of life like food 
and shelter. 
 
[10:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in thanking Sanctum 
Care Group for everything they do for those with HIV in 
Saskatoon, and also considering what we can do as members of 
this Assembly to address the unacceptable rates of HIV across 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

Filipino-Canadian Week 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On June 12th I had 
the opportunity to attend the raising of the national flag of the 
Philippines at city hall in Saskatoon along with the member 
from Saskatoon University and the member from Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 
This flag raising marked the beginning of Filipino-Canadian 
Week in Saskatoon and commemorated the 118th anniversary 
of the Philippine Declaration of Independence from Spain. Mr. 
Speaker, the flag raising was followed by a celebration 
luncheon and family activities hosted by the Filipino-Canadian 
Association of Saskatoon. 
 
FILCAS [Filipino-Canadian Association of Saskatoon] is a 
vibrant community association which has been working to 
preserve and promote Filipino culture in Saskatoon since 1973. 
This organization strives to encourage youth and to help build a 
stronger community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is home to many Filipinos who 
have come to our province full of hope, seeking opportunity. 
Saskatchewan’s Filipino community has made many 
contributions to our communities and has helped to build and 
grow our great province. As you know, Mr. Speaker, our 
provincial motto is “from many peoples, strength,” and our 
province’s diversity is an important part of what makes 
Saskatchewan strong. 
 
I would like to thank the mayor and council of the city of 
Saskatoon for proclaiming Filipino-Canadian Week. I ask all 
members to join me in thanking the Filipino-Canadian 
Association of Saskatoon and all Filipino residents of 

Saskatchewan for their valuable contributions to our 
communities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 

House of Hope Opening 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
indeed a pleasure to rise in the House today to talk about a 
successful fundraiser supporting an important organization in 
Melfort. 
 
A local telethon raised over $30,000 for the recently opened 
House of Hope. The House of Hope, a project of the North East 
Outreach and Support Services, opened a 24-hour residential 
crisis centre this past Monday at 8 a.m. that is providing 
services for women and their children in the northeast area of 
the province who are experiencing interprovincial violence and 
abuse. 
 
The money raised through the telethon shown on Access cable 
across the province two weeks ago featured local talent and 
helped to bring awareness to domestic violence. Mr. Speaker, 
our government takes the issue of domestic violence and 
interpersonal violence very seriously, and has provided 
$500,000 for start-up and operational costs of this new centre, 
as well as $1.665 million through joint provincial-federal 
funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like all members of the House to join me 
in congratulating the organizers of the telethon and thanking all 
contributors and, Mr. Speaker, a special thanks to the people at 
the House of Hope for their hard work. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Liquor Retailing 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — When it comes to the modernization of our 
liquor retail system, the people of Saskatchewan know where 
our government stands. But it’s getting harder and harder to 
figure out where the members opposite stand. The member 
from Regina Douglas Park, the critic for SLGA [Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority], said, “The Sask Party ran on 
this mandate. They were very clear on closing these stores and 
the people of Saskatchewan have responded.” But her 
colleague, the member from Athabasca, disagrees and says, 
“They didn’t campaign on that.” 
 
Meanwhile the member from Saskatoon Riversdale infers that 
small business can’t be trusted to ID [identify] customers 
because money and profit becomes extra imperative and maybe 
training won’t be the top priority for some of these stores. Then 
the member from Saskatoon Nutana said that “Modernization 
makes sense, and I think the attempts that are being done in this 
bill generally appear to have some positive changes.” She even 
told the House that her grandfather used to own a liquor 
franchise in Lafleche, one of those smaller businesses the 
member from Riversdale suggests that might lack enough 
capacity to ID customers. 
 



June 16, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 575 

I can see why people might be confused. Perhaps the members 
from Athabasca and Riversdale should consult with their more 
progressive colleagues from Douglas Park and Nutana. If they 
do, they might even agree that, as the member of . . . [inaudible] 
. . . simply put it, “These changes will be welcomed by many 
customers.” Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, in 2009 the Sask Party 
took away school boards’ ability to increase their revenues. The 
Sask Party has full control of the dollars in the Education 
budget. That’s why, Mr. Speaker, it is crucial that the 
government sits at the negotiating table. They and they alone 
have the money. They control all the purse strings. 
 
The minister said teachers “deserve to get paid, and this 
government will never see that they don’t get paid.” Well it’s 
the government that is responsible to ensure that boards are 
transferred enough money to meet this agreement. The minister 
has argued that the funding comes in one envelope, which is 
true, but the increase they’re offering doesn’t even come close 
to covering the teachers’ pay increase. 
 
To be clear, by the minister’s own admission, the Sask Party 
has refused to honour their commitment, their word, and their 
signature. Mr. Speaker, when you connect the dots and follow 
the money, how can the minister say anything at all except that 
they negotiated in bad faith and that he is not providing the 
money to pay our kids’ teachers salary negotiated contract? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I caution the members 
opposite on fearmongering on this issue. We’ve made it 
abundantly clear, Mr. Speaker, that teachers in our province 
will get paid. Teachers in our province work hard. They’re 
competent professionals. For the members opposite to infer by 
any stretch that they will not get fully paid is something that is 
dead wrong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to give some numbers out so the 
members opposite know about our commitment to funding 
education: 2007-2008 provincial funding to school divisions, 
$694 million; that same year, education property tax was $742 
million; 2016-2017 provincial funding to school divisions from 
694 up to $1.2 billion; at the same time, education property tax 
down to $680 million. So in simple terms, operating grant up 73 
per cent, taxes down 8.3 per cent. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — And I’d urge and caution parents and 
teachers to not take that minister at their word, but I don’t need 
to because they already know they can’t trust him, Mr. Speaker. 
Not funding the full amount of an increase for the teachers’ 
salaries, and increases which they took full part in the 
negotiations, is perhaps the most egregious of the Sask Party’s 
broken promises. Now they are scrambling to find the cash to 

pay for this unexpected shortfall. 
 
And of course students will pay the price, Mr. Speaker. This 
will mean that there’s going to be cuts to teachers and 
educational assistants in already strained classrooms. This will 
mean that overcrowded classrooms will get worse across our 
province. This will mean that kids that are going to schools that 
are in need of urgent repairs, that are in disrepair, aren’t going 
to see what they need, Mr. Speaker. And it will mean that 
school boards will have much less autonomy to give our kids 
the education that they need and that they deserve. 
 
My question is this: when will the minister finally admit that his 
budget is a broken promise and a slap in the face to our 
teachers, and is undermining the education our kids receive? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday in the House I 
read out some of the past performance of the members opposite, 
times when they gave teachers zero per cent. We’ve never done 
that. Times when they gave school boards negative numbers. 
We’ve never done that. We value our education system. We 
value our teachers. We value our students. Mr. Speaker, overall 
our budget is up this year by 7.8 per cent to $2.2 billion. The 
school division operating income has increased $16 million. It 
includes $288 million for supports for learning, $5.4 million for 
Syrian refugees, $391 million for capital, including $310 
million for the ongoing construction of joint-use schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s something that never happened under the 
members opposite simply because the kids were being driven 
away. They went to another province. They were not here. Mr. 
Speaker, we now have ongoing capital projects all across the 
province and, Mr. Speaker, those projects will continue. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, of course teachers will get paid, 
because unlike this minister, school boards keep their 
commitments. The money has to come from somewhere, 
however, and school divisions are already stretched thin. The 
minister claims he doesn’t want literacy and numeracy rates to 
head in the wrong direction. He claims that negotiating in bad 
faith was just another day at the office and won’t hurt anyone. 
And he claims he wants to keep the cuts out of the classroom. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate that none of that is reflected in the 
Sask Party’s budget or in reality. Teachers and administrators 
have been clear. This budget will lead straight to cuts in the 
classroom. Still this government is continuing to push school 
divisions to their financial limits. One school division is already 
having to take almost $2 million out of their reserve funds to 
make up for cuts in their funding. 
 
The minister says that he will “work with school divisions to 
find efficiencies in their budget.” Mr. Speaker, coming from a 
minister who walked away from his own signature, it’s hard to 
hear that as anything but stepping in and forcing yet deeper 
cuts. Mr. Speaker, will the minister agree that this is neither a 
sustainable nor a constructive way to fund our kids’ 
classrooms? 



576 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2016 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, in the costing platform put 
forward by the members opposite during the election, they 
talked about a $27 million increase. Mr. Speaker, we’ve had 
increases in the tens or hundreds of millions of dollars. We’re 
now well over $2 billion. 
 
We’re not going to take lessons from those people over there, 
and in fact, Mr. Speaker, the things that we are doing are paying 
big dividends. Mr. Speaker, our grade reading levels have gone 
up in 2013 for students reading at . . . [inaudible] . . . from 65 
per cent; 2014, up to 70 per cent; 2015, 73 per cent of the 
students are now reading at grade levels. Mr. Speaker, that’s the 
kind of commitment that we’re making to our classrooms. 
 
The people over there never set goals. Improvement in 
graduation rates: ’08-09 when it was 32 per cent; ’14-15 up to 
over 40 per cent. Five-year grad rate for First Nations, Métis 
students, under the previous government 47 per cent, now up to 
56 per cent. More work to do, Mr. Speaker, but we’re making 
progress, unlike when the members opposite were in 
government. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Management of Health Care System 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan hospitals are 
feeling the Sask Party cuts too. We’ve been hearing for a while 
that they’re bursting at the seams. Hospitals are at critical 
capacity, and back in February, health regions were saying that 
they were one patient away from a bad situation. Mr. Speaker, 
that was back in February. Since then, nothing has changed and 
we continue to see our hospitals beyond capacity. 
 
Yesterday in just two Saskatoon hospitals there were 76 
over-capacity beds. We know that some of these people are 
squashed into units. We know that some of these people are 
waiting in the ER [emergency room] for a bed, and we know 
that some of these people are placed in a pod where there are no 
beds. We have heard from this government that they are getting 
rid of hallway medicine but, Mr. Speaker, sometimes there are 
over 20 people in these pods. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a pod at the RUH [Royal University Hospital] for 
example is IV [intravenous] poles and bedsheets used to create 
a makeshift room around patients in a hallway. Mr. Speaker, 
does it not still count as hallway medicine if you’ve just built a 
fort around that patient in a hallway? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member for what I think was a question. Mr. Speaker, we have 
as a government worked hard with our regional health 
authorities to first and foremost ensure that we’re investing 
record amounts each and every year, Mr. Speaker, and we are 
again this year. 
 
No doubt it is a more difficult budget year, but in fact this 
budget does include in the base budget the $4.7 million that was 

identified last year for emergency department waits. And that’s 
resulting in things like our seniors’ house call program, Mr. 
Speaker, our Home First/Quick Response program, the policing 
crisis action teams, Mr. Speaker, that are seeing hundreds of 
patients being diverted away from the emergency departments, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
As well, what we have done as a government, Mr. Speaker, is 
reopened beds, reopened rooms in our hospitals — our tertiary 
hospitals — which were closed by the members opposite. We 
knew as a government with a growing population, an aging 
population, changing demographics, that we needed to add to 
the number of hospital beds. And we have in significant ways in 
Regina and Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker, and we’ll continue to do 
that work with our regions. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, we hear all the time from the 
minister about things they are doing or supposedly doing, but 
things are not getting better. The minister is avoiding the reality 
of this situation. Mr. Speaker, we know that yesterday the Dubé 
Centre was over capacity. When we asked yesterday, he tried 
telling us that this wasn’t the case. His proof? The 2013-14 
numbers. 
 
[10:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that yesterday there were over-capacity 
beds in use at the Dubé Centre and another four patients waiting 
in the ER for a bed. Mr. Speaker, these are folks with serious 
mental health issues that need help right away. But the minister 
thinks things are rosy because they were okay in 2013-14. Is the 
minister hiding a DeLorean and Marty McFly back in his 
office? Now that he has his numbers, thanks to the NDP 
researcher, what will the Health minister do to fix this growing 
crisis? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we are working very hard with our regional 
health authorities to ensure that we are able to provide a more 
appropriate service for our residents and our patients regardless, 
Mr. Speaker, of what their need is, whether it’s a mental health 
crisis or whether or not it is a physical crisis, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is why we have invested in this budget, as we 
have in the past budgets, on some, I think some pretty 
ground-breaking initiatives. For example, the police and crisis 
teams in Saskatoon and Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region pair 
a mental health professional and a police officer. Over the first 
six months in Saskatoon, the program made 238 patient 
contacts, which only less than half of those actually required 
transportation to the hospital, Mr. Speaker. As well, in one 
quarter in the Regina Qu’Appelle Health Region, under that 
team they diverted eight individuals away from the emergency 
department and diverted nine arrests from occurring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the kind of work that we need to be doing. 
If the members opposite just want to keep doing the same thing 
over and over again, Mr. Speaker, we will not see 



June 16, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 577 

improvements in the system That’s why we’re trying these new 
programs, Mr. Speaker, and hopefully going to spread them 
beyond where they’re already operating. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, makeshift forts in hallways is 
the reality today under this government. Mr. Speaker, last year 
we heard from an infectious disease specialist who said that 
Saskatchewan’s HIV epidemic was unbelievable. As a 
physician from Toronto, she said, “You don’t need to go to 
Africa to do HIV humanitarian work. You can go to 
Saskatchewan.” 
 
Saskatchewan HIV rates are the highest of all provinces and 
territories. Mr. Speaker, that was before we heard about the new 
numbers that are up again. Last night we heard that new cases 
of HIV climbed up to 160, a significant increase from the 112 
reported the previous year. Certainly we know that more testing 
is happening, and that’s a good thing. But what we see is that 
this increase in testing is showing the true epidemic that is 
going on in Saskatchewan. Community health workers and HIV 
advocates have been warning the government for years about 
how bad things are. 
 
How has this government remained so lax on this issue instead 
of taking action? Why are they frozen and so squeamish when it 
comes to harm reduction? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, nothing could be further 
from the truth, Mr. Speaker. We are working with our 
stakeholders, Mr. Speaker. We are working with experts from 
across the province and outside of the province, Mr. Speaker, in 
looking at ways that we can reduce, Mr. Speaker, the number of 
new HIV infections in the province that we have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, compared to 2014, in Regina Qu’Appelle 
Health Region and Saskatoon Health Region, Regina 
Qu’Appelle Health Region saw a 16 per cent decline in new 
cases. Saskatoon Health Region saw a 37 per cent decline in 
new cases, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we are seeing is, since 2009, a 48 per cent increase in the 
number of tests that are performed on an annual basis — 26,000 
more than 2009, Mr. Speaker. We’re up to over 70,000 tests. 
But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, we’re moving out into 
areas that were perhaps undertested in the past, into rural and 
remote areas of the province, Mr. Speaker. As well, since 2012 
we have more than doubled the number of HIV point-of-care 
testing sites from 20 to 48, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Is there more work to be done on this? Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. 
Are we doing more testing? Absolutely. And are we spreading 
the message, Mr. Speaker, that people should know their status? 
Absolutely, Mr. Speaker. And we’ll continue to work with the 
experts in this field. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
 

Employment and Job Training Initiatives 
for Aboriginal Population 

 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, the unemployment rate in 
Saskatchewan is climbing and it should be a cause for everyone. 
For off-reserve First Nations, unemployment is up sharply from 
16.7 per cent a year ago to an alarming 25.3 per cent. Those 
numbers come straight from Statistics Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
And the situation is much worse for those living on-reserve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yet again in this House we draw attention to the 
work of Eric Howe, University of Saskatchewan economist, 
who has shown that closing the education gap and reducing 
First Nations and Métis unemployment could produce a $90 
billion economic boost to the entire province. 
 
I know this government likes to use their own financial woes as 
an excuse to cut everything, but you would think the 
opportunity to invest in people and get a $90 billion payback 
would be a chance that they, that even them, could not turn 
down. Investing instead of cutting is the moral thing, the right 
thing, and the economically smart thing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what more will it take for the Sask Party to take 
this issue seriously? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Immigration, Jobs, 
Skills and Training. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker, and thank my friend for the question. In terms of the 
unemployment rate, we saw last month the province go from 
the third lowest unemployment rate in Canada to the second 
lowest unemployment rate in Canada, which is an 
improvement. 
 
We added jobs last month. In fact, we’ve added over 60,000 
full-time jobs over the course of the last eight years. 
 
And in terms of the specific question, in terms of Aboriginal 
employment, we know that the Aboriginal unemployment 
number reached its height under the NDP. We’ve made 
significant progress. We’re about seven or eight points lower in 
terms of Aboriginal unemployment than when the members 
opposite were in government. 
 
The way we did that, Mr. Speaker, was by making very 
significant investments into adult basic education, into job 
training programs so . . . matter of fact, we’re the first province 
in Canada to actually fund adult basic education on a reserve. 
We spend about $7 million per year on ABE [adult basic 
education] on-reserve, about $30 million in Aboriginal 
employment programs in the general sense, Mr. Speaker, and 
we’ve made some very real progress. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, in fact it was the then NDP 
government that extended adult basic education on-reserve. The 
fact is that the Sask Party has shamefully cut important training 
and education economic development programs for First 
Nations and Métis people in Saskatchewan. So let me make the 
economic argument one more time for my friends across the 



578 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2016 

way — $90 billion. That’s more than the total value of all 
potash that’s ever been produced in Saskatchewan. 
 
This government needs to reverse their cuts and work with the 
communities to ensure that First Nations and Métis people are 
employed at the same rate as non-Aboriginal people. The 
minister says they will work closely . . . the Education minister 
says they’ll work to close the education gap, but the deep divide 
still exists. Working together to solve this crisis is not only fair, 
it’s also good for all Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, in this 
budget, in this Throne Speech, we didn’t see a call to action; we 
saw the issue being ignored. Will they stop ignoring the issue 
and get the job done? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Immigration, Jobs, 
Skills and Training. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. As I said, we’ve made record investments into adult 
basic education. We’re making record investments into job 
training programs. SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technologies] is an example, receiving record investments, far 
more than were ever made by the members opposite. And on 
top of that, Mr. Speaker, creating genuine economic opportunity 
for Aboriginal people in this province to take advantage of. 
We’ve created a tremendous amount of economic growth. 
We’ve been in government and seen tremendous economic 
growth over the last number of years that First Nations and 
other folks from this province have been able to take advantage 
of. 
 
As a matter of fact, as I just indicated, $7 million spent 
on-reserve this year for adult basic education, a significant 
increase over when the members opposite were in government. 
We’re seeing progress being made. The second lowest 
unemployment rate in the entire country. In fact for most of the 
last two years we’ve had the lowest unemployment rate in 
Canada. We’re moving in the right direction. We added jobs 
last month, as an example, Mr. Speaker, and we’re going to 
continue to make those record investments going forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Illegal Drainage and Flooding Issues 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, for Saskatchewan farmers, 
illegal drainage continues to be a serious issue. And this 
government needs to take meaningful action on the backlog of 
over 700 complaints. The Provincial Ombudsman’s report last 
week is an indictment of this government’s failure to take these 
complaints seriously. Here are some of the words she used in 
her report to describe this government’s handling of just one of 
the dozens of complaints she has received: unreasonable, not 
served well, not procedurally fair. 
 
On October 5th, 2010, the Water Security Agency’s 
investigation in this case revealed that the complainant’s 
neighbour’s ditches were constructed without the WSA’s 
[Water Security Agency] approval. The ditches were illegal. 
What did they do? They insisted on following through with 
both the informal and formal complaint-handling process 
before, some 26 months later, finally ordering these illegal 

works to be fixed. Are you kidding me? Twenty-six months? 
What is this government doing to ensure that other farmers 
don’t have to wait 26 months for action? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And you know, at 
the outset I’d certainly like to apologize for the time that it did 
take to get this decision resolved, these drainage problems 
resolved. But at the time that this was occurring, I think 
everyone knows we had a huge water problem on that side of 
the province. We had a lot of rain that year. And we certainly 
thank the Ombudsman for the recommendations that were 
made. And this is not the level of service that we want to 
provide from water security agencies. 
 
But since that time we have passed our new drainage 
regulations, last September 1st, last year. And that’s why we 
introduced them, was to take care of some of these complaint 
processes. We’ve streamlined them. We’ve made them a lot 
more risk-based type things. And that is how we’re going to 
streamline that. And the new approach to that drainage is going 
to definitely affect and address the time that it took to handle 
these complaints. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Well we’re certainly thankful for the apology, 
Mr. Speaker, but until we see some actual meaningful action on 
the backlog, there’s no evidence that the new regulations are 
going to do anything unless . . . the actual staff that can do the 
job. 
 
On another issue, Mr. Speaker, there is a slow water torture 
impacting producers in the Quill Lakes area of Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, in the last 10 years, water levels in the Quill Lakes 
have risen by almost 7 metres. People living there are fed up. 
The lakes have flooded 29,000 acres of their farm land and 
56,000 acres of pasture land. Mr. Speaker, recently local 
producer Darrel Allen said, “I don’t think the government is 
working very hard at it, myself. I’m getting more upset about it 
every year.” Mr. Allen has watched more than 500 of his acres 
wash away. Another local resident described the government’s 
action on this issue as “pretty slow.” 
 
Last summer the minister announced his solution to the 
problem, but quickly, and to his credit, pulled his flood plan to 
fix the problem. But the issue remains a major concern for the 
people of the Quill Lakes region. Plan A was soundly rejected 
last summer. Now what is Plan B? To the minister: when can 
the people of the Quill Lakes region expect you to finally take 
some meaningful action and address this very serious problem? 
What’s the plan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cox: — Again, Mr. Speaker, thank you for that 
question. And the Quill Lakes problem is certainly a very 
complex problem and we’re aware of that. And we did do 
extensive work, studies, and looked at the situation that the 
member opposite alluded to, the Kutawagan project, but after 
consultation and hearing reports from some 500 people, 74 per 



June 16, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 579 

cent of which were opposed to that project for various reasons, 
we decided not to proceed with it. 
 
What we are doing, Mr. Speaker, is we are very active out there 
looking at various alternatives that we can undertake to solve 
this problem. We’re looking at such things as closing some 
illegal drainage works. As I mentioned in my previous question, 
we did pass new drainage regulations last fall. This is giving us 
an opportunity to take a look, and we’ve identified the 100 top 
illegal drainage works in that area. We’re looking at closing 
them. We’re looking at reservoir storage. We’re looking at all 
sorts of things, and I would be happy to mention more of them 
next. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Health Policies in Correctional Facilities 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, the government’s refusal to act 
on urgent issues is tragically clear in the Children’s Advocate 
report of a death that occurred at a provincial youth facility. The 
report clearly outlines that lack of overview from the ministries 
to ensure that youth have access to health services contributed 
to this young man’s death. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was no overarching provincial health policy 
for the Ministry of Justice, Corrections and Policing. The report 
points out that these ministries needed to have better health 
policies for corrections. Mr. Speaker, unfortunately the minister 
doesn’t seem interested in meaningfully addressing these 
challenges, and families have been left waiting for answers. We 
need more accountability from this minister when it comes to 
giving these issues the attention and compassion they need. To 
the minister: has she read the report, and when will she commit 
to implementing the necessary changes? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to start 
off by first giving my sincere condolences to the family of 
Dylan Lachance who have lost a son and a brother. 
 
We take the work of the advocate very seriously, Mr. Speaker, 
and thank the advocate for this report and the hard work that 
went into it. It’s always concerning when someone dies in our 
care, and in particular it’s concerning when it’s a young person. 
We accept the spirit of the report. I have not had a chance to 
really go through it. Our ministry will need the time to consider 
each individual recommendation. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
[11:00] 
 

Management of Automobile Injury Coverage 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, last year SGI [Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance] made recommendations to improve 
Saskatchewan’s auto injury coverage, and the government 
promised that they would implement those recommendations. 

And now they are recommending them, but they’ve left two 
out. They’ve dropped their pledge to increase assistance to 
those with cognitive impairment and their pledge to reduce 
income benefits by the amount someone receives through the 
Canadian pension plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when asked about why they were backing away 
from these promises, the minister responsible had a baffling 
explanation. He said it would be a huge cost to summary 
financial statements. In other words, Mr. Speaker, people with 
disabilities and seniors were left out because of the Sask Party’s 
massive deficit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people depend on those payments as their source 
of income. And Saskatchewan people paid into their insurance 
policies in good faith, trusting this government to ensure the 
quality of life after a serious accident. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government had years of record resource 
revenues. Why does the minister think it’s fair for victims of 
auto accidents to have to pay the price for this government’s 
mismanagement? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, we received the review on auto injury. We’ve went 
forward on 20, over 20 of the recommendations, Mr. Speaker, 
costing SGI anywhere from 12 to $17 million as we move 
forward. 
 
There were two we didn’t move forward on, and the member is 
correct. That isn’t meaning that we’re backing away from them, 
Mr. Speaker. We will implement those as we move forward, 
Mr. Speaker, whether it’s a CPP [Canada Pension Plan] or other 
benefits. We will follow through, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to say, day after day, Mr. Speaker, the opposition I 
guess does a very good job. They come in, and pretty much 
every issue that they raise is a scandal. In fact, the Leader of the 
Opposition one day used the word scandal about eight to nine 
times, Mr. Speaker — whether it was BD3 [Boundary dam 3] in 
Estevan where the NDP got less than 7 per cent, or whether it’s 
the GTH [Global Transportation Hub], Mr. Speaker, where the 
member of Kindersley put the NDP down to 10 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. Just because the NDP says it’s a scandal doesn’t mean 
it’s a scandal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they use the word crisis over and over and over 
again, Mr. Speaker, and they try and tie the Premier to that. I’d 
say to the NDP opposite, we’ve got the most popular premier in 
Canada. He has come off of a historic third-term majority as a 
Sask Party centre to right wing Premier, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s only the NDP who would talk about this as a 
crisis. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, we heard earlier this week that the NDP 
would be going through a leadership race. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
going to take . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I’m having trouble hearing the Deputy 
Premier with his response. I would ask that he would rise and 
complete his answer to the question, please. 



580 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2016 

Hon. Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s going to 
take the NDP, we’ve learned, two years to push, to prod, to 
persuade somebody to run for that seat, Mr. Speaker. That’s the 
new P3 for the NDP — push, persuade, or prod to take that 
ejection seat, Mr. Speaker, to take the ejection seat. That party 
come off the lowest popular vote it’s ever received in 85 years, 
Mr. Speaker. If there’s a crisis in this House, it’s right over 
there. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — I rise on a point of order, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has raised a 
point of privilege. Point of order. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to draw the attention of the Speaker to words 
spoken in question period by the Leader of the Opposition. He 
cautioned parents not to take this minister at his word. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, this is certainly language that’s unbecoming a 
member of the House and certainly out of order, and this isn’t 
the first time that this happened to this particular member. I 
refer the Speaker to Hansard, page 4511 and page 4488. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. And I ask that the member opposite, that he 
withdraw the remarks and apologize. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — I will . . . It’s a serious matter, although 
I will withdraw and apologize the remark to ensure that we have 
the proper discourse in this Assembly. Doesn’t dismiss the 
seriousness of the matter. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Domestic and Interpersonal Violence 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege and 
an honour to rise in this House for the first 75-minute debate of 
this session, first 75-minute debate since the election, and my 
first debate, although it’s a very, very serious issue and it’s one 
that I hope that the members opposite — including the members 
that are heckling right now — take serious as well. 
 
As we’ve been discussing in opposition here and we’ve been 
bringing to the government’s attention time and time again, we 
have the highest rate of domestic violence amongst provinces in 
Canada. It’s an astoundingly high rate, Mr. Speaker. Not only 
that, but we have extremely high rates of sexual assault. We 

have extremely high rates of intimate partner death as well. And 
although this is an issue that affects both women and men, 
unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, women bear the higher brunt of this 
issue and are more likely actually to be assaulted or murdered 
by somebody that they know than men are, and that’s a really 
unfortunate situation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I had some . . . In my previous work I had some instances where 
I had clients who were trying to flee and deal with intimate 
partner violence, and unfortunately they struggled in trying to 
find ways of escaping the situation that they were in. They were 
afraid to flee or they had nowhere where they could go; they 
had children with them and they didn’t want to leave their 
children. Sometimes actually, frankly, Mr. Speaker, they’ll have 
pets; they’ll have loved pets that they can’t take with them to 
shelters, and have partners that are threatening to do harm to 
those pets if they choose to escape. We’ve been hearing about 
deaths more and more, Mr. Speaker, but the more concerning 
thing to me is the . . . are all of the instances in the province that 
we don’t hear about, all of the silent victims, all the victims that 
are still suffering through this to this day. 
 
The government is doing a few good things in this area, and I 
will give them credit for that. They’ve created, and I’m not sure 
when it was created — if it was NDP or it was now — but some 
attention’s been paid to the domestic violence courts in the 
province and I do know that that’s working quite well, and that 
there’s some new shelters that have been built. And I know 
other members on my side will join me in the debate and talk a 
little about the good things, but also the bad things in terms of 
the funding and where the direction has been going. 
 
But there’s more that needs to be done, clearly. We need to be 
paying attention to this and we need to be doing something 
about this immediately. It’s quite a stain on our province that 
we have such high intimate partner violence and death rates. 
And there’s really no reason for why we should be so much 
higher than the rest of the provinces, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another one that I know the government just put out a news 
release for today was the death review panels that had been 
worked on for a while and they’re coming out, I believe shortly, 
with reports to happen perhaps in the fall which . . . I’m happy 
to see that. 
 
We’re doing more now, Mr. Speaker, but there’s so much more 
that needs to be done. And we don’t have to tie it to the price of 
oil, Mr. Speaker. People’s lives don’t have to be tied to the 
price of oil. And we can be doing something about this now, 
something that’s low cost or no cost. We can look to other 
jurisdictions to help us find other ways to address this. We 
don’t have to wait for another person to die, frankly, Mr. 
Speaker. We don’t have to wait for a committee to meet and 
then another committee with a subcommittee having another 
committee, and then that report gets tabled and then we talk 
about what parts of the recommendations can we implement. 
You know, I don’t want to see this continue on and more people 
suffer before we seriously address this issue. 
 
There’s things that we already know about this problem, Mr. 
Speaker, that we can start to look at. Poverty and domestic 
violence, they go hand in hand. We know that women are 
disproportionately impacted by poverty. They are more likely to 



June 16, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 581 

be caregivers for our children and our seniors, and they are 
often the lifeblood of our families and communities. However, 
we continually allow for these economic disparities to occur. 
Frankly, Mr. Speaker, the economic inequality between men 
and women should be well understood by now, and it is one of 
the reasons why women are more disproportionately affected by 
intimate partner violence and death than men are. 
 
Research shows us that the most important time to invest in 
domestic violence initiatives is when times are tough because, 
frankly, when families are struggling financially is sometimes 
when instances of violence heighten, Mr. Speaker. And that’s a 
problem. And as the members opposite keep reminding us, 
we’re in a tougher economic time now than we were before 
which causes me to worry about, like I said earlier, the 
instances that we’re not even hearing about, all the silent 
victims, the ones that are struggling right now. So therefore 
now is the time that we need prevention, and now is the time 
that we need action. And this issue isn’t just a women’s issue, 
Mr. Speaker. This is an issue for everybody. It’s an issue that 
we all need to be engaged in. 
 
We know that domestic violence is also rooted in greater 
societal and historical marginalization of women. And our 
society needs to fully value women — our grandmothers, 
mothers, and daughters. And sexism and the value of women 
also play a part in why women experience a higher rate of 
domestic violence and interpersonal violence as well. 
 
And that leads up to the other issue of violence against women 
and girls, Mr. Speaker, and the high rates we have of missing 
and murdered indigenous, in particular women and girls, in the 
province. We need to acknowledge the fact that race and 
ethnicity can play a factor into this, into the issue of missing 
and murdered indigenous women and girls. And we need to be 
seriously addressing this issue. This government has not done 
enough to seriously address this very, very important concern. 
 
I attended a Mother’s Day walk a few months ago on this issue 
in Regina in Wascana Park with families of women, with 
families of women and girls who have disappeared in the city 
and surrounding area, and then allies were there as well. There 
was a few hundred people. Unfortunately, I didn’t see anybody 
from the Sask Party there. It would be really nice to see 
somebody from the Sask Party there with their families. Next 
May when they do another walk, hopefully we’re not there to 
mourn the loss of more women and girls. But in any event, if 
we are, I’d really like to see more government there and 
showing that they take it seriously. 
 
We need to be supporting women better, Mr. Speaker, with 
better maternity leaves and affordable child care. We need to 
move more women into decision-making roles. And I’m so 
proud to be part of a caucus that has 50 per cent women. And 
we’re taking steps to ensure that the voices of women are heard 
in this legislature, which is extremely important to do, Mr. 
Speaker, when we’re talking about these issues. We need more 
women at the table. We need more women at the 
decision-making table. We need more women at the executive 
level. We need more women in cabinet. It just, studies show, 
goes to make better decisions overall, frankly. 
 
Another issue with respect to domestic violence and the high 

rates of domestic violence in the province that we already know 
about and therefore don’t have to wait for another report is the 
factor of isolation that many families feel in our rural and 
remote communities in our province, which goes to one of the 
reasons why we have a higher rate of domestic violence. And 
domestic violence, interpersonal violence, interpersonal death 
— these are issues that need to be addressed. 
 
There’s families in rural and remote communities who . . . 
There’s women rather who are, you know, struggling to try and 
find where they can go. If the closest shelter is 300 kilometres 
away and they have children, it’s very difficult to have to 
uproot your children from their schools, from where they’re 
used to. But you also don’t want to necessarily leave them there 
because you’re afraid for their safety, but you’re afraid for your 
safety. And at times you also are at an economic disadvantage, 
frankly, Mr. Speaker, where you may have trouble being able to 
leave or even having the means to leave. 
 
[11:15] 
 
And you may not have anybody to reach out to as well, and 
that’s the concern, is often when you’re in these types of 
situations, you become isolated from those you love. It’s part of 
the cycle, Mr. Speaker, of abuse, where a perpetrator will 
isolate a victim and put them in a situation where they don’t 
feel like they can leave because they don’t have anybody to 
reach out to. And those issues get exacerbated, Mr. Speaker, 
when you’re in a small community and you can’t necessarily 
walk next door and ask somebody for help, or you maybe don’t 
see somebody every day. So these are things that have been 
studied already. They’ve been studied in other jurisdictions. 
They’ve been studied in Saskatchewan. There’s some low- to 
no-cost solutions, Mr. Speaker, that we could be doing. 
 
You know, there’s been recent events in the news that have 
emphasized how much better our justice and policing systems 
need to do when it comes to sexual assault and violence against 
women. We need to change these systems to better support 
women, Mr. Speaker. There’s often a conversation about, when 
you’re going through a sexual assault trial, for example, or an 
assault trial between two partners, it’s very much a 
revictimization process for that individual. And most people 
will unfortunately choose to not go through the court system, 
especially in instances of sexual assault, Mr. Speaker, instead of 
having to relive the trauma again. And that’s why, especially in 
sexual assault issues, the numbers that we have are . . . It’s quite 
common, it’s quite well known that it’s an under-reported 
number, Mr. Speaker, and the rates are actually significantly 
higher than they are. 
 
In a past history I used to volunteer on the Regina sexual assault 
24-hour crisis line. And there we would hear oftentimes from 
many women, sometimes men but many women who . . . and 
girls, frankly, high school students as well who had recently 
usually had a sexual assault type violent situation happen to 
them, and they were at a loss of what to do. So what we would 
do is, Mr. Speaker, we would explain to them the process and 
how they would have to, you know, go to the hospital, go to the 
emergency room, go get the rape kit done, and then you’ll talk 
to the police and then at that point the police will take it over in 
terms of laying a charge. And the thought of having to get a 
rape kit done and the thought of having to discuss this with 



582 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2016 

other people is a traumatizing, a retraumatizing experience for a 
lot of women and girls, frankly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And oftentimes they’ll just say, you know what, I don’t want to 
talk to anybody else about this. I just would rather forget about 
it and pretend it never happened. And that creates a lot of 
concerns and a lot of problems throughout their lives and in 
terms of the justice system, in terms of addressing this issue. So 
it’s something that needs to be addressed. We have some really 
well-educated nurses in our province. Unfortunately we . . . 
who are specifically trained to deal with sexual assault in our 
ER, in our emergency rooms, Mr. Speaker. We need more of 
them. We need to make sure that they’re available 24 hours a 
day, Mr. Speaker, because these sexual assaults happen 24 
hours a day. 
 
There’s also other things we can do, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 
why I’m glad we’re having this discussion today because yes, 
the government has done some things, but there’s other things 
we can do, and it doesn’t have to be tied to the price of oil. 
They can be low-cost; they can be no-cost. And we can look to 
our neighbours in Alberta, Mr. Speaker, who recently passed 
legislation dealing with an individual who has experienced or is 
dealing with a domestic violence situation to be able to break a 
lease early, because that can be a limiting factor for someone 
trying to get help. 
 
There is also the Ontario . . . no, I believe it’s Manitoba 
legislation that was just recently passed, Mr. Speaker, that gives 
the right to time off work without fear of job loss should you be 
experiencing an intimate personal violence situation, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s extremely important as well. If you don’t 
have a safe place in the home, you should be able to have a safe 
place in the work. You should be able to have at least 
somewhere where you can go where you can reach out to a 
colleague or a boss and explain to them the situation without 
fear of recrimination, without fear of any type of financial 
penalty or job loss as a result of perhaps you having to take a 
few days off to be able to get your living arrangements sorted 
out, Mr. Speaker, or trying to get your kids into a new school 
or, you know, trying to buy new furniture because you had to 
quickly leave your home without any of your belongings. 
 
So these are just a very few, but very important legislation that I 
hope this government looks at and deals with. We do need a 
Saskatchewan-specific response but we need to act now. There 
is also an Ontario death review panel that’s been out for a while 
that has a bystander awareness program that I think would also 
be one that I would like to see this government look into. 
There’s other recommendations as well that would be really a 
good idea for this government to look into. 
 
But I see that my time is running out. I know other people want 
to join in this debate so at this point, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
move the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the government for failing 
to appropriately address the issue of domestic violence and 
violence against women and girls, and for refusing to 
implement a plan to prevent and reduce interpersonal 
violence until the province’s fiscal capacity allows. 

 
And I so move. 

The Speaker: — The member from Regina Douglas Park has 
moved: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the government for failing 
to appropriately address the issue of domestic violence and 
violence against women and girls, and for refusing to 
implement a plan to prevent and reduce interpersonal 
violence until the provincial fiscal capacity allows. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is with 
great disappointment that I need to stand up here today and 
speak on the topic of domestic violence and the violence against 
women and girls. After all of the good work that has been 
happening in this province under this government, and will 
continue to happen, it would appear as though our colleagues 
across the floor have not been paying attention to what is going 
on. 
 
When I read the motion I would think that they were talking 
about the 16 years that they were in power when there was little 
to nothing done with regards to domestic violence and violence 
against women and girls. One of the definitions of domestic 
violence is violent or aggressive behaviour within the home, 
typically involving the violent abuse of a spouse or partner. We 
are aware that Saskatchewan’s high rate of violence affects all 
communities and cannot be tolerated. As part of the 
Saskatchewan plan for growth, the government is committed to 
building safe communities and a better quality of life for all 
citizens. I’m not about to stand up here and say that there is not 
more work that needs to be done with regards to this subject. 
There is more work to be done. 
 
Having said that, there are lots of great works that have been 
happening and will continue to happen. We are getting this 
work done by partnering with several organizations throughout 
the province. Today the member from Melfort stood here and 
gave a member’s statement about the work happening in his 
constituency. On June 13th, 2016, in partnership with North 
East Outreach and Support Services, a full operation of a 
24-hour residential crisis service centre in Melfort was opened. 
This facility will provide services for women and children in 
the northeast area of the province who are experiencing 
interpersonal violence and abuse. This is some very good work 
that is happening in our province under this government. 
 
For this very important facility, included in the 2016-17 budget, 
the Ministry of Justice is providing up to $500,000 for start-up 
operational of this facility. Considering the fact that our 
opposition does not believe we are investing in domestic 
violence, I would say that maybe they need to look at the 
numbers a little bit closer. And who put some money up to 
build this facility? 
 
In 2015-16 and ’16-17, capital costs for construction and 
rebuild of this facility has been provided through the shelter 
enhancement program, the Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 
through the Ministry of Social Services. The Ministry of Justice 
supports domestic violence services through community 
agencies in 17 communities across the province, right from the 



June 16, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 583 

south part of the province to the north — Archerwill, The 
Battlefords, Estevan, Fort Qu’Appelle, Hudson Bay, Humboldt, 
Kindersley, La Ronge, Meadow Lake, Melfort, as well as all of 
the major cities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, police-based victims service programs are 
available across the province in 92 police districts, as well as 
victim witness services and the victims compensation program. 
I am very familiar with the victims services program in Estevan, 
and I’m fully aware of the valuable service this program 
provides the individuals that need to use it. The people who 
volunteer with this program are some of the most caring and 
compassionate people I know. They work tirelessly to ensure 
this service is in place when it is needed. These volunteer 
support workers do the majority of the service delivery to these 
clients. They are all well trained and highly skilled. 
 
All the volunteers have passed a police security check and have 
signed an oath of secrecy, a code of ethics, and a contract that 
speaks to the commitment of personal conduct. Every volunteer 
has completed a classroom training program delivered by 
community people with expertise, and a minimum of 12 hours 
of shadowing with experienced support workers. Ongoing 
training is a requirement for all of our volunteers. The 
expectations for the volunteers are very high. This reflects the 
high level of their responsibilities and need for professionalism. 
It is a uniquely hands-on volunteer experience which offers a 
significant level of personal satisfaction and educational gain. 
Victims services is more excellent work that is taking place and 
will continue to take place in the future. This program is also 
funded by the Ministry of Justice. We value the programs and 
services delivered by community organizations that support 
people who experience interpersonal violence and abuse. These 
organizations make vital contributions to the safety of 
Saskatchewan citizens and families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I was researching what this government has 
been doing with regards to this topic, I did not have to look too 
hard as there was a long list of things we did just last year. Last 
session our government introduced amendments to the victims 
of domestic violence Act, Bills 144 and 152, to enhance the 
ability of police and justice systems to engage protective 
measures for victims. Last year in 2015-16, we provided over 
$11 million to develop and operate interpersonal violence and 
abuse services including transition houses, family violence 
outreach services, sexual assault services, just to name a few. 
And also last year we increased funding for sexual assault 
services by over 20 per cent. 
 
We proclaimed Violence Prevention Week in October. This was 
to help raise awareness about how we can all take part to make 
our communities safer. We also ran a public awareness 
campaign called Who Will You Help? and it was about how we 
can all take part in preventing sexual assault. 
 
I would hardly call what I have just listed, failing to address the 
issue. If anything, I would say we are being fairly aggressive in 
trying to address the issue. In 2016-17 we will be providing 
11.4 million to develop and operate 43 services delivered by 33 
community-based organizations in 17 communities across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As part of our government’s commitment to keep Saskatchewan 

individuals and communities safe and as part of its response to 
the 14 cases of domestic-violence-related homicides in 
2014-15, the Ministry of Justice is implementing a process to 
review domestic violence death cases. The purpose of this 
review will be to identify consistent themes across domestic 
death cases in order to make recommendations to prevent them 
in the future. The goal and objective of implementing this 
process is to prevent deaths related from domestic violence. 
Within the framework, we’re going to try and identify trends 
and risk factors and patterns. We’re going to identify possible 
gaps and points of intervention in community systematic 
responses. We’re going to recommend domestic violence 
prevention and intervention strategies as well as seek ways to 
prevent similar deaths from occurring in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mentioned that we were going to be putting 
$11.4 million in this budget. The type of services that we will 
be offering in this funding will be family violence outreach, 
sexual assault services, transition houses, enhanced residential 
services, provincial coordinated services, and northern 
transportation and support initiatives.  
 
And in the words of our Social Services minister and Minister 
Responsible for the Status of Women, while much has been 
accomplished, more work needs to be done. We need to speak 
against gender violence and build upon existing work occurring 
between all levels of government and with community 
partnerships. 
 
[11:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I was looking at the domestic violence death 
review process and reading the number of domestic 
violence-related homicides, I could not help but think of Lisa, 
and how even though we are not related by blood, she was a 
member of this government’s family. Lisa is one of the statistics 
that we are talking about here today. 
 
Once again I am angered by the fact that our opposition has 
made a conscious decision to bring a motion to this Assembly 
to try and say that we are not addressing the issue and that we 
are refusing to implement a plan to prevent and reduce 
interpersonal violence. You had 16 years to fix it and you did 
very little. Our government is not just sitting by the sidelines on 
this very important topic. 
 
In closing I would like to applaud my new work colleagues and 
all of the work that they have already done on this file, and I 
would like to thank them for having the compassion to bring 
new ideas and programs forward. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the 
Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s important 
for me, I feel, to enter into this discussion here today. And I 
think that we should be even careful on how we enter into this 
discussion today in how we characterize the debate that we’re 
having and how we maybe fall into the traps that we sometimes 
do as politicians, into referencing this government or that term, 
and this or that or this party, as opposed to recognizing, I think, 
something that’s just abundantly clear to, I would hope, every 
single person in this Assembly and I believe to most inside the 



584 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2016 

province, is that the violence rates, domestic violence rates, 
sexual assault rates in Saskatchewan are not acceptable, and that 
it has to change. 
 
And the fact that domestic violence in . . . that we lead all of 
Canada with rates of domestic violence is something that we 
can’t accept, the fact that we’re twice as high as the national 
average. Our statistics are a shame, but they manifest 
themselves in real ways in lives of girls and women all across 
our province, robbing them of dignity and security and safety 
and of opportunity, Mr. Speaker. And these are our nieces. 
These are our sisters. These are our daughters. These are our 
neighbours. These are our moms. These are our grandmas. This 
is the future of our province. These are those who have given so 
much to our province. 
 
And I’ll just simply enter into the debate here today, 
recognizing that there’s measures that government has taken for 
which we would be fully supportive of and are on the record 
with that. And we’d recognize the efforts and leadership of 
many as well across our province that are working to address 
this abhorrent reality for many across the province — whether 
they be working in shelters or in violence prevention programs, 
or working in justice, or doing what they can in policing or in 
education or in victim services through justice. All of these 
partners are important, but it’s not enough. 
 
And it’s not good enough for us to back-pat and accept that this 
is reasonable. And it’s certainly not acceptable when you look 
at the tragic statistics but, more importantly, the tragic realities 
that are lived out in the lives of women and men all across 
Saskatchewan. It’s not good enough for us to back-pat or to 
maintain the status quo. 
 
This is an issue that impacts every last one of us, and every one 
of us plays a role, Mr. Speaker. Men play an important role in 
this as well. And somebody that speaks to this is Dr. Jackson 
Katz, cofounder of Mentors in Violence Prevention. He speaks 
about the importance of addressing violence and domestic 
violence as not simply a women’s issue, but as an issue for all 
of us. If we’re speaking of it as just a women’s issue, it can 
allow men to not enter that conversation in the way that we 
need to or to prevent men from engaging in understanding their 
role in all of this as well, or not being engaged that are things 
that might be perceived as typically feminine, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I think it has to cause all of us, and certainly as men, to 
look at the world around us and to look at, to deconstruct 
what’s, you know, sometimes become a perceived norm within 
society or a cultural norm, and to challenge that and to 
understand and to learn and to be able to be an active member 
of making things better, doing all we can as individual citizens 
and then doing all we can by working together. 
 
This is a matter of right. It’s a matter of equality, of 
opportunity, of safety and security, and of freedom for so many 
across our province and our province as a whole. It’s not good 
enough to accept that, you know, we have to wait for certain 
fiscal conditions in the resource sector to allow further 
investments in these areas. It’s an area that needs steady and 
active attention and progress, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The reality stated by the Provincial Association of Transition 

Houses is that there 2,200 spousal violence incidents were 
reported to police in Saskatchewan in 2007, and that women 
accounted for four out of five of those victims. And that 
between 1975 and 2004, that eight women were killed by their 
spouses. 
 
The impacts of course extend beyond the victim who, you 
know, should be enough. It extends into a family. It extends 
into children. And the reality for children that are observing or 
witnessing or within a home with domestic violence, the 
impacts are real. It has cognitive impacts, Mr. Speaker. It delays 
their ability to grow and learn within school. It creates 
understandings of what’s normal when these things really are 
not normal at all, and in fact they’re hurtful, harmful, and 
hate-filled too often, Mr. Speaker. So it creates a very, I guess, 
unequal and unhealthy perception of relationships. So children 
are impacted all across our province, meaning that our next 
generation is impacted. And it’s a learned behaviour, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s in many ways difficult to deconstruct, difficult 
to learn other perspectives, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also know that of course there’s, you know, a big 
community impact of domestic violence. And cited here by the 
provincial transition houses, I quote: 
 

We all pay financially for the cost of domestic violence. It 
is estimated that each year in Canada domestic violence 
results in $487 million in lost wages, costs the criminal 
justice system $872 million, costs the health care system 
$408 million, and results in increased social service costs 
of $2.3 billion. In total, the economic impact of domestic 
violence is approximately $6.9 billion a year. 

 
So I mean, it’s in our economic interest to act, Mr. Speaker, but 
we should almost even set aside that debate because it’s our, a 
moral imperative that we act, Mr. Speaker. There’s many things 
that we need to be supporting on this front. 
 
The discussion, I think, moved by the member from Regina 
Douglas Park, the motion that was brought forward is an 
important one. And that member knows full well the realities 
for many that are subjected to domestic violence. This is 
somebody that was a real champion in and continues to be in 
ensuring access to the justice system for all people. The access 
to that justice system is something that’s indeed a real problem 
to address domestic violence, and I know it’s something that 
that member’s worked long and hard before she was a member 
in this Assembly to extend those services. And I know it’s 
something that she’ll continue to champion within her role as an 
MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly]. 
 
It was also mentioned by the member from Douglas Park the 
impact of poverty and impact of poverty inaction, and the lack 
of security that many — and in many cases, women — are in 
within poverty, Mr. Speaker. And there’s real consequences to 
inaction on this front, and it leaves real vulnerability for many 
that are trying to remove themself from a domestic violence 
circumstance.  
 
We hear of specific challenges for those that are in 
employment, and we hear about options that, you know, could 
give the guarantee of taking a leave, which is something that’s 
important. We also hear of lack of supports and challenges 



June 16, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 585 

within more rural and remote parts of our province. But I don’t 
want to point to any part of this province, you know, as being a 
leader in a positive way on this front. Every part of our province 
— in the far North, in rural Saskatchewan, and in urban 
Saskatchewan — has a lot more that we can do. 
 
Obviously any measures, and I’m going to stay out of the whole 
budget debate here right now, but any measures that make 
things worse for hard-working families, that don’t reduce 
inequality, that don’t provide security to the vulnerable, make 
matters worse on this front. And unfortunately we see far too 
much of that in this budget, and it’s an area that we need to 
really be a lot more cognizant of. 
 
It’s concerning when we see cuts to things like the mobile 
crisis, and their ability to respond in places like Prince Albert, 
knowing what sort of security and connection to service that 
can provide. And it’s shameful, Mr. Speaker, that we see 
shelters all across our province having to turn far too many. We 
shouldn’t be turning anyone away. But it breaks one’s heart to 
hear that in Prince Albert the shelter had to turn away thousands 
of women within a single year, Mr. Speaker, or that in Regina 
alone our wait-list can often be close to 1,000 people, Mr. 
Speaker. So we certainly need to have better supports on that 
front. 
 
So there’s a lot more we all need to do. It’s about cultural 
change, and it’s also about practical supports across the 
province, making things better as it relates to poverty and 
inequality and rights and equality for women also. I see I’m out 
of time right now, but it’s an important debate to enter. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota. 
 
Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I acknowledge the 
sober tenor surrounding this debate and the words of the Leader 
of the Opposition and the member for Regina Douglas Park. Of 
course we all need to work together on this very serious, very 
important issue. 
 
That said, I must say that the motion before us amounts to 
sloganeering and relies on base clichés that quite frankly are 
completely inaccurate, Mr. Speaker. Our record is very clear on 
domestic and interpersonal violence and violence against 
women and girls. And it’s very, it’s very definitive and very 
honourable in terms of its commitments. 
 
The very premise of this motion put forward by the member for 
Douglas Park is false, that our overall plan does not include the 
financial commitment, the backup to address this extremely 
important issue of violence against women. What then, Mr. 
Speaker, of the $11 million, 11 million allocated this year to 
develop and operate 43 services that address interpersonal 
violence and abuse, delivered by 33 community-based 
organizations in 17 communities across this province? 
 
What then of the $500,000 provided by the Ministry of Justice 
for the start-up and the ongoing operation of a 24-hour 
residential crisis service in Melfort, House of Hope, that will 
help women and their children in the Northeast who are 
experiencing interpersonal violence and abuse? The opening of 
this emergency shelter was this week, June 13, Monday. 

Tragically, it was almost ready in November 2014 before it 
burned to the ground. But it was full steam ahead again to get it 
up and running. And here we are, up and running. It’s the first 
transition home in Saskatchewan since 1989, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I was chatting just the other day with the member from Melfort, 
and he was saying this motion, this motion comes this week, of 
all possible weeks, because he is so proud, as we all are, of this 
project and of our co-operation, so proud of our project and of 
the co-operation with North East Outreach & Support Services 
in Melfort. And he told me with some degree of emotion about 
some of the stories he’s heard of women in crisis in and around 
the community of Melfort, particularly where children are 
concerned, where children are involved. And he told me how 
important this transition house is to the community of Melfort, 
of course to victims above all, but also to him personally as a 
representative of that community who has lobbied so tirelessly 
for this, honourably and committedly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What too of the fact that this government went above and 
beyond the recommendations of the poverty reduction strategy 
advisory group back in 2014? That advisory group included Dr. 
Ryan Meili no less, social activist, one-time leadership 
contender for the NDP. It was our government, it was the 
Minister for Social Services, not the advisory group, not Dr. 
Meili, that included interpersonal violence and domestic abuse 
as a root cause of poverty worthy of future direction, because it 
is a root cause. There are known links between being 
disenfranchised or unemployed or under stress and abusing. 
Where economies are stronger, where people feel they have 
more purpose, domestic violence rates tend to fall. And of 
course where women, where women and children don’t have to 
pick up and leave and put their lives and their schooling and 
maybe their jobs on hold while they stay in a temporary shelter 
for example, that too becomes a poverty producer. 
 
[11:45] 
 
We took that direction for the future, Mr. Speaker. Take bills 
144 and 152, amendments to the victims of domestic violence 
Act, that came into effect just last year. These amendments 
enhance the ability of police and of the justice system to 
engage, to activate protective measures for victims. As well, 
importantly, the Saskatchewan domestic violence death review 
process is being implemented this very summer. Panel members 
were announced today because we have been moved and stirred 
to action as a government to address the 14 tragic cases of 
domestic-violence-related homicides in this province in 2014 
and 2015. They cut close to home. 
 
The purpose of this review will be to identify consistent themes 
in domestic death cases and to make recommendations to 
prevent them in the future. Can we do more? Of course we can. 
Always. But we have acted too. Consider the banners 
surrounding some of our major initiatives: “Province enhances 
protection for victims of violence abuse.” That was April 2015. 
“Province confirms commitment to review domestic violence 
deaths,” October 2015. “Province launches powerful campaign 
against sexual violence and abuse,” also October 2015. And this 
was following the proclamation for the second year in a row of 
awareness-raising Violence Prevention Week, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I remember that public awareness campaign. It was very 



586 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2016 

effective. It was called, Who Will You Help? And it was about 
how everyone has a role to play when it comes to preventing, in 
this case, sexual assault. It ran on TV, in theatres, on social 
media where it garnered 1 million views. And when I saw some 
of these PSAs [public service announcement], I recalled 
personally how I once called the police when I was a student at 
McGill. Every day I was home around the supper hour I would 
hear a husband come home to the apartment below me, and he 
would start to yell and to scream at his wife and things would 
escalate to the point my mind raced. At first I left an 
anonymous note on their door and then one particularly bad 
night I decided to call the police. And I remember the police 
came to my door following their visit to the apartment below 
because I had placed the call. And then as it turned out the 
couple in question, including the man in question, came up a 
few days later ostensibly to apologize. But I still sometimes 
wonder whether that was really appropriate that my apartment 
number was passed along to them. But at any rate, the yelling 
did cease, at least for as long as I lived there, which was 
something. 
 
I also recall volunteering to provide legal advice to a woman at 
a Saskatoon shelter back when I was a law student. And I recall 
the fear more than anything, the disorientation, the distraction in 
her demeanour. She was trying to listen to whatever strategy I 
was proposing, but really her mind was quite understandably on 
what she feared was only temporary peace. I continued to 
donate toys and books to that shelter, and I often wonder what 
happened to that lady. I hope she is well and that she found 
more than just temporary peace. 
 
Of course there’s no question that the high rate of violence, 
particularly in our North, Mr. Speaker, affects all communities. 
And prevention, reduction, they are everyone’s responsibility. 
Governments, individuals, communities, they all play a part. 
But every single case of abuse and death from abuse is a 
tragedy, and we will work hard to make them avoidable 
tragedies. In terms of rural and northern Saskatchewan, the 
Ministry of Justice currently supports domestic violence 
services run by community agencies in 17 communities. In 
northern Saskatchewan specifically, the Ministry of Justice 
funds a program through North Sask Victim Services in La 
Ronge specifically designed to help northerners leave 
dangerous situations safely and quickly. 
 
Police-based victims services programs are available across the 
province. All RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] and 
municipal police services are ready and able to help with 
situations of domestic violence. There are 24-hour crisis lines 
available that help victims create plans for their safety. 
 
The Ministry of Justice has also provided training on trauma 
through webinars and face-to-face meetings with some 700 
individuals. Regina and Saskatoon provide access for offenders 
to earlier programming and to increase victim safety. No fewer 
than 14 residential services for women and their children have 
been licensed or relicensed under this government through The 
Residential Services Act by the Ministry of Justice. 
 
Bottom line, there is never a more open demonstration of 
commitment than in the practical, the application of action. We 
are working to find realistic and effective solutions. That’s what 
the Minister for Social Services called it following our 

government’s announcement of the domestic violence death 
review process. Not just words, not inflammatory words, but 
action, action on an issue that continues to be a major one, not 
only here in Saskatchewan but in Canada and around the world, 
Mr. Speaker. But that it’s submitted that we have failed to 
address the issue of domestic violence and violence against 
women and girls and refused to implement a plan to prevent and 
reduce it — this after the Justice minister has said attitudes that 
legitimize sexual violence and misogyny are an ongoing safety 
to the safety of our province’s women and girls — that is not 
refusal. That is not looking the other way. 
 
Our record, our actions clearly show the contrary. The member 
for Regina Douglas Park, the Leader of the Opposition, their 
engagement with this issue is to be commended. We must all 
work together, of course. But my suggestion would be to 
withdraw this contrived motion, which I will not be supporting, 
Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Regina Lakeview. Mr. Speaker, I’ve been 
thinking about how I wanted to introduce my remarks today. I 
did make a commitment to myself that if I were lucky enough 
to be able to stand in this legislature, in this space, that I would 
bring forth some of my experiences and the experiences of 
women that I have dealt with over the course of my career, over 
the last 25 years as a social worker. So I’m feeling a bit 
emotional about this, but please know that this is a great honour 
to be able to stand in place today and talk about the issues 
facing women in this province and the need for improved 
services to address domestic violence. 
 
And one thing that I want to start my remarks by saying, to start 
with just to correct or just to address some of the remarks by the 
member from Estevan. I think that it’s unfair to suggest that we 
haven’t been paying attention to this issue. I know my colleague 
to my left here has been a long-time social worker and has dealt 
with victims of domestic violence. My colleague from Douglas 
Park, a long-time sexual assault volunteer. And certainly this is 
an issue our leader has consistently been strong on, and talking 
about the need for men to also carry this burden and find 
solutions to the problem of domestic violence. 
 
I grew up . . . Like many people, I didn’t have a long time in my 
childhood without knowing that domestic violence did happen. 
And while it’s not my story to tell, and I would just qualify it 
wasn’t members of my immediate family, it was people that I 
cared about very much who, from an early age, I recognized 
were experiencing violence at the hands of someone that they 
cared about. And that’s concerning as a child, but it certainly 
has impacted the way that I have lived my life and the course of 
my career over the years. 
 
When I left the farm in 1991, I moved to the city and 
immediately became involved with the Saskatchewan Action 
Committee on the Status of Women. It was at that time that I 
had the chance to meet a very special, very small, very 
quiet-spoken woman named Ina George. And Ina George was 
involved with SAC [Saskatchewan Action Committee] because 
her daughter Pamela had been murdered, and mom doing the 
best to provide for her daughters. And it was really a privilege 



June 16, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 587 

and . . . a tragedy, that story, but to get to work with her. And at 
that time — it was 25 years ago — we were calling on 
improvements to services for women, for children to address 
domestic violence. And here we are 25 years later. 
 
Since 1995 I started as a volunteer at Regina Transition House 
and was really, really excited to get the position of the 
children’s councillor in 1999, or in 2000 rather. And the stories 
that I heard from both the women there and the children have 
informed me as a parent and certainly as a member of this 
Assembly. I hold their stories with me and again, as I said, I 
consider it a great privilege to get to stand here and talk about 
some of those experiences. 
 
Most recently I was manager of Regina Transition House, and 
I’m going to focus my remarks a little bit about Regina 
Transition House because that is the area that I’m most familiar 
with, but I think it builds into the broader context of issues 
around violence against women in this province. 
 
Regina Transition House was opened in 1976 — 40 years ago. 
In fact next week they’re going to be having their AGM [annual 
general meeting] and their 40th anniversary AGM. And I just 
want to say that, you know, I don’t think that any political party 
can take credit for the establishment of shelters. In fact Regina 
Transition House was the first shelter in Regina, and the way 
that it came about was the result of two very dedicated mobile 
crisis workers, Lisa Brownstone and Karen Howe. In 1976 they 
recognized that they were taking women out of situations of 
domestic violence and then housing them temporarily in sort of 
. . . well I think term that Lisa uses is fleabag motels, and 
recognizing that, without the supports, often these women were 
going back home. So they got to work. They rolled up their 
sleeves still while being employed full-time and they got 
funding for Regina Transition House with a little help of the 
IODE, the independent order of the daughters of the empire, 
Imperial Order Daughters of the Empire. 
 
So I say that just by way of, you know, I don’t think any 
government should take too much credit for the establishment 
of their shelters. This was really a grassroots effort to address 
issues that they were seeing in the community. And I think we 
really have to listen to those grassroots voices. And on that 
note, I will say that there has been work done by both the Sask 
Party and certainly previous NDP governments around the issue 
of domestic violence. I had the chance to meet Minister Wyant 
at Regina Transition House a couple of years ago when we 
opened the expansion in 2013. And I recognize that, you know, 
there has been money for shelters, the domestic violence courts 
which has been sort of a collaborative approach with many 
agencies and different governments, and it’s certainly the death 
review panel. 
 
But the question that we’re talking about here today is, should 
we wait until oil prices rebound before we engage in a more 
comprehensive strategy? And my assertion is that no, we should 
not. As I mentioned, in 2013 when I returned to the shelter, we 
were in the middle of a boom and housing in Regina in 
particular was very, very scarce. I think the rental rate was 
under point six per cent, and we had just opened a new wing to 
the shelter that increased capacity by 50 per cent, and that was 
important. It was accessible, which provided opportunities for 
women who had mobility issues. Also unfortunately that year, 

we had over 1,000 women and children on our wait list; it was 
also the case the next year. And the length of stay increased 
because of the lack of availability of affordable housing. 
 
[12:00] 
 
So what I suggest is, you know, funding shelters is very, very 
important, but if we only try to address this issue by funding 
shelters, we will never be able to build enough shelters. We will 
never be able to build enough shelters. 
 
We need to address root causes. And something like domestic 
violence, you know, like many social issues, there isn’t one 
cause. When I was hiring staff at the shelter, one of the 
questions I always liked to ask was, what do you think causes 
domestic violence? And I certainly didn’t have all of the 
answers but it was interesting to hear what people had to say. 
 
And then also we would ask, what do you think would address 
family violence? How do we get rid of family violence? 
Certainly in 1976, when Lisa and Karen started Transition 
House, their goal was the elimination of violence. They 
thought, you know, by now they expected — and they’ve told 
me this many times — that we would be at a point where we 
wouldn’t be talking about this. But unfortunately in 2016, we 
are in a position where, not only are we still talking about this, 
that Saskatchewan has the highest rates of domestic violence in 
the country, double the national rate. 
 
And, you know, that’s cause for some hand-wringing. And I 
think, certainly, I hope we can, both sides of this legislature, can 
agree on this: that the status quo is not acceptable. And I would 
hope that we could also agree that we shouldn’t wait until oil 
prices rebound. This is something that deserves our attention 
today. 
 
One of the causes of violence that increases rates of violence is 
inequity. We know that women don’t make as much money as 
men, on the dollar, and their choices are limited. So any time a 
woman is isolated or she has less access to resources, her risk of 
violence goes up. I thought it was going to be hard to talk for 15 
minutes. So anything that we are doing that increases 
inequality . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has expired. I 
recognize the member from Regina University. 
 
Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In a 
way, this is an exercise in preaching to the choir. We on this 
side of the House agree that this is a very serious issue and 
we’re definitely not proud that our province has a very high rate 
of domestic violence. We know that our police-reported 
violence is nearly double the national rate, and that this is 
especially acute in our northern communities. Stories like the 
quadruple murder-suicide of Latasha Gosling and her three little 
kids in Tisdale about a year ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, make 
every single one of us ill. 
 
This is not an area where we disagree with members on the 
opposite, and we would hope that it would be elevated above 
scoring a political point. 
 
The members on our side of the House, the male members on 



588 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2016 

our side of the House today, you might notice, are wearing 
white ribbons. It was noted earlier, the Leader of the Opposition 
talked about the work of Jackson Katz, and I would argue that 
we have a male-dominated caucus who’s done a lot of work on 
this issue. 
 
You know, it was noted by the member of Regina Douglas Park 
that their caucus has 50 per cent men and that it is noticed that 
when there are more women, there are better decisions overall. I 
think that’s a terribly sexist remark. We have a number of men 
on this side of the House who have been involved in these 
initiatives and are to be commended, I think, for their leadership 
on this very, very serious issue. I think we need to be careful, in 
the words of the Leader of the Opposition, how we characterize 
these things. 
 
We were admittedly a little bit surprised to see this motion 
come forward and even more surprised by its language 
condemning us. As I’ve said, this is an issue where there is 
agreement across the aisle. 
 
And it was suggested by the member from Douglas Park earlier 
that our absence at an event was illustrative of our lack of 
interest in it. Unfortunately, as I’ve watched this debate unfold, 
I’ve noticed that the same member has been absent for the 
remarks both by the member from Estevan and by the member 
from Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota. And therefore, if this is 
such an important motion, I’m shocked that that same member 
wouldn’t sit attentively and listen to the response of the 
members on this side. 
 
In addition to perhaps not investing the appropriate amount of 
energy into researching what has been done on this very serious 
matter and the myriad of programs, this motion also woefully 
ignores the fact that not only is an issue of interpersonal 
violence one that we agree we continue to work on for many on 
this side of the room, it is deeply personal. I’m a long-time 
supporter of the Regina Transition House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and served briefly on their board. And last summer, less than a 
year ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, our party lost its longest serving 
employee to domestic-related homicide. Her name was Lisa 
Strang. This is her. So this issue is deeply personal to many 
people on this side of the House. 
 
We understand this issue and we have acted on it. And we 
know, we know deeply that violence prevention and reduction 
is everyone’s responsibility. There are members on this side of 
the House who have, I think, lost a lot of sleep wondering what 
they could have done to help this particular long-time employee 
of ours. The Who Will You Help campaign video which was 
launched last summer speaks to this by outlining the many 
situations where people’s lack of intervention would have made 
the difference in preventing interpersonal violence and abuse. 
 
We know that Aboriginal women experience a greater level of 
violence than non-Aboriginal women. The Aboriginal family 
violence initiative helps urban Aboriginal families deal with the 
various forms of violence and abuse. There are six of those 
programs offered across North Battleford, P.A. [Prince Albert], 
Regina, Saskatoon, and Yorkton. In P.A., which has one of the 
highest Aboriginal populations in our province, we have two of 
those programs. 
 

We know that the cycles of violence are repeated and that’s 
why there are nine Children Exposed to Violence programs 
operating in Buffalo Narrows, Estevan, La Ronge, Moose Jaw, 
North Battleford, P.A., Regina, and Saskatoon. These programs 
try to help children cope with the trauma they have experienced 
in witnessing or experiencing violence and helps them cope so 
they don’t repeat it. 
 
We know that people need help in their communities. We know 
that women in particular often have less resources and so 
having services close to home is important. There are 33 
community-based organizations that we provide funding to 
which respond to these issues, and one of those of course is the 
Regina Transition House. But it is important that people outside 
the major centres also have service and on Monday of this 
week, as has been noted, we opened a 16-bed facility in 
Melfort. And again, as the member from Saskatoon 
Stonebridge-Dakota has done, I want to commend the member 
for that constituency on championing that particular facility. 
That’s the kind of leadership we need. 
 
Of the 12 transition houses we provide funding for, two of those 
are very specific to the needs of Aboriginal women. One of 
those of course is the WISH [Wichihik Iskwewak Safe House] 
safe house which is rightly operated by Touchwood-File Hills, 
and the other one is Piwapan which is operated by the La Ronge 
Native Women’s Council. And then we also have the northern 
transportation and support initiative which supports transitional 
support for residents in the North who are fleeing interpersonal 
violence and abuse. And the domestic violence death review 
process has also been talked about. And I was really pleased to 
see that Mary Aspinall from Family Service is involved in that. 
I think we would all recognize she is a leader and her voice will 
be very important. 
 
And I concur with the member from Regina Lakeview that we 
need to look at this issue through a more than just simply a 
justice lens. People have to have more affordable housing to go 
to, and our government has certainly been working on that 
issue, and particularly in the area of those hard to house. I think 
when our Premier and my colleagues talk about Saskatchewan 
whose best days are ahead of us, we do mean where we have 
the lowest, or I would hope, non-existent rates of domestic 
violence and abuse. 
 
We understand that getting people out of poverty and engaged 
in educational opportunities while looking forward to the jobs 
and opportunities across the province is key. We understand 
that our investments in housing are key. We understand that our 
investments in health are key. These are things that we work 
together to create the kind of society that we want to see, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And that’s why three-quarters of our budget is 
devoted to health, education, and social services. 
 
Of course there’s more work to do. I don’t know that we’re ever 
going to be done on this issue. And it’s difficult to celebrate the 
opening of a women’s shelter, to be quite honest. 
 
But I look forward to the proposals, not just the opposition from 
the other side of the House on this issue. Instead of a motion 
condemning us, let’s start from a constructive place of common 
ground. And so I will not be supporting this motion, which just 
does not start from the level of serious reflection and a spirit of 



June 16, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 589 

co-operation that I think this issue so richly deserves. Thank 
you so much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the member from 
Saskatoon Stonebridge . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — There is still a few seconds available 
for debate, but I think we will dispense with debate. And before 
we go into the 10-minute question period, I’d simply like to 
remind members of rule 51(b) which states, “No member shall 
reflect on the absence of another member.” And I’d particularly 
like to remind the member from Regina University of this rule. 
We now go into the 10-minute question time. I recognize the 
member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The members 
opposite are quick to condemn, but they never seem to offer any 
ideas or solutions. In their 2016 election platform, they said 
they were going to increase funding to transition houses. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve already done that. This year we’re investing 
more than $11 million to support interpersonal violence and 
abuse services, including transition houses. And this week we 
opened the first new transition house since 1989. 
 
Their platform said they would establish a domestic violence 
death review committee. Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are 
already doing that. In fact, five months before the election, the 
Minister of Justice announced that there would a domestic 
violence death review process. To the member from Lakeview: 
instead of condemning, do you have any new ideas to offer? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you for the question. I do have a lot of 
ideas. One of the first ones that comes to the top of mind would 
be a provincial-wide risk assessment tool in dealing with issues 
of domestic violence. Another would be addressing root causes 
of violence against women and children, particularly addressing 
rates of inequality, increasing access to child care spaces, 
forgiveness of student loans for women leaving domestic 
violence situations, more availability of affordable housing, 
because the more that women have choices to choose from 
when they’re thinking about leaving a situation such as this, the 
more likely they are to be able to access those and to get out of 
the situation. Dealing with isolation, working with communities 
in rural and isolated communities . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has expired. I 
recognize the member from Regina Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — To the member from Saskatoon 
Stonebridge-Dakota, this is an issue that needs to move beyond 
the political. Regardless of the fiscal situation, will she agree 
that the government needs to fully implement the poverty 
reduction strategy created by her own government and also 
mentioned by her in her speech as a means of addressing some 
of the risk factors of interpersonal violence? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Stonebridge-Dakota. 
 
Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And thank you 
for the question. I think it’s to be clearly agreed upon here in 
this Assembly today that this is a cross-party, holistic, if you 
like, issue. And that goes absolutely without saying, Mr. 
Speaker. In terms of poverty reduction, it’s never an either-or 
proposition between the fiscal and the moral, and that has been 
said numerous times. We can always improve, of course. That 
said, this is a work-in-progress, Mr. Speaker. This strategy is a 
work-in-progress. 
 
But look at what we’ve done on that file. Not only have we 
created the SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for disability] 
program, pioneered the Hub model, made record investments in 
housing and child care. Four pillars to guiding policy to 
reducing poverty including sustaining a strong economy, of 
course; ensuring citizens have a higher level of disposable 
income to use at their discretion; removing the barriers to 
independence; providing financial support to our most 
vulnerable citizens, and targets and . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has expired. I 
recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Mr. Speaker, I’m saddened that members 
opposite are playing politics with this troubling issue. In recent 
days members opposite have stood in this House and called our 
government mean-spirited, and erroneously suggest that we are 
doing nothing to address this issue. Members opposite may 
think that this kind of talk is good for them politically, but it 
does nothing to help address this important issue of domestic 
violence. 
 
[12:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the member from Regina 
Lakeview: will you set aside the rhetoric and instead commit to 
bringing forward new ideas and suggestions to working with us 
to try to find a way to address this difficult issue? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Again, I appreciate the question. I’ll watch my 
time more closely. I’m not sure . . . I suspect the question may 
have been written before listening to the debates but I have 
presented in a spirit of honest, honest searching to improve the 
rates of domestic violence, to reduce rates in this province. I 
have offered some suggestions. I have given credit where it’s 
due to the minister and have come here in an honest, honest 
hope to improve this issue. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Next door in Alberta the NDP government 
created a law for breaking leases and rental agreements to make 
it easier for women who are experiencing domestic violence to 
leave their partners. Does the member for Regina University 
think that this is worth looking at here in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 



590 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2016 

University. 
 
Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you for the question. I actually 
think that’s quite an interesting idea as I also think is the idea 
that Manitoba implemented a couple of weeks ago about the 
five days off. I think we’ve all demonstrated here today that we 
are open to listening to new ideas on some of these issues and 
so I would definitely look forward to hearing more about them 
and seeing if it’s something that our government would be 
interested in implementing. I obviously can’t speak for the 
minister responsible on that issue at the moment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Wood River. 
 
Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On May 19th, while 
talking about investments in domestic violence programming, 
the member from Saskatoon Riversdale said, and I quote, 
“These kinds of things cannot wait.” Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
for 16 years under the NDP government we waited for a new 
transition house to open and it never happened. 
 
Earlier this week this first new transition house since 1989 
opened in Melfort, Saskatchewan. Mr. Deputy Speaker, my 
question is to the member from Regina Lakeview. How can you 
reconcile the statement that action on domestic violence cannot 
wait with the fact that your party failed to open a single new 
transition home in 16 years the last time you were in 
government? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — I thank the member for the question. I think, as I 
mentioned earlier in my comments, I think that any government 
has to be a little bit careful when they take too much credit for 
the opening of any new shelter or any new program, especially 
when there’s such work done at the grassroots level. And I 
know, I believe it’s Louise in Melfort worked for a very, very 
long time to get that shelter off the ground. So I think that she 
should, she deserves a great deal of credit as well as her 
supporters, and they had a number of efforts to raise money to 
see the shelter off the ground. 
 
Of course there was support by the government but again I 
would caution them against taking too much credit where it’s 
actually the community who have stepped up and demanded 
and raised funds and really, really pushed for that shelter to get 
open. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In Prince Albert 
our women’s shelters turn away thousands of women every 
year. And also like, we used to have a men’s program, and the 
funding for that was taken away in 2011. And so Catholic 
Family Services has tried to implement a men’s program to help 
men who admit that they’re domestically violent, but they have 
a hard time finding funding. And just more recently, Mobile 
Crisis lost its funding for daytime services. So my question is 
for the member of Prince Albert Carlton. What are you going to 
do to help advocate for more services . . . 

An Hon. Member: — Regina University. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Regina University. How are you guys going 
to advocate for more services in Prince Albert? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
University. 
 
Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — I think, as I stated in my remarks, we 
do agree that support for men in particular is something that we 
believe is very, very important. I’m familiar with the 
Whitespruce initiative up in the northern part of the province, 
but that is the only one I’m familiar with at the moment. And I 
can tell you that we will be having those discussions, I’m 
certain. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Westview. 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
our government takes this issue very seriously. We 
acknowledge that the rate of domestic violence in Saskatchewan 
is too high, and we have been working very hard to reduce this. 
In October of last year, the government launched the 
#WhoWillYouHelpSK public awareness campaign, garnering 
over 1 million views. Public awareness is an important way to 
help reduce the prevalence of domestic violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the member from Regina Lakeview: our 
government undertook the initiative to bring public awareness 
to this issue. What have the members opposite done to help 
promote awareness to this very important issue? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Again thank you for the question. I’m not sure if 
the member means personally or as a party, but I think we’ve 
done a lot on both fronts. On a personal level, I sat on a 
community advisory board for the Red Cross around initiatives 
around domestic violence. During the campaign certainly we 
drew attention to the issue of the rates of violence against 
women in this province and the need to provide supports. Our 
former federal leader was very . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The time for 75-minute debate has 
expired. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon University. 
 

Motion No. 1 — Provision of Medical Imaging Services 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
at the end of my remarks, I’m going to move the following 
motion. I move: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the NDP for their 
ideologically-based attacks against private provided MRI 
and CT scans for Saskatchewan residents, an initiative that 
provides better choice for patients and expands the 



June 16, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 591 

capacity of the public system at no extra cost to taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, just a few short days ago, the NDP 
encouraged the federal government to stop this Saskatchewan 
government from enacting legislation that will cut waiting times 
for CT [computerized tomography] scans while also staying 
within the guidelines of the Canada Health Act. I can’t believe 
this is actually happening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will ideology finally be trumpeted by 
common sense and common decency? When will the rhetoric 
be put aside to allow for out-of-the-box thinking? When are we 
going to be allowed to step into the 21st century? Our 
challenges are already there, now it’s time to move our 
solutions there too. 
 
This legislation will save lives and improve outcomes for 
thousands of Saskatchewan residents. To me, this is a 
no-brainer. Murray Mandryk in the Leader-Post writes, and I 
quote, from June 14th: 
 

. . . the government’s case for private MRIs — and now 
CT scans — is more compelling and it’s better than 
anything we are hearing in the form of a rebuttal. 
 
The “buy one, get one free for the system” model for 
private CT scans was introduced in the Saskatchewan 
legislature last week, as the Sask. Party repeals its MRI law 
and rolls the two into a single act. 
 
But if New Democrats still want to oppose this on 
philosophical principle, they have a historical problem. 
 
Under the former NDP government, both Workers 
Compensation Board and SGI no-fault . . . clients were 
frequently sent out of province to private CT and MRI 
facilities in Alberta simply to move forward costly cases. 
For New Democrats to now stand on supposed principles is 
more than a little hypocritical. 
 
Of course, this former NDP government approach didn’t 
go over well with every New Democrat. One 
Saskatchewan NDP convention resolution (from 
then-health minister John Nilson’s Regina Lakeview 
riding, no less) urged the government to prohibit doctors 
from using information obtained in private Alberta CT 
scans. 
 
Rather than make it a point of principle, it was laughed off 
on the convention floor and was not passed. 
 
Evidently, even the most ardent medicare purists can 
identify occasions where [simple] practicality . . . must 
prevail. 
 
For that reason no one should be opposing what Duncan 
and the Sask Party are trying to accomplish today, simply 
because of philosophy. 

 
Mr. Speaker, a little history lesson is needed to put all of this in 
perspective. In 2007 the wait time for CT scans was five and a 
half weeks and for MRIs [magnetic resonance imaging] it was 
12 weeks here in Saskatchewan. We were waiting longer than 

the national average for both of these diagnostic tools. As more 
and more people needed them and as these tools became more 
mainstream, the demand soon outstripped resources. 
 
In 2015, despite our government doubling the public capacity 
for MRI scans and expanded delivery of publicly funded 
diagnostics in community clinics, the wait times remained too 
long. The demand has grown from 15,700 patients in 2007 to 
over 33,000 patients in 2015. That’s not good enough for 
Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. That’s not at all what we 
want for our seniors, our children, and our grandchildren. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Health minister in the Leader-Post, 
12 November, 2015 stated, and I quote: 
 

Our model for private-pay MRI differs from other 
jurisdictions. The unique “two for one” model allows a 
patient to pay privately for an MRI scan, but requires that 
an additional patient from the public list receive a scan at 
no additional charge. This arrangement has been available 
to Workers’ Compensation clients and members of the 
[Saskatchewan] Roughriders for many years — policies of 
the former NDP . . . that did not receive even a second of 
debate. 
 
Our government has doubled the public capacity for MRI 
scans since 2007 and has expanded delivery of 
publicly-funded diagnostics in community clinics; 
however, wait times remain too long. 
 
There is work to do to ensure MRI referrals are appropriate 
and necessary, and a patient will still need a referral from a 
specialist to get an MRI under this new model. 
 
This legislation will not be a cure-all for [all] those waiting 
for MRIs, but we know that patients are already going out 
of province to pay for an MRI and then returning to 
Saskatchewan for further treatment. It’s time to give them 
that choice here at home. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP started this two-for-one system years ago 
for the Roughriders in 2007 and Workers’ Compensation Board 
in 2003. Few people outside of those organizations would even 
know that, Mr. Speaker. The NDP did this all in secret and 
behind closed doors. 
 
This government has been open and transparent. We have told 
people exactly what we were going to do. We campaigned on 
the CT plan, and we are now going to follow through on our 
promises. Mr. Speaker, we went to the door. We knocked on the 
door. We said we were going to have two-for-one CT scans 
shortly after the election. We explained what they meant to the 
people, and here we are. Nothing stealthy or secretive or sneaky 
about that, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great idea. Other provinces that 
allow private MRIs, Mr. Speaker, are BC, Alberta, Nova Scotia, 
and Quebec. 
 
An Hon. Member: — NDP Alberta. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Yes, NDP Alberta as well. Mr. Speaker, we 
think it’s important to ensure Saskatchewan people who choose 
to pay for an MRI or CT can access that service in their own 
province. Patients who want medical imaging services in a 



592 Saskatchewan Hansard June 16, 2016 

more timely fashion historically have travelled to neighbouring 
jurisdictions such as Alberta to obtain that service. 
 
It’s just as important not to erode the services provided in that 
public system or to negatively impact the wait times within that 
system. Requiring the licensed private facility to deliver a 
second scan at no cost to a patient on the public list every time 
it conducts a privately paid for scan will ensure greater capacity 
in the system and is expected to reduce overall wait times. If a 
patient has an MRI or CT result and can be seen by a specialist, 
they will move to treatment. It is not appropriate to delay 
treatment if someone has a diagnosis from imaging results that 
necessitates treatment. 
 
Private-pay CT scans will be provided in the same way as 
private MRI services. Licensed facilities will be required to 
provide a second scan at no cost to a patient on the public list 
every time a scan is provided to someone who chooses to pay 
for their own CT. An appropriate physician referral will still be 
required to obtain a CT scan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to date, from February 29th, 2016 to date, 258 
people have paid privately for their MRI scans. That means, Mr. 
Speaker, that 258 people are also coming off the public list, 
public wait list, in order to shorten those lists. Mr. Speaker, the 
model works, and we should continue and move into it for the 
CT scans. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I won’t further this any longer. I further move: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the NDP for the 
ideologically-based attacks against private provided MRI 
and CT scans for Saskatchewan residents, an initiative that 
provides better choice for patients and expands the 
capacity of the public system at no extra cost to taxpayers. 

 
Thank you. 
 
[12:30] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
University has moved: 
 

That this Assembly condemns the NDP for their 
ideologically-based attacks against privately-provided 
MRIs and CT scans for Saskatchewan residents, an 
initiative that provides better choice for patients and 
expands the capacity of the public system at no extra cost. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
There’s a lot I’d like to say about this motion, and in the 
coming weeks when this motion comes back up on the order 
paper, I’ll be able to speak to it. But right now I’d ask to 
adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Walsh 

Acres has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. In order to facilitate committees that’ll do their work 
later this day, I ask that this Assembly do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that the Assembly does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until 
Monday at 1:30 pm. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:31.] 
 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Stewart ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 569 
  Wotherspoon ..................................................................................................................................................................... 569, 572 
  Moe ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 570 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 570 
  Kaeding ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 571 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 571 
  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 571 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 571 
  Merriman .................................................................................................................................................................................. 571 
  Reiter ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 571 
  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 572 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 572 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 572 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 572 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Population Figures Reach All-Time High 
  Young ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 573 
 Moose Jaw Pride Parade 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 573 
 University of Saskatchewan Agri-Marketing Team Places Second at Conference 
  Kaeding ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 573 
 Sanctum Survivor Fundraiser 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 573 
 Filipino-Canadian Week 
  Lambert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 574 
 House of Hope Opening 
  Phillips ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 574 
 Liquor Retailing 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................... 574 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Funding for Education 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 575 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 575 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 575 
 Management of Health Care System 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 576 
  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 576 
 Employment and Job Training Initiatives for Aboriginal Population 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 577 
  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 577 
 Illegal Drainage and Flooding Issues 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 578 
  Cox ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 578 
 Health Policies in Correctional Facilities 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 579 
  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 579 
 Management of Automobile Injury Coverage 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 579 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 579 
POINT OF ORDER 
  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 580 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 580 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Domestic and Interpersonal Violence 
  Sarauer .............................................................................................................................................................................. 580, 589 
  Carr ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 582 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 583 
  Eyre .................................................................................................................................................................................... 585, 589 
  Beck .................................................................................................................................................................................... 586, 589 



 

  Beaudry-Mellor ................................................................................................................................................................. 587, 590 
  Phillips ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 589 
  Bonk ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 589 
  Marit .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 590 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 590 
  Buckingham .............................................................................................................................................................................. 590 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 1 — Provision of Medical Imaging Services 
  Olauson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 590 
  Steinley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 592 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 




