






















































Hansard: October 26, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 31A  WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 26, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (Ind.) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10; Independent (Ind.) — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 903 
 October 26, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, in your gallery there’s three gentlemen who I’d 
care to introduce: Dennis Mahony, John Laskin, and John 
Terry. They’re here from the Torys Law Firm in Toronto. And 
for those of us that practise law, we’ll know that that’s a 
pre-eminent law firm in the country. 
 
They’re here doing some business in the province, Mr. Speaker, 
and so I thought I’d bring them to the House, introduce them to 
the legislature, and welcome them to the Saskatchewan 
legislature. So I’d ask everyone in the House to welcome them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I’d to join with the Attorney General in welcoming 
Dennis, John, and John to this Legislative Assembly. I know the 
great work that the Torys Law Firm does in the country. I do 
think I have some fellow U of Saskatchewan [University of 
Saskatchewan] College of Law grads who work at your offices. 
So I’m very happy to see you today, and I’m glad that you’re in 
town doing some business. So please join me in welcoming 
them to our Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I’d like to introduce to you my intern I’ll be working with 
today, this term. David Sparling is up in your gallery. There he 
is — David. You can’t really see him very well from here. He 
attended St. George School and Bishop Mahoney High School 
in Saskatoon and was on the honour roll for all three of his 
years at Bishop Mahoney. He also won the Saskatchewan 
Greystone Scholarship and finished with the second highest 
average among his graduating class. 
 
He graduated from the University of Saskatchewan last year — 
in May actually of this year — with great distinction. After 
three years of study, he was in the top 10 per cent of his class. 
And he was invited to join the Golden Key International 
Honour Society in 2015. He’ll be working with our group in 
Saskatoon University for the first term this year, Mr. Speaker, 
and I’m sure he’s going to learn a lot, as I will from him as 
well. I invite all members of the Assembly to welcome him to 
his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Steele: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I’d like to recognize my intern for this session is Rachelle 

Bistritzan. She was raised on a farm near Zehner in 
Saskatchewan, went to school in Balgonie. Graduated golden 
honour roll, and she’s in her third year in the University of 
Regina. She has a long group of accomplishments, worked with 
community leadership and with the government. Canadian 
politics is her passion and moving forward. So join me in 
welcoming her to her Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you, 
it’s my pleasure today to introduce a very good friend of mine 
seated in your west gallery. Bart Wood is here today. If you 
could give us a little wave, Bart. Thank you. Bart’s been a good 
friend of mine for many, many years. He was very important in 
my campaign this last time and I think the two elections before 
as well. And, Bart, we really appreciate it. And just to show the 
respect that I had for Bart, I decided that I’d go to the same 
barber as he has. I would ask everybody to please welcome Bart 
to the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Gardiner 
Park. 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Well thanks, Mr. Speaker. Once again I’m 
pleased to be on my feet this afternoon to introduce a school 
group. Some members, unfortunately they can go a long time 
before three school groups come and visit them because of 
distance. Maybe for some other reasons; I’m not sure about 
that. 
 
But it’s the third day in a row, and we thank Mr. McKillop once 
again for bringing a school group from F.W. Johnson Collegiate 
here to the Legislative Assembly. They’re a group of grade 10 
students, 25 of them. I look forward to having a chat with them 
after, as always. And Ms. Sarah Hewson is also accompanying 
them today. Members, once again please help me welcome 
them. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition to reverse the cuts to the Lighthouse program. 
In April 2014 the Minister of Social Services said that the 
Lighthouse in Saskatoon would “. . . take pressure off of 
existing detox facilities, hospitals and police cells, while 
keeping people safe, especially in our brutally cold winters.” On 
the same day, the Minister of Health said, “We want to ensure 
that individuals with mental health and addictions issues have a 
safe place to stay.” 
 
These ministers are now trying to place the responsibility for 
repairing budget deficits on those experiencing addictions, 
unemployment, and poverty and who are living from day to day 
without proper services. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

They respectfully request the Government of 
Saskatchewan to immediately reverse their recent cuts to 
funding that allows extremely vulnerable people to access 



904 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2016 

the services of the Lighthouse stabilization unit in 
Saskatoon, and revisit their imposition of a strict and 
narrow definition of homelessness in November of 2015 
which forced the Lighthouse to cut back its hours of 
essential service in February of 2016, and take immediate 
steps to ensure that homeless people in Saskatchewan have 
emergency shelter, clothing, and food available to them 
before more lives are lost, Mr. Speaker. 

 
And the individuals who are presenting this live in the city of 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly. 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present the petition from the citizens who are opposed 
to the federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax to 
the province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on our 
province. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Canora, 
Stenen, Invermay, Preeceville, Sturgis, Norquay, and Kamsack. 
I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much. I rise to present a 
petition today in support of Wakamow Valley Authority. And 
we know that as a result of the passage of The Wakamow 
Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2016 on June 30th, the 
Wakamow Valley Authority lost its statutory funding of 
$127,000 from the Saskatchewan government in addition to 
$30,000 in supplemental funding. And this loss of annual 
funding negatively affected the ability of Wakamow to 
maintain its lands and to repair its facilities and to provide 
services to its community. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately repeal The Wakamow Valley Authority 
Amendment Act, 2016 and reinstate statutory funding to the 
Wakamow Valley Authority. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the city 
of Moose Jaw. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present to you a petition condemning the Sask Party cuts to the 
SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for disability] program. 
After nearly a decade of wasting the economic boom and 
blowing through the savings, the government is now forcing the 
province’s most vulnerable people to pay for Sask Party 
mismanagement. 
 
The Sask Party’s latest cold-hearted cut will take money away 
from people who are unable to work due to a disability. The 
many people who are being hurt by the Sask Party cut live with 
serious illnesses such as multiple sclerosis, cancer, autism, and 
other illnesses. And that contrary to the Minister of Social 
Services’ claims, the government underfunds clients in regards 
to shelter allowance, and that shelter allowance should be 
reflective of the current rental costs. 
 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party government to stop their plan to cut the SAID 
funding and immediately restore funding for those living 
with a disability; that shelter allowance is reflective of the 
current rental costs; and that the Saskatchewan Party 
government implement the recommendations of the 
advisory group on poverty reduction. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing this petition are from the 
cities of Regina and Saskatoon. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition regarding child care centres in Saskatchewan. Those 
who signed this petition wish to draw attention to the following: 
across Saskatchewan, licensed, non-profit child care centres are 
taxed inconsistently and many of our licensed, non-profit child 
care centres pay commercial property taxes. Mr. Speaker, this is 
not done in Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, BC [British Columbia], 
or New Brunswick. 
 
Child care is essential to the economy, yet most centres struggle 
to balance their budget. This threatens both the number of child 
care spaces as well as the quality of care. Quality child care has 
an enormous positive impact on a child’s future outcomes and 
yields high rates of economic return. Child care centres are 
institutions of early learning and childhood development. It is 
appropriate that they have the same tax treatment as schools. I’ll 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognize 
that licensed, non-profit child care centres provide 
programs that are foundational to a healthy society by 
including them in The Education Act and exempt all 
licensed, non-profit child care centres in Saskatchewan 
from property tax through the changes to appropriate 
legislation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those signing the petition today reside in Yorkton. 
I do so submit. 



October 26, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 905 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition to stop the Sask Party sell-off of SaskTel. The 
petitioners point out that in the last five years alone, SaskTel’s 
returned $497 million to support government programs and 
services like education and health care. They point out that 
SaskTel’s an important part of building a stronger and fairer 
Saskatchewan together. And they point out that once SaskTel is 
gone, there is no getting it back and no telling what else the 
Sask Party will sell. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the prayer that reads as follows: 
 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the Saskatchewan Party 
government to keep their promise, stop their plan to sell off 
SaskTel, and keep our valued Crown corporation in the 
hands of Saskatchewan people. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by individuals 
from the good city of Prince Albert. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling on the government to reverse the cuts 
to the Aboriginal court worker program. The Government of 
Saskatchewan cut the budget for the Aboriginal court worker 
program in the 2016-2017 provincial budget, resulting in 
layoffs and termination of Aboriginal court workers throughout 
the province. 
 
Aboriginal court workers play an important role in helping 
Aboriginal people in criminal and child apprehension cases. 
Aboriginal peoples are disproportionately represented in 
Saskatchewan’s correctional centres, and Aboriginal court 
workers successfully help to make our communities safer 
through reduced recidivism rates. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan reverse its 
short-sighted and counterproductive cuts to the Aboriginal 
court worker programs. 

 
The individuals signing this petition are from Saskatoon and 
Regina. I do so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

First Nations University Celebrates 40th Anniversary 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On September 26th 
I had the pleasure of attending the celebration of the 40th 
anniversary of the First Nations University of Canada at the 
Prince Albert Campus. My colleagues, the members from 
Regina Rosemont and Regina Elphinstone-Centre, attended 
similar celebrations here in Regina. 
 

This university was created through an agreement between the 
FSIN [Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations] and the 
University of Regina. Originally named the Saskatchewan 
Indian Federated College, it changed its name to First Nations 
University of Canada in 2003. Its mission is to serve the 
academic, cultural, and spiritual needs of First Nations students. 
 
When it first opened its doors 40 years ago, it had nine students 
and offered six programs. Today there are over 3,000 students 
annually, and more than 30,000 students have attended the 
university since 2003. First Nations University offers a holistic 
education and provides the opportunity to students to receive 
quality academic education along with traditional indigenous 
knowledge. 
 
As one of three campuses, the Prince Albert Campus is a vital 
part of our city and of our downtown. Many students from 
around Prince Albert as well as across northern Saskatchewan 
attend the Prince Albert Campus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 
congratulating the First Nations University of Canada on its 
40th anniversary and to acknowledge the contributions of the 
Prince Albert Campus. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Key Ceremony in Regina for Habitat for Humanity 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
inform members about a key ceremony for 10 Habitat for 
Humanity families that took place yesterday here in Regina at 
Haultain Crossing. Upon completion of this multi-unit housing 
development, a total of 62 Regina families will call Haultain 
Crossing home. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all realize that some families face challenges in 
finding a safe, quality place to call home. That is where Habitat 
for Humanity comes in, to bring hope and help to families who 
want to put those challenges behind them. Our government 
supports that goal and that is why we have contributed 
$650,000 towards these homes at Haultain Crossing. In fact we 
have dedicated nearly 9 million in funding since 2009 to 
support 13 Habitat chapters across our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, myself, the member from Gardiner Park and 
Regina Coronation Park were able to help at an MLA [Member 
of the Legislative Assembly] build day at Haultain Crossing 
project this spring, and we all came home uninjured, thankfully. 
And it’s amazing to see these deserving families now have a 
place to call home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate Habitat for working 
tirelessly with Saskatchewan families to make their home 
ownership dreams come true. Our government is proud of the 
leadership, teamwork, and community spirit exemplified by the 
community partnerships that built these 10 homes. 
 
I’d ask all members of this Assembly to join me in thanking 
Habitat for Humanity, the community sponsors, and all the 



906 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2016 

volunteers for their work on the Haultain project, and 
congratulate the 10 families on getting the keys to their new 
home. Welcome home. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Outstanding Achievements in Energy Management 
 
Ms. Sproule: — In June of 2015 the Saskatchewan Energy 
Management Task Force, Saskatoon chapter, decided it was 
time to recognize and honour outstanding achievements of 
individuals and organizations in energy management. The 
awards are titled the Rob Dumont Energy Management Awards 
in honour of the well-known and respected engineer who passed 
away in 2015. 
 
At their dinner in Saskatoon on October 5th, this year’s 
Lifetime Achievement Award went to Professor Robert Besant, 
while the Youth Award went to the grade 8 class from St. Anne 
School. 
 
Robert Besant, a mechanical engineering professor emeritus, 
has had a long and illustrious career at the University of 
Saskatchewan where he started as an instructor in 1960. 
Professor Besant’s research has focused on heat and mass 
transfer and energy conservation in buildings, heat exchangers, 
HVAC [heating, ventilating, and air conditioning] systems, and 
porous materials. His research spans the entire spectrum from 
theoretical to applied research, and he has always demonstrated 
a high degree of innovation. 
 
The 26 students in the grade 8 class from St. Anne elementary 
school also took home an award. The 26 students investigated 
the current usage of energy and water in their household, looked 
at ways to measure energy and water consumption, and planned 
and undertook audits. They then prepared and implemented 
action plans to reduce energy and water consumption in their 
own homes. As a result, over the period of a year it is projected 
there will be a 12 per cent reduction in energy use and a 10 per 
cent reduction in water use. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating Robert Besant 
and the grade 8 class at St. Anne School on these well-deserved 
awards. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 

2016 Lakeland Citizens of the Year 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 
is known all across this country for its strong volunteer base. 
Today I’m delighted to recognize and honour two worthy 
individuals from my constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers. 
They are Gladys and Al Christensen, both of whom were 
recently crowned the Lakeland Citizens of the Year. They share 
an impressive list of accomplishments and are very active in the 
community. 
 
Gladys is on the board of the Christopher Lake Library, was the 
secretary-treasurer for the Anglin Lake Cottage Association. 
She was also one of the founders of the Boreal Browsers, a 
book club which helps collect donations for the local library. 

Al was the reeve for the RM [rural municipality] of Lakeland 
from 2006 to his retirement this year. He’s volunteered with the 
local fire department, served as an auditor for a number of 
years, helped organize a capital campaign to move the 
Christopher Lake Library into a new building, and buy 
furnishings and equipment. Currently Al is co-chairing a group 
to raise funds to renovate the community hall in the village of 
Christopher Lake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the honour of working with Al in his 
capacity as reeve, and I wish him all the best in his retirement. 
 
Would all the members please join me in recognizing Mr. and 
Mrs. Christensen as the 2016 Lakeland Citizens of the Year. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 

Lives Transformed Through Youth for Christ Programs 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to stand 
in the Assembly today and acknowledge another successful 
fundraiser going to support Regina Youth for Christ. I attended 
the Hope Dinner Monday evening. The room was packed with 
800 guests. 
 
This year’s theme was Overcomers, emphasizing how through 
the programs Youth for Christ offers is leading to lives being 
transformed. Some of the programs they offer include: school 
programs impacting an average of 150 youth per week, housing 
for vulnerable youth, serving healthy meals, and their Gymblast 
program, to name a few. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have attended this dinner several times over the 
past few years, and one aspect that each year stands out is when 
the young people share some of their personal testimonies. A 
young woman was featured this year where she shared that, 
prior to getting involved with some of Youth for Christ’s 
programs, all she cared about was how her friends thought 
about her. She shared how as a result of the program she has 
grown in confidence and in her faith. Mr. Speaker, she has 
overcome the insecurity in her life that previously led to some 
poor choices. 
 
It’s amazing to think that when I met Youth for Christ executive 
director James Clifford in 2008 or so, he had a dream. He had a 
prayer that this organization succeed in this city, and it has. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would invite all members of this House to join 
me in congratulating Youth for Christ on another successful 
banquet fundraiser and thank them for the hard work they do in 
our communities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Question period. Oh, one more there. Sorry. I 
recognize the member from Moose Jaw North. 
 

Post-Secondary Institutions Welcome 
Indigenous Students 

 
Mr. Michelson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to recognize the great strides that are being made to 
ensure equal opportunities for First Nations and Métis people 



October 26, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 907 

here in Saskatchewan. Last week, at the Saskatchewan 
Polytechnic campus in Moose Jaw, a new mural was revealed 
that celebrates the institution’s indigenization efforts. 
 
The mural, painted by Calgary artist Anna Krop, marks a 
commitment to the student population that inclusivity will 
always be valued and that all students are welcome. This is 
especially important, Mr. Speaker, since enrolment of 
indigenous students has increased over 30 per cent since 
2011-2012 at Saskatchewan Polytechnic. 
 
Speaking of enrolment increases, the University of Regina 
announced yesterday that it has recorded a record enrolment of 
14,849 students for the 2016 fall semester. The U of R 
[University of Regina] is also proud to report that the number of 
students who self-declare as indigenous is up 16 per cent from 
last year. That equates to nearly 13 per cent of the university’s 
total student body self-identifies as Aboriginal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our learning institutions are doing their part to ensure that 
post-secondary education is accessible to all students, no matter 
who they are. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating Saskatchewan 
Polytechnic on their indigenization mural, and congratulating 
both Saskatchewan Polytechnic and the University of Regina 
for their increases in indigenous students. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Wadena Joins Main Street Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this fall, the 
town of Wadena was accepted into the affiliate level of the 
Main Street Saskatchewan program. This program, offered by 
the Ministry of Parks, Culture and Sport, provides communities 
with training and financial support to help with downtown 
revitalization initiatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, community leaders in Wadena are excited to join 
the Main Street Saskatchewan program in their efforts to 
improve the downtown and to spur increasing economic 
development. This program provides training and learning 
opportunities in areas such as economic restructuring, heritage 
conservation, and community promotion. Main Street 
Saskatchewan also distributes more than $300,000 in matching 
grants to participating communities each year. 
 
Since its launch in 2011, Mr. Speaker, 21 communities have 
participated in this program. All together these communities 
have benefited from 56 business openings, the creation of 158 
new jobs, $6 million worth of investments in building 
rehabilitation and streetscape improvements, and $7.6 million in 
private property investment. 
 
With the help of our government, communities across the 
province are working to ensure that their historic main streets 
once again become the heart and soul of Saskatchewan’s town 
and cities. I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
community of Wadena on becoming an affiliate member of the 
Main Street Saskatchewan program. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transaction 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, let’s hope we finally get 
some answers today with the GTH [Global Transportation Hub] 
land scandal of the Sask Party. To recap, when the final sale 
was on the table, the land speculator, who was poised to make 
millions of dollars and who just happens to support the Sask 
Party, looked at the deal and rejected a condition in it because 
he knew that cabinet had already agreed. The auditor notes that 
right here on page 16 of her report. I quote: 
 

The GTH Minister asked condition be removed after 3rd 
Party C [that’s the seller] questioned condition given 3rd 
Party C’s understanding that Cabinet had previously 
approved the purchase. 

 
There was a condition on the purchase, and the seller demanded 
it be removed because he knew that it had already been 
approved by cabinet. So how did the speculator know about the 
cabinet decision? To the Premier: who leaked this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, if the scenario that the Leader 
of the Opposition has just reported to the House was the fact . . . 
And he did actually quote, well he did actually quote this time 
from the auditor’s report, the same auditor’s report, by the way, 
that found no wrongdoing or fraud by members of the board, 
which include the minister. He leaves that out conveniently. But 
if there were concerns as a result of what he just read, why 
would the same Provincial Auditor be on province-wide media 
on the 4th of July of this year saying there were no red flags? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition’s back on this 
alleged leaked document line of questioning. There was no 
leaked document. The document he’s referring to would’ve 
been minutes from cabinet that highlighted that the government 
had approved up to $105,000 an acre for the agent to negotiate. 
The seller, at a cost of thousands and thousands of dollars when 
you aggregate the number of acres, the seller made the deal for 
$103,000, leaving hundreds of thousands of dollars on the table. 
Mr. Speaker, the logic is not there with respect to the member’s 
questioning. 
 
And if he wants to quote the auditor’s report, will he also 
acknowledge in the House today, finally, that the auditor said in 
the press release accompanying the auditor’s report, her report, 
that she found no wrongdoing, no fraud committed on the part 
of the board of directors of the GTH, which includes the 
minister? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The audit was scathing and it 
exonerated no one. And certainly it found that that government 
spent way too much money on this deal, wasting millions of 
hard-earned taxpayers’ dollars on this deal. So sorry, Mr. 
Premier. We’re going to expect some answers to these basic 
questions. 



908 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2016 

We’re talking about a condition of this sale, like any land 
purchase. There is no reason, no reason for the seller to have 
this, but he did. There was a condition on the purchase and the 
seller demanded that it be removed, and the Sask Party 
acquiesced. To the Premier: how did the speculator know about 
this cabinet decision? Who leaked this information? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — He didn’t know about the cabinet minute. 
The document was not leaked. That is not what is in the 
auditor’s report. The auditor touches on the . . . I mean it’s 
funny because the Leader of the Opposition is out of questions. 
He’s asked this same question now though two different 
question periods. It’s exactly the same question. The answer has 
been provided directly to that member of the House that there 
was no leak. The auditor indicates that there was no leak. 
 
And as to his preamble about who or if anyone was exonerated, 
again will he acknowledge what the auditor included in the 
press release that accompanied her report when she said this, 
and I quote, and I quote, “The audit did not find evidence of 
conflicts of interest, or indications of fraud or wrongdoing by 
the GTH management or Board of Directors.” And that 
included the Minister Responsible for the GTH. He’s shaking 
his head. So he doesn’t agree with the auditor. He doesn’t 
believe the auditor. 
 
Will the member stand in his place and inform members of the 
House whether he . . . I mean we accept the fact that there was 
criticisms the auditor made of government process and have 
acted on them. Will he rise in his place and acknowledge what 
the auditor has said with respect to a lack of evidence on 
conflict of interest or fraud or wrongdoing? Because that’s the 
basis for his line of questioning. Will he stand in his place and 
say, we support the Provincial Auditor? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — It’s really unbelievable that we see a 
Premier day in, day out not be able to answer very basic but 
serious questions for the people of Saskatchewan, actually 
brushing off how serious this deal is and the questions that exist 
and the tens of millions of dollars that have been wasted of 
Saskatchewan people’s money. So we’ll . . . Mind us, Mr. 
Premier, we’re going to keep pressing for some answers. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Back to that information that the seller never should have had. 
And it’s been clear both through investigation and the auditor’s 
report that the seller was aware that cabinet had approved the 
purchase of this land. That seller clearly should have never had 
that information. It’s clearly confidential cabinet information. 
To the Premier: who leaked this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This question 
has been answered over and over again. There was no leak. The 
Provincial Auditor concluded that there was no leak. Logic 
would dictate that there was no leak. The buyer paid less than 

cabinet had approved. Logic would dictate that he would not 
have done that had he known what cabinet had approved. The 
auditor concluded that there was no wrongdoing, that there was 
no fraud, and there was no conflict of interest. We’ve 
acknowledged what’s in the auditor’s report, that we could do 
things better. We’re working on implementing those 
recommendations. What I would challenge the Leader of the 
Opposition to do is state clearly whether he accepts the 
conclusions that the auditor made in her report. Yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The question was to the Premier. No 
answer. The minister is talking about logic. Logic would dictate 
that the Sask Party shouldn’t have wasted millions of taxpayers’ 
dollars, paying three times as much for land. And logic and 
actually basic decency would dictate that there’d be some 
answers provided here in this Assembly. 
 
The speculator dictated and demanded that condition be 
removed, and the minister in charge accepted this and the 
condition was removed. Question to the Premier: why was that 
condition removed? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well we’ve canvassed, we’ve 
canvassed and addressed the question. There was no leak. And I 
think that reasonable folks who are listening on television 
conclude, come to that same conclusion, that there was no leak 
just based on simple logic on what was paid for the property. 
 
In terms of the question I just asked the Leader of the 
Opposition though, the Provincial Auditor made some very 
clear conclusions based on having done some very, very 
extensive work, extensive research, interviews, having 
canvassed all of the documents that cabinet . . . having 
canvassed all of the documents that she wished to canvass, 
provided by the cabinet. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition is getting dangerously close to 
expressing a lack of confidence in the conclusion that the 
auditor came to. I’ll give him an opportunity right now. Does 
the Leader of the Opposition have confidence in the Provincial 
Auditor? Yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — This is utterly ridiculous. You bet we 
have trust in the auditor of Saskatchewan, who put forward a 
scathing report that exonerated no one, and with many, many 
aspects that demand questions being asked and answers that 
aren’t being provided here today. So clearly this information 
compromised taxpayers. The question is simple: who provided 
this information to the seller? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — As we’ve talked about before in the 
Chamber here, Mr. Speaker, the auditor had full authority to 
examine all aspects of the transaction, which she did. Her 



October 26, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 909 

conclusion was that there was no wrongdoing, that there was no 
fraud, and there was no conflict of interest. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition seems to be getting dangerously 
close to the position of questioning whether he has confidence 
in the Provincial Auditor or not. There are serious 
parliamentary repercussions. There are significant . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . The members opposite can talk 
away all they want, Mr. Speaker, but there are serious 
parliamentary repercussions if the Leader of the Opposition is 
questioning the . . . is expressing a lack of confidence in an 
officer of the Assembly. 
 
I’m going to give him the opportunity to state, yes or no, 
whether he has confidence in the Provincial Auditor. Yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Our lack of confidence is in that Premier 
and that Sask Party cabinet who wasted millions of dollars and 
who won’t answer a single question. And the fact that the 
Premier again won’t get to the floor and answer questions, and 
actually dismisses this entire deal that wasted millions of dollars 
and this confidential leak, says an awful lot about his 
government. Actually in fact, I ask him, what does this say, that 
you’ve got to this point about your government, that you’ll 
brush off a deal like this that wasted millions and a confidential 
cabinet leak? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well there was no leak and we’ve gone 
over that, and I would say, Mr. Speaker, this government isn’t 
dismissing anything. This government takes the auditor’s 
recommendations in her report very, very seriously. She made 
10 recommendations in that report. We’ve accepted those 
recommendations. We’re working very hard on implementing 
those recommendations. 
 
The only question in the Assembly right now is whether the 
Leader of the Opposition and the official opposition have 
confidence in the Provincial Auditor. All I’ve heard from the 
Leader of the Opposition is questioning the conclusions of the 
report that the Provincial Auditor made, which said that there 
was no wrongdoing, that there was no fraud, and that there was 
no conflict of interest. Once again, does the Leader of the 
Opposition have confidence in the Provincial Auditor? Yes or 
no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Husky Oil Report 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, everyone in this Assembly 
would agree that the pipelines are the safest way to move oil. 
But when spills do happen, Saskatchewan people should be able 
to expect their government to enforce the rules and hold 
polluters to account. Unfortunately, that’s just too much to ask 
of the Sask Party. They let pipeline companies inspect and 
police themselves. 
 

After the devastating spill in the North Saskatchewan River, the 
government stood back and did and said nothing. To their 
credit, Husky stepped up. Of course, the oil has already spilled, 
so it was more than a little late, but still better than this 
government can muster. And the Sask Party is still taking its 
cues from industry. Husky did not get its incident report done in 
time, so the Sask Party just let the company have an extension. 
Mr. Speaker, don’t they understand that the people of 
Saskatchewan deserve better than this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m not sure where to start in my response to all the false 
information that was provided by the member from Nutana. 
 
First of all, the assertion that pipelines are somehow 
self-regulated in this province and that the government doesn’t 
provide any regulatory oversight is patently false. The Ministry 
of the Economy licenses and regulates transmission lines. We 
ensure the design, construction, testing, operations, 
maintenance, and repairs comply with CSA [Canadian 
Standards Association] specifications. This is the same standard 
that is followed all across the country. And we require and 
enforce regulatory standards on all pipelines. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the information that is still yet 
forthcoming from Husky as a part of the investigation, the 
member is correct. The government has provided for a 30-day 
extension as per the regulations that were passed by the NDP 
[New Democratic Party] cabinet in 2000. Under The Pipelines 
Regulations of 2000, they did provide for the ability to provide 
for an extension in the event that, for instance, metallurgical 
testing has not yet been completed by third parties. That is in 
fact the case in this case, and that was provided . . . This 
information will all be made public once the investigation is 
complete. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, the choices that this government 
makes about priorities and cracking down on the rules says a lot 
about their values. If you’re a school board looking for your 
autonomy to be respected, sorry, on your own. Indigenous 
community with your water under threat? Sorry, on your own. 
You don’t meet the government’s narrow definition of 
homeless and want to stay at the Lighthouse? Sorry, on your 
own. But you’re a big pipeline company that doesn’t get its 
homework done after polluting one of our province’s most 
important waterways? Sure, we’ve got your back. 
 
The Pipelines Act allows for the government to issue a fine of 
up to $50,000 for failing to follow the rules, but this 
government just doesn’t care. Mr. Speaker, they have an 
obligation to uphold the law and protect Saskatchewan’s 
interests. So why have the Sask Party not enforced the law? 
And when will they stop treating Husky with kid gloves and 
say, report in and pay up? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 



910 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2016 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, because the investigation is 
not complete. That is why, Mr. Speaker, that is why. Mr. 
Speaker, as per the regulation 21(2) according to The Pipelines 
Regulations of 2000 — which would mean was passed in the 
year 2000 by the NDP cabinet at the time: 
 

If a metallurgical report or other laboratory studies are 
required to determine the cause of a break, leak or 
malfunction of equipment, an additional period not 
exceeding six months may be granted . . . for the 
submission of a final written report . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, nobody is denying that this was not a significant 
leak in Saskatchewan. It is a significant leak. That is why we’re 
taking it very seriously, Mr. Speaker. That is why we want to 
ensure that the report, the investigation is fulsome, that it is 
thorough, and that we get to the bottom of all the answers that 
we all have — the public and the government have — with 
respect to how this happened. And that’s why we are doing our 
due diligence. Mr. Speaker, that information needs to be 
complete before the investigation can wrap up, and that work 
will be done. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Role of Government in Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party has been 
blaming school boards for the cuts that this government is 
forcing onto teachers and students. Instead of taking 
responsibility for their mismanagement and underfunding, 
they’re looking to shift the blame. 
 
The member from Lloydminster stood in this place and 
irresponsibly and inaccurately blamed school boards. This 
minister walked away from his signature, and here he attacks 
the facts and points fingers at school boards. Mr. Speaker, like 
me, they both served as school board trustees. They were both 
even board Chairs. And now they’re making local autonomy a 
punchline. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the minister announced his plans for 
transformational change, he wouldn’t rule out scrapping elected 
trustees and replacing them with Sask Party government 
appointees. Will he today, Mr. Speaker, rule out eliminating this 
important part of our democracy? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday in the House I 
gave the member the opportunity to stand in her place and 
correct the misinformation that she gave to the Leader-Post the 
day before regarding operating funding. To this point in time, 
that hasn’t happened yet. She has had overnight, so I’d like to 
give her that opportunity as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member now moves on, wanting to talk about 
transformational change. Mr. Speaker, we want to do 
everything we can to keep education affordable and give them 
the best education we can for our students. Mr. Speaker, we are 
entering into consultations with the divisions with no 
preconceived ideas. We will consult with the sector. 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP took a different position. The member 
opposite said . . . [inaudible] . . . the NDP continue to support 
amalgamation without waiting for consultations. In 2004 the 
NDP forced amalgamations by dictating that a panel 
recommend new divisions with no more than 40. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, still no responsibility but has raised 
some more questions. My questions are in defence of the 
autonomy and democratic nature of our school boards. His 
comments undermined and insult both. 
 
Today across this province people will be voting for their 
municipal representatives, including hundreds of school board 
candidates. Mr. Speaker, these leaders in our community have 
put their names on the ballot and have done so because they 
care about our communities. They care about education, and 
they want to strengthen our schools and classrooms. 
 
Will the minister guarantee that everyone taking part in this 
crucial part of our democracy, that his government will not 
replace the democratically elected school trustees with 
government-appointed ones? Will the minister provide that 
assurance today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I indicated earlier that we 
would enter into the consultations with no preconceived ideas. 
We will consult with the sector. We’ll consult with the 
divisions. We’ll consult with STF [Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation]. We’ll consult with SSBA [Saskatchewan School 
Boards Association]. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, with regard to amalgamation, the member 
opposite has already taken a position. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
quote from the Saskatoon StarPhoenix, August 25, 2016 where 
she stated, “she’s not surprised the government is looking at 
amalgamation and she’s fine with the idea where it makes 
sense.” Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not as far down the road as she 
is. I want to hear what the different sector parties have to say 
first. I’m not going to go the road that she does where she 
definitely goes ahead and says, I’m going to do this; I’m going 
to do that. 
 
We’re going to sit down and do a thorough comprehensive job 
of consultation. We’re going to listen to the SSBA. We’re going 
to listen to the sectors and, Mr. Speaker, we’re not going to take 
advice from the members opposite. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Funding for Medical Specialists 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, like in education, in health care, 
the Sask Party is cutting the cash and shifting the blame. Some 
health regions have been forced to cut front-line workers and 
reduce patient services. And, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s cuts 
mean that specialists are being cut too. In fact, the only publicly 
funded audiologist in Prince Albert was recently cut. 



October 26, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 911 

Mr. Speaker, specialists like these were already in high demand 
across this entire province and Prince Albert was no exception. 
There was a time that this government promised Saskatchewan 
people that they would not have to wait to see a specialist. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, cutting these positions will only make the wait 
times worse, not better. So how can the minister justify laying 
off specialists when wait times in the province are already so 
high? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
premise of that question is just simply all wrong. Mr. Speaker, 
we have made health care a priority in this province since we 
were given the privilege of forming government in 2007. We’ve 
increased health spending by over 50 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve reduced wait times. We’ve increased spending in 
long-term care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we trust that our health regions will make the best 
use of very precious funds, Mr. Speaker. That’s important. We 
trust that they’ll make appropriate decisions. There have been 
some decisions made by health regions trying to come in under 
budget, Mr. Speaker. We’ve been assured that those won’t 
affect patient care. Patient care is sort of, is front and foremost 
for this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again, the whole premise of that question is just 
simply wrong. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Specialists and staff are losing their jobs, Mr. 
Speaker, and no surprise we’ve seen a drastic jump in the wait 
times for surgeries. Yes, Mr. Speaker, the other side will be the 
first to tell us that they did make progress on surgical wait 
times. But after all of their scandal and all of their 
mismanagement, we see that progress has stopped and they are 
losing their once-lauded gains. The ex-Health minister said, and 
I quote, “All of this would be for naught if we weren’t able to 
sustain our commitment of three months.” Well it’s looking like 
it will all have been for naught now. 
 
In less than a year and a half, the number of patients waiting 
longer than three months grew by close to 5,000 people. Mr. 
Speaker, that’s an increase of nearly 300 per cent. When will 
this government stop bragging about what they had done and 
acknowledge the damage they are causing and the consequence 
it’s having on real families? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite talks 
about the wait-list for surgeries, and yet under the former 
government, under the NDP, we had the longest wait-lists in the 
country. Mr. Speaker, we went from there to among the shortest 
wait times in the country. Are those wait times still too long? 
They are, Mr. Speaker. We’re continuing to work towards that. 
We’ve been innovative. We’ve done surgeries in private clinics, 
surgeries that those members are opposed to. 

Mr. Speaker, again I mention what I said in the first question, 
that we’ve made health care funding a priority, over 50 per cent 
increase. Included in that increase in health care funding is over 
3,000 more nurses and over 650 more doctors. Many of those 
doctors, Mr. Speaker, are specialists, the very specialists that 
the member opposite is referring to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, do we have more work to do? Absolutely we do. 
Is health care going to continue to be a priority for this 
government? Absolutely it will. We consider the tax dollars to 
be very precious. We’re going to allocate them judiciously, Mr. 
Speaker, and health care will again continue to be a priority. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, the past is in the past, but the 
consequences of this government’s cuts are in the present. Cuts 
to specialists and the growing wait time for surgeries impact 
real people, people like little Emily Summers. Emily is three 
years old. She’s from Spiritwood. And her mother, Jennifer, has 
been fighting to have her properly cared for, for over two years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since April, Emily has been regularly bleeding 
from her ear at night. Often she wakes up in agony. The 
family’s been trying to get help through several government 
agencies and the Saskatoon Health Region. And her MLA has 
been no help. This morning after their story appeared on CTV 
[Canadian Television Network Ltd.] news, the minister pointed 
her toward a website — a website, Mr. Speaker. You can’t 
make this stuff up. 
 
Will the minister finally acknowledge the consequences of their 
cuts in health care? And can Jennifer and Emily expect to get 
more help from this government and their MLA? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I’m aware of this issue and, 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very concerned. I can’t imagine how difficult 
this is for Jennifer and her little girl Emily. Mr. Speaker, the 
member from Rosthern-Shellbrook has been contacted by 
Jennifer, he’s spoken to her. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, 
both he and I spoke to Jennifer this morning. Mr. Speaker, I 
understand from Jennifer that she signed the consent form for 
the members opposite so that we’re free to discuss this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what my office tried to do is to, first of all, to help 
Jennifer be in contact with the appropriate people in the 
Saskatoon Health Region, the surgical care coordinator who 
deals with these sorts of issues. Mr. Speaker, the website that 
the member referred to opposite, what my staff member was 
doing was showing that we’ve introduced as part of the 
Saskatchewan surgical initiative, we’ve introduced pool 
referrals so that people are aware of where the wait-lists are for 
which specialists and potentially can get to the specialist that 
has the shortest wait-list, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Just matters, trying to be innovative to help people get through 
the surgical wait lines as quickly as possible. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re providing information to Jennifer on that. We’ll be 
following up with her. 



912 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2016 

Mr. Speaker, to that, I’ve already indicated on how many more 
resources we’ve put into health care, and I certainly hope the 
member opposite isn’t suggesting in any way that politicians 
should be deciding on who’s in the wait-list, Mr. Speaker. 
Those decisions need to be made by medical experts, by the 
specialists. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Opposition House Leader on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. McCall: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Earlier in 
question period the Minister of Energy and Resources talked 
about how the member from Nutana had used . . . how he 
needed to correct “false information provided by the member 
from Nutana.” Mr. Speaker, that’s against rule 51(f) of this 
House and the minister ought to know better. I call on the 
Speaker to ask that member to withdraw the comment and to 
apologize. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
just wanted to read into the record what rule 51(f) actually says. 
It’s: “make a personal charge or accusation against a Member 
except by way of a substantive motion [or] with notice.” I don’t 
think that the minister was doing that, Mr. Speaker. But I would 
encourage you to review the context of it, review the tapes, and 
report back to the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I was listening closely to the debate, but I will 
refer judgment on this until a later date after I review Hansard. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 40 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016 
Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’interprétation 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I move that Bill 40, The Interpretation Amendment 
Act, 2016 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Attorney General 
that Bill No. 40, The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016 be 
now introduced and read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 41 — The Coroners Amendment Act, 2016 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move that Bill 41, The Coroners Amendment Act, 2016 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Attorney General 
that Bill No. 41, The Coroners Amendment Act, 2016 be now 
introduced and read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 2 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 2 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Crown Corporations’ Fiscal Year 
End Standardization) Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am honoured 
today to stand up and talk about this Bill No. 2, the 
miscellaneous statutes, the Crown corporations’ fiscal year-end 
standardization. This was presented last when we were in 
session in the spring, and by the previous Government Whip at 
that time, who I believe is now the House Leader. 
 
So it’s an honour to be able to sit here and talk about some of 
the proposed amendments with regards to this bill. And when I 
look at it and read through this, it looks like they’re wanting to 
make amendments to a lot of the different Acts with regards to 
the Crown corporations. All Crown corporations have their own 
separate legislation, and obviously because they deal with 
different issues or items. And so one of the things that they’ve 
noticed, that is something that’s not very consistent, is the fact 
that the fiscal year-ends aren’t consistent with regards to the 
different Crown corporation Acts. 



October 26, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 913 

So it looks like some of the Acts that they’re going to propose 
amendment to would be The Crown Corporations Act, 1993, 
The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Act, The Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance Act, 1980, The Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation Act, and The Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications Holding Corporation Act, and The 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation Act. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when we start talking about our Crown 
corporations, my ears perk up because the Crown corporations 
is really important to our province. And they’re Saskatchewan 
owned, and so it’s really important that we ensure that things 
are running smoothly in the Crown corporations. I’m a former 
SaskTel and SaskPower employee, so I’m really proud to say 
that I was a previous Crown employee. 
 
So I think it’s also important that when we’re going to make 
some of these serious changes to these Acts, and I think when 
we’re changing fiscal year-end dates and such, that has a big 
impact on the way they’re going to be managing their budgets. 
So I hope there’s going to be a lot of consulting with 
stakeholders here and discussing with accounting officials who 
know a lot more about that than I might. I don’t have an 
accounting background. So I would hope that they look into 
what kind of issues that might come into effect when they’re 
planning their budgets. 
 
I know when the previous government whip brought this to our 
attention, he said, like this would be particularly helpful for 
government when they’re looking at the earnings that we might 
be expecting from our Crowns and how that might impact our 
provincial budget. And I think that’s a very important point. 
 
But when we’re looking at this, we also want to see what 
impact does it have on our Crowns. And that’s also very 
important because, even though it might be good for us, it might 
not be good for them. But again, like I’m not quite familiar with 
that, so I hope there’s a lot of discussion with those 
stakeholders and discussion in committees with regards to how 
this is going to look like. Because I could see, you know, even 
communicating within agencies, when you’re talking 
budget-wise, like that might be helpful to be on the same 
pattern and on the same system. And again, when we are 
planning our provincial budgets as well, we need to have all the 
information. 
 
And I’m glad that even like when this was presented and they 
talked about our earnings from our Crowns, it was recognized 
how important our Crowns are and the earnings are to our 
provincial budget. And so I hope that continues to be a priority 
with this government. 
 
Again, like I said, they’re going to need to have some 
discussion with the different Crown corporations and other 
possible stakeholders and people who manage their budgets and 
their finances and see how this will, particular changes to the 
bills and amendments will have an impact on them, and take 
that into account when making a final decision. 
 
So I’m sure my colleagues will have a lot more information that 
they’ll want to add to this and provide a little bit more insight 
than what I might have said today, and have some more time to 
review this. So because we want to take more time to review 

this very important bill which is going to have a major impact 
on our Crowns, I am going to move to adjourn this debate. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 2, The Miscellaneous 
Statutes (Crown Corporations’ Fiscal Year End 
Standardization) Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 4 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 4 — The Queen’s 
Bench Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur la 
Cour du Banc de la Reine be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As ever, 
good to join debate, take my place and speak to in this case, Bill 
No. 4, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, there’s . . . Laws dealing with the 
justice system are always particularly interesting, and this one is 
no exception. This bill will make it easier to enforce decisions 
by the dispute resolution panels under free trade agreements. It 
will allow the minister to keep a list of lawyers who can be 
appointed as court-appointed lawyers, regulating their 
compensation, and it updates the process for people applying to 
get a court-appointed lawyer.  
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I guess that we’d need these particular 
amendments is reflective of the changing domestic trade 
arrangements that we have here in Canada and, you know, 
trying to keep up to date with those. But in terms of what trade 
agreements would be applied, that will be set out in the 
regulations. So we await that information, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then in terms of the process and substantive requirements 
for the court’s appointment of a lawyer, those are set out in the 
new part III.1 of The Constitutional Questions Act, 2012. 
Again, Mr. Speaker, fairly straightforward if a bit opaque, as a 
layperson I tend to find some of these matters, and why I rely 
on learned colleagues such as the member from Regina Douglas 
Park to keep me on the straight and narrow as regards to these 
kind of questions. 
 
But certainly there is some consultation that we’ve undertaken 
to see how this applies in the case of things like the New West 
Partnership, the AIT [Agreement on Internal Trade], and 
various other agreements. But we’ll see, Mr. Speaker. There is 
some of that consultation still to be concluded, and I’m certain 
that that consultation will benefit further interventions on the 
part of other of my colleagues on this particular piece of 
legislation. But as it stands right now, Mr. Speaker, that’s about 
it in terms of my observations for The Queen’s Bench 



914 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2016 

Amendment Act, 2016. And with that I would move to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 4, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 4, The Queen’s Bench Amendment 
Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 5 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 5 — The 
Electronic Information and Documents Amendment Act, 2016 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I am 
pleased to rise in the House today to enter into the debate on 
Bill No. 5, An Act to amend The Electronic Information and 
Documents Act, 2000. 
 
As indicated, the original bill was passed in 2000. And this was 
right around the time that the land title system in Saskatchewan 
was undergoing a massive transformation from a paper-based 
system to an electronic title-based system. And at that time I 
was heavily involved in real estate transactions for the 
Government of Canada and the department of, at the time, 
Indian Affairs and Northern Development, and we were 
working very closely with the provincial government and First 
Nations to implement the treaty land entitlement framework 
agreement. 
 
At that time there were . . . This transition from a paper-based 
title system to an electronic-based system was considerable. It 
was a gargantuan effort on the part of the officials that were 
working on it at the time. And certainly considerable monies 
were expended to make this system work, and I think it was an 
excellent system. And as I was working with the officials on the 
transformation from the paper title to the electronic-based 
system, we worked through a number of issues through that 
affected, in my case in particular, Crown land transactions — a 
lot of mineral titles were affected, a lot of surface titles, a lot of 
Crown land — where the previous registry didn’t deal with 
those lands because they were abstract, and then they became 
titled through the new system as abstracts. So it was the way the 
new system was set up, and quite frankly we were behind three 
years in some of our registrations because of some of the bumps 
that we encountered along the way. 
 
One of the big issues that really affected people using the new 
electronic system was the problem they had filing mortgages 
that were paper mortgages. And in those days, many of the 
mortgages were hundreds of pages long. There was a 
standard-form mortgage that many banks used that were many, 
many, many pages long, and the actual tombstone information 
that was relevant to that particular mortgage for that piece of 
land was very short. 

So I was part of a client team that Information Services 
Corporation engaged to make recommendations on improving 
the system. This was about in 2003, so the system was now up 
and running, but there was a continuous effort to improve the 
system and make it work better. And one of the things that our 
team heard loud and clear from some of the clients who were 
working with banks and mortgage institutions is that there had 
to be a way to file these documents in a timely fashion, and 
without using the paper system. It was proving to be difficult. 
So one of the things ISC [Information Services Corporation of 
Saskatchewan] did at the time was they arranged for an ability 
to convert those many-page mortgages into a PDF [portable 
document format] file which then could be submitted 
electronically into the system. And that was something I 
thought ISC was very responsive to. 
 
I guess I could move forward now to 2016, and what has 
happened since then is that real estate and credit union 
communities, banking communities, have asked that the Act be 
amended, this particular Act be amended, which predated the 
improvements made in the Information Services Corporation 
system back 10 or 12 years ago. So they’re just asking that this 
Act be amended because the exemption for these types of 
documents was created prior to the ability of the electronic 
registry to process them in a proper way. 
 
So I think in many ways this is just a bit of catch-up so that 
these types of mortgage agreements in the electronic registry 
process, they’ve been dealt with through the ISC process. So 
the protections that were afforded in the 2000 bill regarding 
electronic information and documents, these were exemptions 
for certain documents not to be exempted. And one of the very 
important ones, of course, is wills, trusts created by wills, 
powers of attorney and health care directives. So those are still 
exempted and they must be, they are exempted from the Act 
itself. 
 
So the only thing it’s doing here is removing that requirement 
for documents that create or transfer interests in land and that 
require registration to be effective against third parties. And in 
most cases this would be a mortgage or a third party interest 
filed against a property. So basically I think it’s just catching up 
with what the ISC is already providing in terms of protection 
for those interests. 
 
I do miss some of the things that were available in the previous 
land titles system, on the paper system, because you could 
actually search those documents. They were required to be 
filed. And now it’s a little bit tougher to actually go back and 
see how these third party interests were registered or actually 
have a look at them. It’s much more difficult now because all 
you have to do is inform the title holder that you have an 
interest. You don’t actually have to file it. But that’s a 
completely different issue than the one that’s being looked at in 
this bill. 
 
There’s some other minor changes here in relation to the 
definition of, using the word “ministry” instead of 
“department.” So those are housekeeping changes. But I think, 
as far as it goes, Mr. Speaker, the change here is fairly 
insignificant inasmuch as it’s been already dealt with through 
the Information Services Corporation provisions. And so this is 
just I think a bit of catching up as requested by the realtors and 



October 26, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 915 

the credit unions and the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. 
 
So in that sense I don’t think there’s much more to be said, and 
I would move that we now adjourn debate on Bill No. 5, The 
Electronic Information and Documents Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 
adjourned debate on Bill No. 5, The Electronic Information and 
Documents Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 6 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 6 — The Statute 
Law Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. Good tone 
there. Good to be recognized. Bill No. 6, An Act to amend the 
Statute Law, it’s got certain vitality to it. I like it. I like it. I’m 
not just joking around here. Well maybe a little. But An Act to 
amend the Statute Law, well, Mr. Speaker, it, in a word, tends 
to get a little miscellaneous. And again the updating of 
nomenclature is, you know, a never-ending pursuit on the part 
of those hard-working legal drafting folks out there in the 
Ministry of Justice and then scattered through the various of the 
departments, to use the current nomenclature. I caught myself 
from using the word “ministry,” that being an earlier public 
policy initiative on the part of this government. 
 
But Bill No. 6 and its cousin Bill No. 7, which I’ll certainly get 
to, Mr. Speaker, are largely about housekeeping and updating 
the nomenclature. So for an example, various of the clauses 
consist of striking out “department” and substituting “ministry.” 
Rolling through other subsections of the legislation and 
touching upon the . . . The Agricultural Leaseholds Act is 
amended by striking out “provincial magistrate” and 
substituting “judge.” 

 
You know, you get the picture, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had a look 
at this and it seems to be housekeeping top to bottom. Some of 
it’s kind of interesting, you know, substitutional being gone 
over for substituted, or “ex parte application, make an order for 
substitutional” struck out and provided a substitution, 
“application without notice, make an order for substituted.” 
You get the picture, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we’ll be pondering this one for some time to come, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m sure. It could be an early candidate for heading off 
to committee to provide the kind of, you know, in-depth 
scrutiny that the committee affords. But for the time being, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 6, An Act to 
amend the Statute Law. 
 
The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 6, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 
2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 7 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 7 — The Statute 
Law Amendment Act, 2016 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2016 modifiant 
le droit législatif be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thanks as ever, Mr. Speaker. Again, good to 
join debate on Bill No. 7, An Act to amend the Statute Law 
(No. 2). You know, sometimes there’s just not enough room in 
a given law, and you’ve got to come along with the sequel or 
the cousin or however you want to state it. But again, this one, 
you know, has a lot of the same sort of characteristics of the 
previous one, though in a much shorter format and also 
bilingual, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But you know, the sections dealing with The Enforcement of 
Maintenance Orders Act and, you know, realigning what should 
be struck out and what should be substituted, trading 
“substitutional” with “substituted,” and then doing it all again in 
French, Mr. Speaker, that is the business of Bill No. 7. And as 
such, Mr. Speaker, this one would require a bit more 
consideration. We don’t want to disappoint the member from 
Cannington. We want to keep him coming back. 
 
[14:45] 
 
I can’t say precisely when, but I know it’s going to be soon, this 
bill is going to head off to committee and get the thoroughgoing 
treatment that it deserves there, Mr. Speaker. So for the 
meantime, we’re going to keep our powder a little while longer 
and move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 7, An Act to amend the 
Statute Law (No. 2). Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 7, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 
2016 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 8 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 8 — The Summary 
Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured 
today to be able to stand here and talk about Bill No. 8, The 
Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act. And this was 
presented by the Minister of Justice. There’s been a lot of bills 



916 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2016 

that have been reviewed in that department, which . . . I would 
think that they probably have a lot of Acts to review there as 
well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when I was reviewing this bill, it looks like 
. . . And I’ll quote what the Minister of Justice said here: “This 
Act deals with the procedures for charging people with 
provincial offences and offences against municipal bylaws.” 
 
So that’s really important that we look at different ways to deal 
with the procedures. And I found it really interesting when they 
talked about the municipal bylaws and the provincial offences 
and how they may be correlated. And I’m not quite sure exactly 
in what ways that might be and which exact municipal bylaws 
that they might be talking about. I know in different 
municipalities there’s a variety of different bylaws. 
 
So I’m not quite sure exactly what this particular Act would be 
talking about with regards to amendment, but I’m sure there’s 
people that can be talked to with regards to stakeholders. And 
our critic here for Justice is very well educated in all of these 
different Acts and so I’m sure that she will be able to provide 
more insight with regards to that when it comes up to 
committee. And she’ll definitely make her connections with 
stakeholders to discuss what might need to be done and dealt 
with. 
 
And also when the Minister of Justice presented this, he talked 
about enforcement of fines, you know. And so apparently, since 
there’s been those automated speed enforcement photo lasers 
that are placed in different areas like in Regina, Saskatoon, and 
Moose Jaw, that increased the number of speeding violation 
fines that the courts now have to deal with. And so of course 
they had to look at ways that they can manage that. 
 
And I know the court system in general is really busy and 
there’s incredible wait times to deal with very serious cases. So 
in different areas, if you can manage some traffic violations that 
might not be on the spectrum of, as serious as some other 
violations, I think that’s really important that they look into 
being able to manage those so they’re not eating up the court 
time, and the precious time of the judges and the lawyers can be 
used to deal with the very serious issues that are happening and 
need to be addressed. 
 
So it’s again like one of the questions I had was it said that the 
automated speed enforcement photo laser project was a 
two-year pilot. And I’m kind of thinking if they’re wanting to 
make some changes to the Act, is this going to look like 
something that might be more in a permanent form? 
 
So I haven’t heard much information on if this is the direction 
that we’re planning on going. I haven’t heard also . . . Like I 
know there was some little glitches that were happening with 
regards to that, and I don’t know if they’ve been worked 
through yet or not. But when we rely on technology, sometimes 
there might be those glitches. 
 
And I know our police officers can’t be everywhere, and they 
can’t address all the issues, you know. And so having some of 
these types of projects are a good idea, especially if they’re 
working well. 
 

Also you want to make sure that this isn’t reducing people’s 
positions, this isn’t going to cause job losses. And I can’t 
imagine that because I know our police forces are busy dealing 
with, like I said before, with our court system with very serious 
issues in our communities. 
 
And not to say speeding isn’t a serious . . . Speeding can 
definitely become a serious situation and serious issue. So if 
people know that there’s big brother looking after you, like 
there might be a camera that’ll catch you, that might prevent 
them from driving those extreme speeds, you know. 
 
And so this definitely is something that’s being placed because 
they want to reduce the court volumes and improve court 
efficiency, so that’s very important. And I’m glad that we’re 
looking at different ways to change the system because, you 
know, sometimes if we could just change one aspect, it’ll 
improve the system for all areas. 
 
And it sounds like if you were wanting to go on a payment plan 
to deal with your fines with your speeding ticket because, you 
know, sometimes you just don’t have that cash on hand to be 
able to pay that, so I guess you needed to contact the courts and 
make an appointment to go in front of a judge and ask them if 
you could make these payment plans. Well I know like, for a lot 
of people (1) that’s very intimidating to go to court, stand in 
front of a judge, and ask for a payment plan; (2) a lot of people, 
they need to take time off work in order to go and do this and so 
they can’t afford to do that, take that time off, or get child care 
or whatever they need to do to attend. 
 
And it sounds like if you were wanting to go on a payment plan 
to deal with your fines with your speeding ticket because, you 
know, sometimes you just don’t have that cash on hand to be 
able to pay that, so I guess you needed to contact the courts and 
make an appointment to go in front of a judge and ask them if 
you could make these payment plans. Well I know, like, for a 
lot of people (1) that’s very intimidating to go to court, stand in 
front of a judge, and ask for a payment plan; (2) a lot of people, 
they need to take time off work in order to go and do this and so 
they can’t afford to do that, take that time off, or get child care 
or whatever they need to do to attend. And so it’s really 
important that we provide different options. 
 
And if it’s just a matter of phoning the courthouse and saying, 
look I’ve got this ticket. I know I’m guilty but I can’t afford the 
full amount right now; can we work out a payment plan? And 
having administration work through that with you, I think that’s 
a great idea. I think the more that we can simplify issues for 
people who are willing to admit, yes, I did something wrong, 
I’m willing to pay for this, then that’s really important that we 
allow them to have that process. 
 
One of the other things I hope is addressed in committees and 
maybe discussed with stakeholders is, do we have that immense 
support to be able to provide that? If in fact we are getting these 
increases of tickets and fines and we’re going to go this 
direction, do we have administration that’s able to pick up that 
workload? Because when the courts are busy, we know 
administration’s also busy because they’re the ones that are 
filing everything and working through all these processes and 
making sure that the judges and everybody has the proper 
information that they need. So we also have to look at, is this 



October 26, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 917 

going to be something that the courts are going to be able to 
handle, manage? And is it going to need to have more staffing 
involved? And I’m sure these are all going to be questions 
that’ll be discussed in committee and in the way that can be 
done. 
 
There was also some . . . like about having a possibility that 
they’re wanting to make some changes so that you can easily 
change some of the format. So possibly if a person wants to 
make an early payment, maybe they could have a reduced fine, 
you know, and that could encourage people to pay right up 
front, you know. And I know like sometimes when I get a bill, 
and I see oh, it’s not due for two weeks, I throw it on the end 
table. And then sometimes I forget about it and all of a sudden 
it’s late. But if I got a bill when it says: if you pay by this day, 
you’re paying this much; if you pay by this day, you’re paying 
that much; you can believe me I’m going to pay the first date 
because I don’t want to pay more. And so that might be a good 
option as well is having people who admit that they’ve done 
something wrong, and they’re able to own up to it and provide 
the financial payments that they need to do. 
 
There’s also some changes to this Act that it’ll be easier to 
transfer information for people that live a distance away. And 
so if you’re living in a rural community and such and you need 
to have your court date there and the court papers didn’t get to 
the people that needed them, like that they could be transferred 
easier. So it’s good to have a lot of these different options. I’m 
glad that the Minister of Justice has obviously been doing a lot 
of work with his portfolio and providing a lot of these different 
amendments to Acts. It’s really good that we’re looking at 
different options so we can make some of these important 
changes, and like I said, I am sure my colleague, the critic of 
Justice, will be able to handle this with great ease when it 
comes to committee and that my other colleagues will have a lot 
more to add to discussion of this bill. So with that I’m going to 
move to adjourn this debate. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has moved to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 8, The Summary Offences Procedure 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 9 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 9 — The 
Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 
2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’exécution des jugements 
canadiens be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — And I thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I am pleased to rise and enter into the debate on this 
bill, coming from the Ministry of Justice once again. They’ve 
been busy there cleaning up a few things. And what’s happened 
here is the Uniform Law Conference of Canada has requested 

that we get a little more clarity and certainty in our . . . This is a 
bill that ensures reciprocal enforcement of Canadian judgments 
so if you get a judgment in one province you are able to take it 
to another province. 
 
According to the Uniform Law Conference, although the 
Supreme Court has ruled that tax judgments are part of a 
Canadian judgment, the Uniform Law Conference has 
recommended that provinces take the extra step and make it 
absolutely clear that tax judgments are in fact included in the 
definition of judgment. So that’s what this bill does. It basically 
adds a definition of tax judgment into the definition of 
Canadian judgment, and that’s by adding a new clause in 
section 2 under the definition of Canadian judgment and then a 
separate definition specifically addressing what a Canadian tax 
judgment would be. 
 
The other important feature of this Act is that it makes it 
retroactive, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so that it’s very clear that all 
tax judgments in effect in Canada today that are already issued 
or that are to come will be included under this bill which 
requires the enforcement. 
 
The minister made a note in his comments that he was glad that 
Saskatchewan was taking a lead on this. And I’m just 
wondering, you know, if he’s happy that Saskatchewan is 
taking a lead there, I would encourage him to think about 
Saskatchewan also following suit from other provinces when 
they talk about donations to political campaigns, Mr. Speaker. 
And as you may know, in our convention last weekend we 
actually passed a resolution saying that democracy requires that 
there be equal access for all parties in terms of campaign 
donations. And currently there’s a lot of inequity in that realm 
so maybe the Minister of Justice might want to take that into 
account as well and see that other jurisdictions are indeed doing 
that already. And it would take courage for this government to 
do that, but I certainly encourage them to consider that as well. 
 
So in terms of the other substantive portions of this bill, I think 
that pretty much sums it. It’s just to make sure that, absolutely 
clear . . . And I guess another case where this government did 
do that was in the terms of the definition of gender in the 
Saskatchewan human rights Act. And again this minister took a 
proactive stance, upon the recommendation of our human rights 
critic, my colleague from Saskatoon Centre, and he actually 
made a proactive move to make sure that the definition is 
absolutely clear by adding transsexual individuals into that 
definition. And so this is another example of just making it 
absolutely clear. And I think that upon the recommendation of 
the Uniform Law Conference, there’s an important thing to do. 
 
[15:00] 
 
So at this point I would say I have nothing further to add to the 
debate, and I would move that we adjourn the debate on Bill 
No. 9, The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment 
Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’exécution des 
jugements canadiens. Merci. [Translation: Thank you.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Nutana has moved 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 9, The Enforcement of Canadian 
Judgments Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 



918 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2016 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 10 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cox that Bill No. 10 — The Forest 
Resources Management Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is a 
pleasure to rise today and enter into the debate on Bill No. 10, 
An Act to amend The Forest Resources Management Act. And I 
have to say, it’s with great interest when I was preparing for this 
and I was looking at the minister’s comments, and how 
thorough, how thorough he was. You know, it’s been a long 
time since I’ve seen the minister’s remarks longer than the bill 
itself. The bill is actually only a couple of pages long but maybe 
2 or 300 words. And I think he took maybe a couple of 
thousand to explain it which is helpful in many ways. And I 
know this is a very technical bill, and he certainly set out the 
parameters for that discussion. And when we get into 
committee clearly he’s expecting a lot of questions and he 
wanted to take some anticipatory action to be prepared for that. 
But it is good. 
 
But I do . . . But the one thing that I did think was missing from 
the minister’s comments was how the state of affairs are in the 
forest resource management world here in Saskatchewan. 
Usually the minister’s set out a bit of the state of the . . . an 
environmental scan. So how are things going in the forestry 
world? And the minister was pretty mum on that topic, you 
know, because we know we’ve had some difficult times. 
 
And in fact we had a member from Prince Albert promise that 
the jobs and Weyerhaeuser would all be back and that the P.A. 
[Prince Albert] pulp mill would be up and running. And of 
course it is yet to be the case. We don’t know what’s happening 
there. And it would’ve been of interest, I think, to the people of 
Saskatchewan for a bit of an update of this, and instead he is 
quiet on that. And we all, you know, no matter how well we do 
in the province, we all are concerned that all cylinders are 
firing, you know, not just oil, not just potash. We want to see 
farming firing on all cylinders. We want to see agriculture, 
farming firing on all cylinders. We also want to see forestry and 
all the related economic activity that is part of that management 
working together. 
 
And I just want to say that two speeches that have been given 
by my two colleagues and from two different perspectives: my 
colleague from Saskatoon Nutana who has experienced a lot of 
forest resource management as a former tree planter . . . I never 
had that experience, but she’s certainly brought a lot of 
experience and talked about the after-effects of what happens 
when a lot has been cleared and the timber’s been taken out. 
And I also want to thank my member from Athabasca, talking 
about the impacts of forestry. And he particularly lives that 
first-hand, being from the North. I know sometimes he doesn’t 
have a lot of opinions on certain bills, like the one that I’ll be 

speaking to later on horned cattle. He did give some history of 
horned cattle up in Cumberland, but this is an area that he 
speaks with a lot of knowledge in terms of the state of affairs of 
forestry, particularly when it comes to trappers. And he talked 
about the impact it has when trappers haven’t been involved in 
consultations and they’re not aware and they come back after 
summer and the area where their traplines would be or their 
cabins would be have all been cleared, and the impact of that 
because somebody else had the forest management agreement. 
 
And so this is an important piece of legislation, and I think we 
need to take a look at it carefully. The minister has highlighted 
some of the areas where people have approached him and 
approached the ministry. He does talk about streamlining 
processes for industry, which enhances the government’s ability 
to ensure that forests are sustainably managed and our 
environment remains protected. 
 
And we saw the dangerous line that happens when you cross 
. . . As my colleagues say, we don’t want to overregulate and 
stifle economic activity, but we do want to make sure that the 
environmental standards ensure sustainability of our forests are 
maintained and people and companies, corporations, are held 
accountable. That’s part of the deal. That’s part of the deal 
when they pay their fees. 
 
And we saw it today where the Minister of Resources couldn’t 
really answer, couldn’t give a good answer about the 30-day 
extension around the pipeline spill that we had here on the 
North Saskatchewan and how that can’t be business as usual. 
They need to have those reports. They need to have that done as 
quickly as possible. 
 
The self-regulating approach only works if they come to the 
table fully willing to be on top of their game, and not saying, 
ah, you know, we need more time and don’t push us; we’ll be 
there. And of course it looks pretty mighty inviting from our 
side, from the government’s side to say, you know, it’s less cost 
for us. It’s cost borne by the business sector. But I think it’s 
important that we have our oar on the water when it comes to 
making sure that there’s a way of maintaining some eyes on the 
management and that that happens as best as can be. 
 
So we have to watch those code words like streamlining 
processes. What does that really, really mean? And is it cutting 
corners for both business and for government? That’s our role. 
That’s the government’s role, to make sure environmental 
standards are there for our forests, you know. When we’re 
down south like this we don’t often think about the forests. And 
you know, we often assume we’re talking about the North, but 
we could be talking about the forests in Cypress Hills, around 
Moose Mountain, that type of thing. Forests, they’re throughout 
the province, largely in the North. But we have to be on top of 
our game. 
 
He talked a little bit about the long-standing issue of abandoned 
forest roads and trails. And he mentions that they could both 
pose public safety and environmental risks. And so whether 
they’ve had consultations about that, that would be interesting. 
It is really interesting to know what the government plans are 
on this. 
 
It is a dangerous thing to go too far down this road when 



October 26, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 919 

these . . . If it’s snowmobiling or cross-country skiing or 
quadding, if the roads aren’t built with the intention, with the 
purpose in mind, sometimes it seems to be an easy fix to say, 
let’s use an old road. But you don’t know. And as my colleague 
mentioned, the cut-outs there, if the signages have been 
removed or the rains from the summer have really washed away 
some of the cut-outs so they’re even more dangerous, it’s hard 
to maintain these. And so this is a very important question that 
the minister has put forward, and one that I think when we are 
in committee that we’ll be interested in hearing because public 
safety is huge, huge, huge. 
 
And of course some of the . . . The definition of a legacy road is 
interesting. Is a legacy road one that has been there from 
decades and has stood the test of time, or was it one that was 
just put in last year for only one year? Is that a legacy road? 
 
And I can think of especially tree planters who have had roads 
put in for them that have been only there for one season, but 
everybody knew that they were actually going to be very 
dangerous roads. Come any heavy rain or anything, they could 
be washed out. And lives have been lost on these roads. And so 
when you have people quadding, snowmobiling, or 
cross-country skiing, any of those things could be huge, huge 
issues of safety. So this is a big, big, big deal. 
 
Now it is interesting that the minister has taken a look at one of 
the auditor’s reports and their findings was that the forest 
management fee needs to be sufficient to cover the actual cost 
of reforesting the harvested area, which can vary depending on 
the site. And he mentions that “the current fee rates as 
established in the regulations are not appropriate in all 
circumstances, making the proposed amendment necessary.” 
 
Now that’s a curious statement because regulations aren’t 
necessarily amended in here. I don’t think they’re made, they’re 
not made here. So what is the relationship between the 
amendment and the regulation? And as I said, it’s a small bill; 
it’s a short bill. So I’m not sure what he’s hoping to accomplish 
out of that, so that’s very important. 
 
He also talks about “The obligation to reforest harvested areas 
is established in two types of licences: the 20-year forest 
management agreement and the five-year area-based term 
supply licences.” And how some of these forest management 
agreements, especially the five-year ones, haven’t been dealt 
with in the appropriate way, where people have been renewing 
them and not coming up with the long-term plans and so that 
has to be dealt with in a head-on way. So that’s very, very 
important. 
 
Again I’ll go back to the road agreements, talking about 
culverts and bridges associated with abandoned accesses. 
They’re in various states of disrepair, and who can be expected 
to maintain them after a certain particular time? And you know, 
the ecological impact, and they pose a safety risk, it’s really, 
really important to acknowledge. 
 
And the other one, I think this is very important: “In addition, 
the unreclaimed access does not provide a productive 
environment for the re-establishment of forestries and are a 
major concern in the preparation of a woodland caribou 
recovery plan for Saskatchewan.” And this is very, very 

significant, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we’re glad to see that this 
is part of the consideration that they’re bringing forward. Well 
the bill doesn’t specifically address this. They’re doing this in 
anticipation of some work that needs to be done very much, in a 
major way. So again we’ll be hearing more about this. 
 
But again, is this being left up to the holders of the agreements? 
And if nothing is done, is that recovery plan for the woodland 
caribou, is it put on hold? What’s happening there? And so this 
is very important, that we have this work before us. It goes on 
and talks about, “Forest management plans are long-term 
strategic plans that establish management objectives for the 
large forestry . . . areas.” So this has to be kept up, especially 
when he talks about the second renewal of an area-based term 
supply. We’re wanting to make sure we don’t allow situations 
where people can get around the obligation to make sure they 
have good solid plans. These solid plans are significant. They’re 
significant in costs, significant in work, significant in 
consultations, and as I said earlier, whether it’s with the 
trappers, whether it’s with the local people, but particularly with 
the First Nations and the Métis people. 
 
Again my colleague from Athabasca talked about the 
significant rulings that have been established in the Supreme 
Court about the ability to hunt and gather, and how this plays 
out. And this is very, very important that on one hand we are 
saying yes, we recognize that right, but on the other hand we’re 
totally taking away that ability to do that because of the forest 
management agreement. So really it’s very, very important. 
 
And so it’s interesting to say how this all will play out, and 
again as I said, it was very interesting that the minister really 
gave quite a thorough going-over in terms of the legislation, and 
again kind of unusual that we would have that. We’ve had the 
whole gamut of ministers being very short in their comments 
and we say, you’ve got to give much more. 
 
[15:15] 
 
This one, this time I thought that there was a good balance and 
a good leadoff to the committee meetings that we’ll have in a 
while about The Forest Resources Management Act. It will give 
us lots of food for discussion, for questions on that. So with that 
though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that . . . And it does talk 
about establishing the authority of the minister to prohibit a 
person from obtaining a licence for a period up to three years 
for offences including failure to comply with the Act, and 
establishes authority for a judge to prohibit a person from 
obtaining a licence for a period up to five years. So it toughens 
up the penalties as well. 
 
So with that, I know that we’ve got lots of work to cover today. 
As I said, I would be curious to know how forestry is doing in 
our province. As I said, it’s important that all our economic 
engines, our cylinders are all firing, and that they’re doing well. 
And sometimes it’s tricky to have them all firing in the right 
rhythm, but when they do, this province really is doing very, 
very well and that’s for everyone in the province. So this is an 
important piece of legislation to make sure that those who are 
connected with the forests can do well, can do their job and the 
economic activity that they would get out of the forest is there 
and not over-encumbered but that there is a balance in terms of 
environmental sustainability and regulations that anybody 



920 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2016 

should be able to expect. 
 
So with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would move that we 
adjourn Bill No. 10, An Act to amend The Forest Resources 
Management Act. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 10, The Forest 
Resources Management Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 11 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cox that Bill No. 11 — The Forestry 
Professions Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And again 
a pleasure to enter into Bill No. 11, An Act to amend The 
Forestry Professions Act. And it does follow in some way along 
with The Forest Resources Management Act, again a very short 
piece of legislation. This one is just five sections, and not much 
. . . In fact I remember, I think we’ve had this come before us a 
few times and I guess the question I would have is, what 
happened to it last time? Did it actually . . . We passed it, but 
did it come into force? Why are we here back again? 
 
And again we have a minister who, you know, gave quite a 
lengthy speech about this bill, and so I don’t know if he dusted 
off the old one — not that we ever do that in this House, dust 
off old speeches and bring them forward. I think every word is 
original and new, a new idea every half-hour here. But I 
digress, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I do appreciate that they’ve done a lot of good work, the 
Canadian Institute of Forestry, about bringing forward their 
ideas about how to be recognized as a professional organization 
with the ability to act as a self-regulating organization. And so 
in terms of this, the amendment enhances accountability, 
enabling the application of financial penalties who unlawfully 
engage in the professional practice of forestry. The change is 
required to further enhance the accountability that’s built into 
the legislation, and it goes on and on. 
 
And it’s interesting because I’m not . . . I mean this’ll be a very 
interesting discussion in committee because I’m just not . . . 
The minister’s reading an awful lot into this Act that only does 
two things in section 40 and 41: 
 

Section 40 is amended in the portion preceding clause (a) 
by striking out “section 23” and substituting “section 23 or 
23.01”. 

 
And: 
 

Section 41 is amended in the portion preceding clause (a) 

by striking out “section 23” and substituting “section 23 or 
23.01”. 

 
So I think he’s reading an awful lot into those two lines. I’m not 
sure if that’s the case, but I just think that again it’s . . . I 
appreciate the former minister of Environment’s enthusiasm for 
his work, but this was a pretty minor amendment. So on our 
part we’ll have more questions about it. Is it really . . . The 
length of speech here that he gave, it seems to be pretty 
significant. Now maybe I’m missing something and I’ll just 
have to check my notes here. I’m just not seeing the impact of 
those amendments and substitutions. But it is good. 
 
Now it will be interesting to know . . . We know that sometimes 
bills that make it through the House aren’t put into force, so 
we’ll be interested to see if that was the case with this, but I’m 
not sure. 
 
So I know many people have a lot to say about some of the 
other bills that are coming up before. And with this one, as I 
said, that has such little meat to it, I don’t know if you can call 
some of the forestry . . . put it that way. But anyway, with that, I 
think Bill No. 11, An Act to amend The Forestry Professions 
Act, I would move that we adjourn debate on that today. Thank 
you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 11, The Forestry 
Professions Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 12 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 12 — The Public 
Health (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I do rise 
today to enter debate on Bill No. 12, An Act to amend The 
Public Health Act. I note when the minister rose, I guess this 
was back in May, that he noted some of the objectives with 
regard to the proposal of this bill, Mr. Speaker. One of the first 
areas that this bill addresses is some changes to definition. 
Specifically the term “clinic nurse” is introduced, and that nurse 
by definition, is one who’s supervised by a physician or is 
approved by the minister and provides testing, screening, 
counselling, diagnosis or treatment for category II 
communicable diseases, and includes other persons designated 
by the minister or the nurse. 
 
When the minister was speaking to this back in May, Mr. 
Speaker, he noted that this legislation is intended to improve 
public access to public health inspection information as well as 
to bring some of this legislation in line with what happens in 
other provinces, Mr. Speaker. One of the things that I note and 



October 26, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 921 

had noted last evening when we were speaking to bills was 
sometimes in their comments the ministers will stand up and 
note the amount of consultation that they have undertaken prior 
to drafting the bill. Of course changing the classification to 
clinic nurse or adding that classification has impacts for those 
working within those professions. So I don’t see direct note of it 
to the consultation, but it is noted that this definition brings that 
definition in line with the bylaws of the SRNA [Saskatchewan 
Registered Nurses’ Association], and certainly that type of 
consultation and input from those so impacted is certainly very 
important. 
 
It adds new reporting duties for nurse practitioners when 
treating patients with category II communicable diseases. And 
of course, Mr. Speaker, it’s very important that we have good 
numbers and early reporting so that people can have access to 
the appropriate treatment. It’s also very important that we have 
strong numbers in terms of those who are living with 
communicable diseases so that we can track them. 
 
Certainly in this province right now we have a very serious 
issue with the rates of HIV [human immunodeficiency virus]. 
And it’s important that we have a clear picture of what those 
numbers are so that we might start to meaningfully address that 
very real public health concern and stem a problem that really 
has reached epidemic proportions in the province. I know it’s 
not only garnered attention provincially and nationally, but 
internationally. And when we have good numbers in terms of 
the number of people who are dealing with that or other 
communicable diseases, I think that gives us part of the 
information that we need. But then from there we need to really 
set about the work of formulating procedures and strategies to 
start bringing those numbers down, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I think certainly the reporting as is anticipated in this bill is 
very important. The other piece, hopefully we will hear 
something from the members opposite in the near future about 
what meaningful steps they are taking to address this very real 
health crisis. 
 
And of course there are other issues of communicable diseases 
that arise from time to time. I know the Planned Parenthood 
group in Regina had a campaign a number of years back 
drawing attention to the high rates of STIs [sexually transmitted 
infection]. 
 
So agreed, Mr. Speaker, that it is important to have numbers 
and have a clear idea of exactly the types of public health risks 
and numbers that we have out there. But also it’s very important 
to have plans to deal with that when we realize by those 
numbers that we have a problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m just going to go back to the minister’s 
statements on the day that he spoke to this legislation, and that 
is the public reporting of public health inspections. I understand 
that currently there is a computerized system, and I think that 
perhaps many of us here have looked at that system when 
making a decision about a restaurant or a place that we would 
want to visit. 
 
Currently that legislation extends only to restaurants. What I 
understand is anticipated by this bill is increasing the scope of 
those establishments that are inspected by public health 

inspectors and making that information public. Some of the 
examples that have been brought forward, and I suppose we 
could think of others, would be public swimming pools for 
example, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And certainly, you know, having that information does seem 
like a good idea to ensure that all of the regulations are being 
followed, that people can make good decisions about the 
establishments that they want to frequent. But also when 
problems do arise, it’s important that those running those 
facilities have the ability to address them in a meaningful way 
and have the resources that they would need in order to properly 
be able to address those so that we have not only safe 
restaurants, Mr. Speaker, but safe recreational facilities and 
other facilities that are inspected by public health inspectors. 
 
I suspect there are others on this side of the Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, that do have some expertise, I know some of my 
colleagues have some expertise in health. Any time that we are 
dealing with matters that are meant to address and improve 
public health, I think it’s important and is deserving of our time 
and attention and, as I noted before, that we ensure that we have 
the proper amount of consultation with those bodies that are 
impacted and also that we from there put forth solutions to 
some of the issues that are reported and uncovered through this 
type of legislation and this increased level of reporting. 
 
[15:30] 
 
So I’m thinking that while I may have exhausted my comments 
on Bill No. 12, The Public Health (Miscellaneous) Amendment 
Act, some of my colleagues may not have. So to allow them 
some time to enter into the debate later, I will with that move to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 12. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 12, The Public Health 
(Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 13 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 13 — The Cancer 
Agency Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure and honour to rise and bring my remarks in line with 
the rest of my colleagues who have been speaking to this bill, to 
talk about Bill No. 13, An Act to amend The Cancer Agency 
Act. 
 
I noted that the former minister of Health, when tabling this 
legislation, mentioned that the number of new cancer cases 
diagnosed in Saskatchewan is projected to increase 54 per cent 
by 2036. That’s quite an alarming number, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 



922 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2016 

I don’t think anyone in the House hasn’t been touched directly 
or personally by cancer, whether it’s through their family or 
their loved ones. And you know what kind of devastation and 
pain — physically, emotionally, and mentally — that goes 
through. I know I can speak to that personally, as I’m sure I’m 
not alone in that as well to watching a loved one die from 
cancer and how difficult that is. So I’m happy to see that the 
government is saying that they’re committed to funding the 
cancer agency, as the former Health minister said in his 
remarks. I hope that that’s the case, especially if the percentage 
of cancer cases in Saskatchewan are going to rise in the way 
that he said they had. Nobody wants to see that happen; I’d like 
to see those cancer numbers go down, frankly. 
 
In any event, moving towards the bill, it appears that the bill is 
largely making some changes to the wording of the Act; for 
example, it seems like the term “cancer control” has now been 
considered the worldwide appropriate term in this particular 
field. And I know my colleague, the Health critic, will probably 
have more to say about this and probably knows this a little bit 
better than me frankly. I just recently became the associate 
critic of Health, so I’m not going to lie, I’m still learning the 
ropes a little bit. And I’m going to defer more of the intelligent, 
I’d say, remarks on this bill to my colleague, the Health critic. 
 
In any event, it looks like the Act is going to make some 
changes to the wording to make it more in line with what in 
terms of the world definition, I suppose, is. And it’s sad to say 
that this is a worldwide epidemic essentially, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. This isn’t something that is unique to Saskatchewan or 
Canada frankly. Cancer rates, I believe, are on the rise 
throughout the world, and the fact that a worldwide definition is 
needed is quite sad frankly. It’s pretty tragic. It looks like 
they’re again making lots of changes in terms of sections to 
reflect that term to better coordinate our legislation with the 
worldwide standard definition which does make sense. 
 
It also looks like there’s a proposal to include palliation services 
to the Act to encompass the larger role that’s happening and 
their work in ensuring and providing palliative care services for 
cancer patients. It’s often, it’s quite tragic, but that often is 
unfortunately the result of a cancer diagnosis. So a lot of times a 
rehabilitation course will end up leading to a palliative course. 
And again, it seems like all of these changes are the reflection 
of the sad reality that we have in terms of cancer in the 
province. And it’s really a shame. 
 
I think a lot of these bills we’re seeing this session have to do 
with definition changes. Not all of them are frankly as sad, I’d 
say, as these. They’re usually fairly non-consequential and 
minor, and maybe we’re updating wording that hasn’t been 
updated in terms of modernizing. But this one seems to be a 
little bit more reflective of a tragic, tragic situation and the 
tragic reality that we have around cancer in the province. 
 
Another change that they’re proposing to do is to remove 
section 10(4) of The Cancer Agency Act and the use of section 
29(6) of The Regional Health Services Act to ensure 
consistency with the legislative authority given to the regional 
health authorities and clarity for the SCA [Saskatchewan 
Cancer Agency], which is short for something, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but I can’t quite find what the acronym is for. So 
hopefully the good folks at Hansard will be able to get it and fill 

in the blanks for me, as they’re so well equipped and apt to do. 
So it looks like they’re trying to ensure consistency with the 
legislative authority given to the regional health authorities and 
the applicable legislation regarding its administrative authority 
And it’s really good to see the recognition and respect for 
regional health authorities and the good work they do, similar to 
how school boards operate. 
 
However it’s difficult, and we say this time and time again, for 
these local authorities to do their job and do their job in a way 
that they want to do it when their funding comes directly from 
the government, Mr. Speaker. So oftentimes we’re talking about 
issues that are happening in schools or in health regions, and 
it’s not often a slag on the school boards or health regions. It’s a 
criticism of what we’re hearing from the school boards and the 
health regions directly of the chronic underfunding that’s 
happening with the health regions. So we’re happy to see that 
some autonomy is being done, but there’s always the concern of 
making sure that these organizations that have no other way of 
obtaining funding other than through government are receiving 
the adequate funding that they need to be providing the best 
service that they can for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I know that there are other colleagues of mine who are 
going to want to join in on this debate, so with that I would like 
to move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 13, An Act to amend The 
Cancer Agency Act. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina Douglas 
Park has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 13, The Cancer 
Agency Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 14 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 14 — The 
Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Okay, here we go. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker, and I appreciate the opportunity to enter into Bill No. 
14, The Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 2016. 
 
The other day we were talking about great speeches on this 
topic, and I remember the colleague from across the way. Of 
course a great speech the other day here. I don’t want to say . . . 
You know, brevity is often the soul of wit, but she did a 
fantastic job. But I remember, I think back in 2002 when the 
member from across the way gave a much lengthier exposé of 
horned cattle and the dilemmas that are faced by that industry 
on that. 
 
And it was very interesting to read the minister’s remarks. It’s 
funny; today I’m getting up and all the speeches given by the 
ministers are so lengthy, and these bills are actually so short, 



October 26, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 923 

you know. And so this one is just simply repealing The Horned 
Cattle Purchases Amendment Act, and that’s basically how you 
are winding this up. 
 
And it’s interesting. I do appreciate the Minister of 
Agriculture’s history, you know, and this is why these speeches 
are so important, especially the minister’s speeches, because it 
does give a good history of what caused the . . . why it came 
about that we would have such legislation and why now are we 
looking at repealing it and winding it all up. 
 
And I think that he gives a pretty thorough discussion, both 
historically in terms of how in 1940 this was a big deal . . . well 
it actually came into force in July 1939. There were more than 
40,000 cattle that were penalized, representing 19 per cent of 
cattle marketed that year. It’s almost 20 per cent. One in five 
cattle had horns, and they were penalized at a dollar a head. But 
now it’s gone quite a ways the other way. Actually, ironically, 
it’s 1.9 per cent of the cattle, two out of a hundred will have 
horns. But about the same amount of money that they get, about 
30 to 35,000 revenue, which is not very much at all. 
 
And this is where it’s so important, you know, in terms of 
making sure that there’s proper accounting and no chance of 
fraud. And it probably takes two or three people to manage that 
money. But if you’re looking at a salary of 40, 50, $60,000 per 
person, it could be costing a lot more than $35,000 to manage 
that. It could be costing upwards to 200,000 to manage a 
program where you’re only generating $35,000. So clearly 
there’s some issues there. 
 
So he goes through the whole thing and he does talk about 
Alberta and Manitoba have repealed this similar legislation 
several years ago, and British Columbia will be the only other 
province with horned cattle legislation. And who knows how 
long that will last. 
 
So it’s a very interesting discussion that the minister brings 
forward. You know, my agriculture background really comes 
from our own family which, really we were, the business we 
were in was growing wheat. And now our family farm is 110 
years old and it’s found out by Mortlach. So we have a rich 
history, but we don’t have a history of dealing with horned 
cattle. Ironically my brother who is the farmer is now dealing 
more with bison, because of a cousin who kind of just foisted 
that on the family enterprise. Yes we’ve learned how to build 
good fences, but that’s another story for another time. 
 
But I do want to give a shout-out to the stock growers. You 
know, back I think it was in June, the stock growers had a 
presentation at the Centre of the Arts here and they brought in 
Temple Grandin. And many of us were here, I think from both 
sides of the House heard the presentation. And Temple Grandin 
is well known; she’s a professor at the University of Oklahoma 
I believe, and she specializes on treatment of cattle, particularly 
as they’re being prepared for slaughter. 
 
If you ever get to see the movie, I would really highly 
recommend people watching the film, because it really shows 
how this is a person with autism who has a special gift of 
understanding pain and anxiety and stress that others have. And 
it’s done so much in the cattle industry, particularly in the 
slaughterhouses, to understand what cattle are going through 

and how the process of killing animals, slaughtering animals, 
can be . . . The stress of that to the animals themselves can be 
reduced, and therefore a better quality of meat. 
 
And while, you know, it’s interesting that this woman could do 
such a fantastic job, and she wasn’t taken seriously for many, 
many years because, first for her gender and because of her 
autism. But she stuck with it and she certainly had some 
innovative ideas that really changed the process of 
slaughterhouses. And it was tough at first because this industry 
. . . Stock growers often are a tough lot to get through if you’re 
not part of them. But they did hear, and I have to give a 
shout-out to the stock growers for bringing her in. 
 
She talked more, a bit about animals and cruelty to animals, but 
also about autism. But it was interesting to see how she made 
such a great contribution to the livestock industry, but also to 
just humanity, and we certainly have to look at people and say 
that we all bring gifts to the table. And she did a fantastic job 
that night. It was a very good, very good presentation. 
 
[15:45] 
 
So with that though, my contributions to the discussion about 
The Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 2016, Bill No. 14, 
won’t be long. I don’t have much to add but I look forward to 
the committee discussion on that. I do want to say that I 
appreciated the minister’s comments and we have no reason at 
this point . . . But I do suspect others may want to get into the 
debate so I will adjourn debate on Bill No. 14, The Horned 
Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 2016. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 14, The Horned Cattle 
Purchases Repeal Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 15 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 15 — The 
Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
rise today to enter into the debate on Bill No. 15, The 
Provincial Court Amendment Act. Of course The Provincial 
Court Amendment Act establishes powers, duties, and 
procedures for the operation of provincial courts in 
Saskatchewan. I think any time that we’re dealing with matters 
related to our court system, we should pay particular attention 
and recognize that, as has been said previously, this is often 
people’s first contact with the court system, is our Provincial 
Court system. And we should be looking at how it’s being run 
and updating legislation from time to time, Mr. Speaker. 
 



924 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2016 

Part of the Act, as it stands now, sets out the process for review 
of Provincial Court judges who are the subject of complaints, 
and that their conduct be reviewed by Judicial Council. The 
Judicial Council at this time is comprised of representatives 
from all levels of the judiciary in Saskatchewan, as well as 
members of the bar, and government appointees under the 
chairmanship of the Chief Justice of the province. So, Mr. 
Speaker, this is dealing with some complaints at a fairly high 
level, and it’s important that we give a thorough look at this 
type of legislation and the proposed amendments. 
 
What’s proposed, Mr. Speaker, as the minister noted in his 
comments at the end of May of this year, is that this bill 
contemplates amending the Act to provide Judicial Council 
with greater flexibility in the conduct of their reviews of 
allegations of judicial misconduct, and remedies that would be 
imposed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Of course it’s important that we look at this very closely, as I’ve 
noted, when we’re bringing, members of the public are bringing 
complaints forward against those, of misconduct. I think of 
judicial misconduct in this case, Mr. Speaker. It’s very 
important that we ensure that that is a thorough process. 
 
I understand that one of the amendments proposed is the ability 
— I’m just going to look back into the notes here, Mr. Speaker 
— allows Judicial Council to dismiss frivolous or vexatious 
complaints against the judge. And certainly there’s a balance 
here to be struck between ensuring that those complaints that 
are brought forward are given due consideration and are taken 
very seriously. But also I can understand, and I’m sure 
members on this side, the want of a mechanism to ensure that 
those complaints are not made in a malicious, or as has been 
known as frivolous or vexatious complaints. 
 
So I think that that bears some really serious attention, perhaps 
from members on this side or others within the legal community 
who could provide better counsel than perhaps I can on this 
matter but . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . My colleague states 
that it’s hard to be a lawyer and have everyone coming to you 
for that type of oversight and advice. But we are very lucky . . . 
I’m lucky to be surrounded by all of my colleagues, but the 
lawyers included on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s also another fairly significant change, I 
would think, in allowing Judicial Council to have one member 
respond to a particular complaint rather than having the whole 
council respond to a complaint. And again, Mr. Speaker, I think 
that it’s important, when anticipating this type of change, that 
we’re sure that we get the balance right between ensuring that 
those complaints that come forward from citizens are taken 
seriously and given their due course. And so I’m sure that 
others will have more to say and to look into around that 
particular proposed amendment. 
 
This bill also . . . I suppose one of the words that came up a 
number of times yesterday was around streamlining. I’m not 
sure if that’s the intent here, but it proposes taking the power to 
create a list of temporary judges from cabinet and gives it to the 
Minister of Justice, again reduces the scope of people that have 
authority over creating that list. And I have to admit, Mr. 
Speaker, that I would have to again look to my colleagues for 
information about that temporary list of judges and what exactly 

it is that, how you get on that list and what their duties are. But 
I’m sure they will have something to say about that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This bill also proposes adding a new 64.2 that would provide 
that the court is not to appoint a lawyer to represent an 
individual unless the proposed notice requirements to be 
contained in part III of The Constitutional Questions Acts, 2012 
have been met. Again, Mr. Speaker, I might have to admit that 
I’m not intimately familiar with The Constitutional Questions 
Act of 2012, but it does talk about the power to appoint a lawyer 
and that that wouldn’t be allowed unless those requirements 
have been met, Mr. Speaker. And it also does note that that 
requirement in cases of children, appointed counsel for child 
protection matters, that would be aside. That would be 
governed, those requirements wouldn’t be necessary when 
contemplating the child protection matters. 
 
Of course, this changes the rules for court-appointed lawyers by 
introducing some new restrictions. And I would think that my 
colleagues might have some further questions and comments 
about that, that they could add to round out the debate and the 
comments on this bill. 
 
I think that it’s very likely . . . This, you know, looks, as has 
been mentioned by colleagues previously who have spoken to 
this bill, that it is of course a legal document about a legal 
process, so it’s quite detailed and perhaps isn’t something that 
some members, and I will include myself, are overly familiar 
with looking at. But again, just that oversight in making sure we 
have the right eyes on the legislation is why my colleagues and 
others will have an opportunity to enter into this debate at a 
later time. But I think at this point I’ve exhausted my questions 
and comments about Bill No. 15, so with that will move to 
adjourn debate on The Provincial Court Amendment Act of 
2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 15, The Provincial Court 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 16 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 16 — The 
Adoption Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur 
l’adoption be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to enter into debate on Bill No. 16, An Act to amend The 
Adoption Act, 1998. And it is a fairly lengthy and thorough 
piece of legislation, one that is always important that we do 
consider doing the right thing when we are thinking about 
making laws and rules around adoption. 
 



October 26, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 925 

And it is very important to see that some of the pieces that are 
brought forward include the parts from the United Nations 
talking about the immigration, the Convention on the Protection 
of Children and Co-operation in Respect of Intercountry 
Adoption. And these international agreements are very, very 
important and also federally. When we see . . . And it’s 
important that we do, you know, reach out internationally to 
support those in those countries who are facing dire situations. 
And I’m thinking just recently of the situation with Haiti with 
the hurricane there and just the dire situations. But we have to 
make sure that we do the appropriate things and of course that 
we look at what are the proper conventions that have been 
established internationally. And I’m glad to see that this is 
something that we’re bringing forward. 
 
Of course there’s many parts to this and the minister does go 
into a lot of detail. Some of it is language, removing the old 
archaic term of “Crown ward” to “permanent ward,” that type 
of thing. That’s some of the changes there. 
 
But I do want to say that we’ve seen over the years the growing 
challenges that individuals have and families have. And 
whether it’s adoption within communities or within families 
going across the country or going internationally, this is a very 
important piece of legislation. And how we care for our infants 
and our young people is so critically important, and that we 
make sure we consider the knowledge and the experience 
culturally, but also of those in the professional fields who can 
speak to the ability of children to participate in adoption is very, 
very important. 
 
So this will be one that I know will have a lot of discussion in 
committee. And of course we want to make sure there are no 
unintended consequences because once we lock some things in, 
that’s the way we do things. And it’s very important that we 
make sure we get it right the very first time. And of course this 
is an Act that is amending a piece of legislation that’s about 18 
years old, and so it’s one that’s been solid for many years but 
probably has run its course. 
 
Now it’s interesting, it would be very interesting to know who’s 
been consulted on this and who’s been . . . What are the signals, 
what are the cues that the Ministry of Social Services are using 
to bring these forward? Clearly, as I said, it looks like they’ve 
been using and following the international laws and the federal 
laws, and so that’s very, very important. But what about local 
groups and the First Nations, FSIN [Federation of Sovereign 
Indigenous Nations]? Have they been consulted on this? And 
have the various grand councils, have they been consulted? 
 
So we’ll have those questions in committee. It’s very, very 
important that we make sure we get this one, we get this right 
and so that we’re not coming back again to amend certain 
things. So I just want to make sure that we take a look and 
review some of the things that the minister has said. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Now curiously, and I’ve talked about this, this is an 
opportunity, when we have pieces of legislation come forward, 
that it’s often appreciated if the ministries can provide a bit of 
an environmental scan. So what is the state of affairs in terms of 
the topic at hand in Saskatchewan? So how are things going in 

the world of adoption? I’d be curious to know. I’m not sure I’d 
know how many kids are being adopted every year. 
 
She does mention that an average of 35 children aged seven and 
older are adopted each year, but that doesn’t mention how many 
children younger than that are being adopted. How many are 
being adopted internationally? How many are being brought 
back to Saskatchewan? All of these would be things that I think 
would be of interest to the people at home who follow these 
issues. And again, who were some of the folks who were being 
consulted? That’s very, very important. 
 
She does talk about section 27.1, and that’s what I was referring 
to earlier in terms of the requirements are now: 
 

. . . now be the same for children being adopted by 
Saskatchewan residents no matter if the child’s country of 
origin is a signatory of the Hague Convention or not. The 
Hague Convention on . . . children and co-operation in 
respect of intercountry adoption, known as the convention, 
safeguards the rights of children and birth parents, and is 
intended to reduce incidents of child trafficking or 
unlawful financial gain. 

 
So it’s very, very important because we want to make sure we 
prevent parents with all the best intentions from falling, 
participating in these schemes unknowingly and then becoming 
liable. That’s a huge, huge concern and it’s very, very important 
that we follow that up because, as the minister rightfully notes, 
Canada is a signatory to the convention and we take this very, 
very seriously. So that’s an important part. 
 
And it talks about transition plans and of course the one thing 
that we are looking for is what’s going to happen with child and 
family services. There are pieces of legislation that still are 
outstanding, and one deals with The Child and Family Services 
Act that we anticipate will be coming forward pretty soon. It’s 
been in review for many years actually, I think about eight 
years. It was one of the first pieces of legislation this 
government took on to review. 
 
This will be the third minister that’s been involved with the 
review, and so we look forward to seeing that piece of 
legislation. So this is part of that. And it’s very important that, 
as I said, they all fit together because we’re talking about young 
people, young children, infants, the most vulnerable in our 
society, and we want to make sure we get it right. So I think 
that in many ways one of the things it does, it allows the 
minister to enter into payment agreements directly with a youth 
between the ages of 18 and 21 if they’re engaged in an 
educational or vocational plan. That’s very important. 
 
It restricts the court’s ability to hear or take into consideration 
the child’s voice in court to age seven and up. And that’s why 
we’re told it was 35 kids who were adopted in Saskatchewan 
last year. And that is different, and so we’ll be watching. It’ll be 
a good question in committee to have a discussion on the record 
about why that is the way it is now. But again I hope this is 
because of good, sound research on behalf of the ministry, that 
they’re doing the right thing. 
 
Again, this is one though that I think that it would be very 
important to make sure we’ve had good sound consultation 



926 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2016 

throughout the province on this part because this is not just a 
simple matter. And I think there could be, there needs to be 
some discussion about this for sure. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know that there’ll be many others who will 
want to get up and speak on this piece of legislation. As I said, 
it’s a very important piece of legislation. It’s very thorough. 
Some of it’s housekeeping as we renew and correct the 
language. As I said, they’re removing the word “Crown” and 
making more appropriate that it’s permanent. It’s bilingual. It’s 
straightforward. 
 
You know, one of the issues that we’ve had, that I’ve had in my 
office is around assisted adoption, where we know that children 
with needs, unique needs, educational or learning needs, the 
commitment has been made by the government to help assist in 
that adoption and how important that commitment remains 
solid. We’re going to be watching to make sure that continues 
to be. But with that, my comments are pretty limited on Bill No. 
16, An Act to amend The Adoption Act, 1998. So I would move 
that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 16. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 16, The Adoption 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 17 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 17 — The Power 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise again to enter into the debate on Bill No. 17, An 
Act to amend The Power Corporation Act. And really this does 
two things. I mean it’s interesting. It does a lot of housekeeping 
updates which is really pretty straightforward, to changing the 
pronouns to his, to his and her, or he and she, or she, and 
removing unnecessary plurals from persons to person only. 
 
But the big, big, big change is the allowing SaskPower 
borrowing limit to be increased to 10 billion from 8 billion. And 
that requires a legislative change. You know, and it’s interesting 
because we’ve talked about some of the things about why a 
piece of legislation like that should come forward, why I think 
that is significant. That’s a significant amount of money, $2 
billion in borrowing. And I think the minister really needs to be 
able to make the case, what is happening to SaskPower that 
they need to increase their borrowing limit to $10 billion. I 
mean that’s a 20 per cent increase. 
 
And you know, the reality at the end of the day is that it will be 
the people of Saskatchewan, through their power rates, that will 
be paying for that extra borrowing. So we want to make sure 

that it is for the right reasons, and that in fact it’s a sustainable, 
reasonable financial move and it’s the right thing at this time. 
Now we, interestingly we’ve just gone through a big discussion 
about the carbon fee or carbon tax, how you put it. But you 
know, the point being that we have been, we should’ve been 
doing so much more further along. And here we are now, the 
eleventh hour, and we have this Bill No. 17 right after an 
election. It would’ve been interesting if this bill had been put 
forward before the election and people could’ve made a choice 
about what they saw for the future for SaskPower. 
 
Now the minister does talk about, in his comments, about what 
the future of SaskPower will be and what they plan on doing. 
And they’re planning on doing this because of . . . And it is a 
good thing that our population is growing, so there is an 
increased need for power. But how do you get to having enough 
power for the people of Saskatchewan and for the businesses in 
the corporate sector? They talk about 60,000 new customers, 
and so the production will have to increase by some nearly 800 
megawatts, or has increased by some nearly 800 megawatts 
since 2007. And they’re going to have to add some 2000 more 
megawatts. 
 
And so we have seen them make a commitment to moving to 50 
per cent renewable capacity by 2030 by including 1600 
megawatts of new wind power capacity to reduce emissions by 
over 40 per cent below 2005 levels. But the challenge before us 
is we’ve heard this before. We’ve heard this before from this 
government on this side, particularly when it comes to 
commitments around the green technology fund, some of the 
commitments that were made by the minister at the time about 
how she was going to make these things happen. 
 
And so forgive me if I think that people are a little cynical when 
they believe what this government is really going to do with this 
increased borrowing, particularly after we’ve just had Bill No. 2 
that increased the fiscal year from 12 months to 15 months, 
recently increasing the ability of the Crowns to put even more 
money out as dividends. 
 
So this seems to be a small bill. There is a lot behind it. And 
there will be a lot of people watching this, watching this at 
home because they’re concerned about what’s the impact of 
their power bills going up yet again in this province and why 
couldn’t we have managed this a little bit better because, you 
know, we knew the population was going up. And it’s a good 
thing and it’s important to be prepared for that. 
 
And we’ve known for quite a while about the issue around 
climate change and how can we be prepared for that. And it’s 
only this bill that’s come forward recently that I think has 
caused people to really sit back and say, we need to keep an eye 
on this. We need to keep a very close eye on this, and what does 
this mean for the everyday taxpayer of Saskatchewan? 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to move adjournment on 
Bill No. 17, An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act. I do 
so move adjournment. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 17, The Power 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 



October 26, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 927 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 19 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 19 — The Film 
and Video Classification Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour to be 
able to stand here today and talk about Bill No. 19, The Film 
and Video Classification Act. 
 
This was presented by the Attorney General in the spring 
session. So when he presented this, he talked about some of the 
reasons why he was wanting to have this bill. This bill actually 
repeals the previous bill, The Film and Video Classification Act, 
and so this replaces that because they’re changing quite a bit of 
the way, the structure of how we work with the film and video 
industry in Saskatchewan. So it’s hard when you’re comparing 
the two bills because you’ve got the older bill and then you’ve 
got this new one here. 
 
And so basically the one big thing that is the difference between 
the two bills is that the previous bill, they had a Film 
Classification Board. And so you had a chairperson and some 
people on this board. Whereas now with this new Act, they’re 
wanting to have a film classification director. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, like I don’t understand why they’re moving that 
direction because if you look at the new Act here, it says that 
they’re going to have — let’s see here — the director, but then 
they’re also going to have assistant directors. So I’m just going 
to pull that up here. So the minister will appoint a director of 
the film classification, and they will appoint one or more deputy 
directors for the film classification. 
 
And I don’t see exactly how this is different from the board. 
The board consisted of a chairperson designated by the 
Lieutenant Governor — so I guess one’s appointed by the 
minister; one’s appointed by the Lieutenant Governor — and 
not less than two other board members. So this one, they’ll be 
having one or two . . . one or more deputy directors. So they’ll 
be changing from the concept of a board to directors. 
 
And I don’t know exactly . . . Like, I know a lot of this stuff 
will be discussed when it goes into committees. But is there 
some kind of pay structure with regards to this? Because when I 
look at the duties for the director, there’s quite a few duties that 
the director is responsible for, has quite a bit of responsibilities. 
And so I’m wondering if we’re changing the terminology from 
board to director, is that going to increase the budget with 
regards to this for this organization? I’m not sure. Again, I’m 
sure these are going to be questions that will be talked about in 
committee and discussed, and what kind of impacts this will 
have. 
 
[16:15] 
 
But when I look at some of the responsibilities of the director, 

the director will approve or disapprove films in Saskatchewan. 
They’ll remove any portion of films that receive disapproval. 
So the director themselves, seems like they have a lot of 
authority with regards to the film and video industry within 
Saskatchewan. And so I hope that someone is holding that 
person accountable. Because when you have a board, that 
presents some accountability there, and not one person can 
make all the decisions. 
 
And so I hope this is discussed within committee. on who is the 
director going to report to? Are they going to be reporting 
directly to the minister? To the minister’s office? And who is 
going to be monitoring exactly what this director is going to be 
doing because one person might have one perspective and the 
other, like there might be different ideas. And that’s the concept 
of a board, is to gather the different perspectives and ideas so 
that we can have a variety. Like we don’t want to limit our 
aspects with regards to what kind of videos or film is allowed in 
the province. 
 
And so also the director has full responsibility on classifying a 
video. So I’m sure there must be a prescribed classification with 
regards to how you determine what videos are at what level, but 
the director themselves will have that responsibility. And so 
who do they consult with when they have some issues? I guess 
if you have the deputy ministers, maybe them. But does that 
give them the full authority to make whatever decision that they 
want to make? So I have some concerns with regards to that, 
and I’m sure the critic with regards to this issue will talk about 
this in committee and to have that opportunity to talk to the 
ministry about how they plan on handling that. 
 
Also with regards to the power to regulate advertising and 
display, in this new legislation it says that the director will be 
able to approve, restrict, or prohibit any types of advertising. So 
this person will have a lot of control with regards to the film 
and video industry. So whereas it looks like in the previous Act 
that a lot of the decisions were made by the board; it looks like, 
the way it’s written up, that there has to be consensus with the 
board. Whereas in the new Act, it seems like all the decisions 
are being made by the director. 
 
So again, there’ll be some questions with regards to 
accountability, and who will be reporting to that because I’m 
sure the minister’s office has their hands full with a lot of 
ministerial duties. I’m sure I’ll be aware of that in 2020 when 
we win the next election. But right now I don’t know exactly 
what workload they have, but I’m sure this will put some strain 
on that. So it would be good to ask those questions. 
 
Also it looks like the film and video industry within 
Saskatchewan has also been attacked by this government 
because they eliminated the tax credit that they were providing 
for that. And they provide tax credits for a lot of other agencies 
and corporations, so it’s not that that’s not on the table, but this 
one they really destroyed the film industry in Saskatchewan, 
and it’s not as thriving as it used to be. 
 
And so I hope they reconsider this and the director that they 
consider in this new Act will look at maybe proposing that as an 
option so that we can have this because we can’t put all of our 
eggs in one basket when we’re talking about industries in our 
province. We’ve got to make sure that we look at even the arts 



928 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2016 

industry, you know, and how we make sure that thrives.  
 
We had some really great successful TV shows within our 
province that utilized this tax credit. We have some very 
talented individuals in our province that have now had to look 
for work in other provinces unfortunately, but hopefully we can 
work on that together and get that thriving again in this 
province. So also . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Looks like I 
caused a little bit of a ruffle and there’s a little bit of dispute 
going on.  
 
But I’m going to quote from Hansard here what exactly the 
Attorney General said when he brought forward this legislation. 
So he talked about the updates with regards from the 2006 
legislation to this new one that he’s presenting here: “That 
legislation was passed to enable a classification of video games 
and consequent restriction on access to video games by 
underage children and teens.” 
 
And I have to agree that it’s really important that we have 
classifications for film and video. It helps as a parent to 
determine whether the video or the movie might be appropriate 
for their viewing. Like if you haven’t watched something, or I 
know I never played video games so I don’t know what the 
different video games are all about, but when my son played I 
could look at a game and say, oh you’re not playing this one 
because you’re not old enough. It’s not classified for your age. 
 
So that’s a really important aspect that we continue to do, but I 
often wondered, like how is this being monitored and enforced 
when people are renting games or videos or buying them from 
the stores? Oftentimes the people who are working in those 
agencies are underage as well and young people. They might 
not restrict younger people from purchasing or renting those 
videos or games. And so it would be nice to see how that could 
be monitored a little bit more.  
 
But again, like I said, it does really help when people are 
deciding what’s going to be an appropriate video or movie for 
me to go and watch with my children or for us to participate in. 
So that helps provide that level. So that’s a really important 
factor and, like I said, with this new Act, that director’s going to 
be responsible for classifying all of those, whereas previous it 
was a decision from the board. So they had more of a 
consensus. So something that I would think might be, you 
know, 14-PG [parental guidance], someone else might think is 
16-PG. So it’s nice to have more dialogue with regards to how 
that’s going to work. 
 
Also I really hope that they take some time in committee to go 
through this because, like I said, our film and our video industry 
in Saskatchewan is very important. And we need to make sure 
that this Act, you know, represents that and everybody looks 
through this with a fine-tooth comb, like how is this going to 
impact possible . . . Is this going to be an increase in the budget 
with regards to this? How is the accountability going to be with 
regards to this? And how are we going to ensure that this is 
going to help thrive our film industry in our province? 
 
So I know our critic will do well with discussing this in 
committee, and I think our colleagues might have a little bit 
more to add to this with their experience. And so with that, I’m 
going to move to adjourn this debate. 

The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 19, The Film and 
Video Classification Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
members to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 26 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 26 — The Patient 
Choice Medical Imaging Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure and 
honour to rise today to add my thoughts to the debate 
surrounding Bill No. 26, The Patient Choice Medical Imaging 
Act. 
 
Now before I get into some concerns that we have with respect 
to this bill and what the bill is trying to do, I did want to 
mention that the Act that this bill will be repealing, which is the 
government’s MRI facilities licensing Act . . . And I noticed 
that it was assented to fairly recently. It was November 19th, 
2015. So I wanted to give a shout-out, because I feel like they 
don’t get enough respect and recognition, for the hard-working 
legislative drafters, the hard-working Ministry of Justice 
lawyers who toil — dare I say, slave — over these legislations 
only to have them be repealed less than a year later. 
 
So I see that it’s a fairly lengthy piece of legislation, and I just 
wanted to give a shout-out to whoever had to draft this 
legislation. You put in some good work, but this government 
wants to repeal it with a new Act. So I just wanted to take some 
time because I don’t think that they often get mentioned, and I 
know that they are toiling pretty hard in the backrooms over 
there. 
 
So this bill is going to allow patients to pay for an MRI 
[magnetic resonance imaging] or CT [computerized 
tomography] scan out of pocket and the clinic will need to 
provide a second scan to the public waiting list at no cost to the 
taxpayer. Now the Act that this bill is repealing provided a 
similar measure for MRIs. This bill adds CT scans to that. But 
not only does it add CT scans, but it also states that it will also 
include other services. It says that medical imaging services is 
defined within the bill as MRIs, CT scans, and any other 
prescribed services. 
 
So do you know what that means, Mr. Speaker? That means 
that without getting any licence from the public to further 
privatize areas of our health care system, like they did perhaps 
maybe with MRIs, they can go into the regulations — without 
providing for any notice to the public, without allowing for us 
to have any type of dialogue in the House — to further privatize 
our health care services. And that’s quite alarming, Mr. 
Speaker. But it’s pretty common for this government to do this 
sort of piecemeal privatization and say one thing but then do 
another when it comes to privatization. 



October 26, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 929 

We saw that with Information Services Corporation several 
years back. Mr. Speaker, I hear from lawyers often that have 
concerns and complaints with respect to how that whole thing 
played out. We saw that with SaskTel. They said that they 
weren’t going to privatize it. Now they say that, you know, no 
deal is off the table, so to speak. And they’re doing that with 
our health care system. It’s a typical conservative tactic, Mr. 
Speaker, where you will starve an important public system and 
then argue that the only solution is to privatize. And that’s 
what’s happening here. 
 
And I’m particularly concerned about how this bill allows for 
any type of other prescribed service being included in this 
without us being able to know what the other prescribed service 
is, without us able to have a discussion as to what that’s going 
to look like in the regulations. And knowing that regulations 
can be changed — frankly, far more easily than an actual Act 
can — I’m quite concerned about what that means for scrutiny 
and the ability for us to not only advocate on behalf of the 
people of Saskatchewan, but for the people of Saskatchewan to 
be able to have a say as to what’s going on in their health care 
system. 
 
Now this government tabled some legislation today in terms of 
making some changes to The Interpretation Act, and I’m talking 
about this because I think the theme around this Act is very 
similar to what they have done in The Interpretation Act. 
They’ve changed or they’ve added the definition of privatize. 
They’ve changed it in a way so that essentially it will allow for 
the piecemeal privatization of our Crown corporations, and 
that’s quite alarming to say the least. Not only was that not in 
their platform in terms of piecemeal privatization of Crown 
corporations, but neither was this, neither was this blanket 
allowance that they’re trying to give themselves in terms of 
further privatizing what are very important public services and 
trying to find ways around trying to get a social licence to do so 
essentially. 
 
[16:30] 
 
So that’s one of the main concerns I have with respect to this 
bill. And I think the people of Saskatchewan should be 
concerned and alarmed about it as well. It’s very problematic, 
and it leads to an inability for us to be able to have a real 
dialogue as to what’s going on. So I worry about what’s going 
to happen in the future with respect to this. I worry about what 
the regulations are going to look like, mister deputy deputy 
speaker. And I worry about what this means for the future of 
our province, and that’s really what’s concerning. 
 
And I’m disappointed in this government for not being more 
concerned about this frankly. They should be more alerted to 
the fact that these things are going on, and they should be more 
careful when they’re talking about important services in our 
health care system. And I don’t think that they’re quite as 
cognizant of that issue as they should be, frankly, mister deputy 
deputy speaker. 
 
So that’s why it’s important for us to be having these second 
reading debates, to highlight some of these issues. And that’s 
why it’ll be really important for us to highlight this in 
committee. And I hope we have the opportunity to find out 
who, in fact, in the health care system has actually been 

consulted with respect to these changes and whether or not 
these changes are actually going to improve whatever . . . Well I 
don’t even know what they’re going to prove because I don’t 
even know yet what any other prescribed services means. It’s 
far too vague and it’s far too concerning. 
 
So at committee, I know we’ll have a lot more opportunity to 
speak to these issues, and I’m looking forward to it. And what 
we’re going to do is we’re going to fight this piecemeal 
backdoor privatization as much as we can. And we’re going to 
try and shine a light on it because it seems to be what this 
government’s modus operandi is. And we need to make sure 
that we’re shining a light on it and showing the people of 
Saskatchewan what they’re really doing. 
 
With that I think . . . I know that there’s going to be a lot of 
other colleagues who are going to want to speak to this bill, in 
particular the Health critic. So with that I will move 
adjournment of debate on Bill No. 26, The Patient Choice 
Medical Imaging Act. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member from 
Regina Douglas Park has moved to adjourn debate on The 
Patient Choice Medical Imaging Act, no. 26. Carried? Is that 
agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 28 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 28 — The 
Extension of Compassionate Care Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I, of 
course, rise to speak to Bill No. 28, The Extension of 
Compassionate Care Act, 2016. This follows the previous bill 
and a bit of a pattern here with some sort of cleverly named 
bills, Mr. Speaker, that maybe don’t show the true nature of the 
bills and the provisions that are contemplated and proposed 
within them. 
 
This extension of compassionate care Act on its surface and 
certainly the first order is to allow employees to take 20 weeks, 
up to 28 weeks off in order to care for a family member who is 
at significant risk of death. The reason for these changes, Mr. 
Speaker, as noted by the minister on June the 14th, is to provide 
alignment with federal legislation. If there were some changes 
to the unemployment insurance, and this allows legislation to be 
in alignment with those . . . Saskatchewan employees will have 
job-protected leave up to 28 weeks, and at that point would’ve 
been one of the first jurisdictions to increase this leave. So 
certainly, Mr. Speaker, that’s something that is important. We 
all know that people are living longer and often we have people 
in our families that we need to be able to take leave from our 
jobs to be able to provide care for. 
 



930 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2016 

It was something when I was speaking with families at the 
hospital when I worked as a medical social worker. It was often 
a real strain on families when they had someone with a 
significant illness to be able to, not only have the strain of the 
illness, but also have the financial strain by being unable to 
work, Mr. Speaker. So certainly there may be some questions 
about that particular piece of this legislation or that point in this 
legislation that my colleagues have further questions about. But 
I think on its surface that seems to be quite reasonable. 
 
What is a little curious about this legislation is that it does from 
there take a bit of a turn. And on its surface it might not be 
apparent that what this bill contemplates is changes to The 
Saskatchewan Employment Act, Mr. Speaker. For those 
following at home and those who remember the history, this is 
an Act that was brought about that rolled about 12 pieces of 
legislation into one omnibus Act, and certainly comes on the 
heels of some other interesting labour legislation in the 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In 2012 this Act was . . . The minister entered into some 
consultation around this . . . very, really largely changed the 
face of labour legislation in the province, going from about 900 
pages of legislation down to about 200. At that point the 
minister undertook a consultation, but that consultation 
interestingly didn’t include a single public forum or hearing, 
Mr. Speaker. I hope that that is not a pattern given other 
proposed consultations, Mr. Speaker. But certainly there was a 
lack, and many, many within the labour community feel like 
there was a lack of consultation on this Act. This Act, in 
addition to being effective in 2014, was also amended in 2014 
and 2015, so this is the third time at least that we’ve been back 
to look at this Act. 
 
And I note some of the comments that the minister made when 
introducing this bill back in June. He noted that the government 
was committed to keeping Saskatchewan strong, and these 
provisions would ensure that employers and employees 
continue to benefit from the modern labour legislation, Mr. 
Speaker. Certainly it’s a bit of a different take than I hear from 
some people that I talk to in my constituency with regard to the 
state of labour relations in the province. And in fact it’s often 
remarked that the public sector and other labour groups feel a 
bit under attack by this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And certainly after this piece, this contemplated change to the 
28 weeks, we note some other changes which . . . It’s 
interesting that they fall under a bill entitled The Extension of 
Compassionate Care Act because what they actually 
contemplate are changes to the Labour Relations Board, 
including changes to the ability to select the adjudicator for a 
wage assessment and who has the responsibility to set time and 
date of hearings before the Labour Relations Board and serve 
papers on interested parties, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the interesting things — and this has again been a bit of 
a theme — is that this bill requires the adjudicator to follow 
regulations regarding the procedures by which the hearing will 
proceed; however, those regulations have not been addressed. 
And I know that’s been the case with some of the other bills 
that we’ve talked about, so it’s difficult without looking at those 
regulations. As I would say, there’s a lot to be found in the 
details. And I know that not only my colleague from Saskatoon, 

the Labour critic, will have some very important questions 
about those regulations when they’re actually approved, but 
also you know, those within the labour community. 
 
I know the SFL [Saskatchewan Federation of Labour] is 
meeting as we speak right now and I’m sure that they would 
appreciate consultation, and consultation other than the type of 
consultation that was undertaken in May of 2012, Mr. Speaker. 
Again in comments that I’ve made before, but I think it’s 
important that whenever we are talking about legislation that 
has the potential impact on groups, it’s really important that we 
undertake robust consultation, that we understand. Sometimes 
we get unintended consequences when we fail to do that with 
legislation. 
 
Certainly I can think back to Bill 6 whereby I think there was 
one intent, but what we ended up was the constitutional right to 
strike, which may not have been the intent of this government, 
but here it is. We do now have that right as a result of that 
legislation being appealed to the Supreme Court of Canada. 
And I say that because it is important that we do listen to those 
voices, we do ensure that we have a balanced approach to 
legislation and that we’re careful about all of the consequences 
— that it’s constitutional, that it strikes the right balance 
between, in this case, Mr. Speaker, the rights of those both the 
employers and the employees who would be taking their 
concerns to the Labour Relations Board. 
 
The final section of this bill allows cabinet to make 
wide-reaching regulations regarding the duties of adjudicators, 
the rules for appealing decisions of the board, and any other 
rules related to hearings and appeals. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
term wide-reaching certainly caught my attention. And again 
the regulations which have yet to be announced certainly 
require and warrant a lot of careful discussion and scrutiny with 
regard to what exactly is being proposed. 
 
When you’re looking at appeals to the Labour Relations Board, 
Mr. Speaker, often people have exhausted many other 
processes, and it’s really important that they get a fair shake, a 
fair hearing at that board. And I would be, you know, very 
interested in assurances that that would happen with these 
proposed amendments to this legislation. 
 
Again as I said, there’s a lot more to be said about this bill, 
including hopefully when we have a chance to have a look at 
the regulations that are noted in this proposed bill. And I do 
know that, as I’ve said previously, that at least . . . I know that 
at least one of my colleagues, but I anticipate a number of 
colleagues, as well as people that they consult from their 
constituencies and within their critic portfolios, will have a lot 
to say about what is proposed in here that’s been sort of slipped 
under the guise of the extension of compassionate care, which is 
important, but also all of these other anticipated changes to The 
Saskatchewan Employment Act. 
 
So again I think I’ve exhausted my comments for now on the 
topic but will watch the further debate of this bill very closely, 
and I know others will be watching very closely as well. So 
with that, Mr. Speaker, I do move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
28, The Extension of Compassionate Care Act, 2016. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member from 



October 26, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 931 

Regina Lakeview has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 28, 
The Extension of Compassionate Care Act, 2016. Is that 
agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 29 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 29 — The Justices 
of the Peace Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 
sur les juges de paix be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Prince Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Deputy Speaker. I’m really 
honoured today to sit and talk about Bill No. 29, The Justices of 
the Peace Amendment Act. This was presented by the Minister 
of Justice in the spring sitting and so here we are discussing 
some of the amendments that are needed to be done with that. 
And like I said before, the Ministry of Justice, they’ve been 
very busy looking through the bills and working on making 
some amendments to some of them, and this one also. 
 
It’s really important to have the justices of the peace in our 
communities. They really help our court systems, and so it’s 
good that we look at this. And part of this, the amendments to 
this Act, they’re wanting to look at traffic safety issues and how 
that could be resolved outside of the courts. 
 
[16:45] 
 
And earlier this afternoon I talked about another bill that is 
going to also work at expediting some of the court process 
when it deals with traffic violations. And it’s like . . . I really do 
believe that it’s really important that we allow our judges and 
our lawyers to focus on the very serious issues that are 
happening in our court system. They have big caseloads. They 
have endless amounts of work there. And if we could do our 
part in helping them to be able to focus on those very serious 
issues, and we could look at dealing with traffic violations or 
fines in an easier, better way and . . . Even for residents in our 
community, I think a lot of people have possibly gotten a traffic 
violation ticket of some sort in their days, whether it be 
speeding or a parking ticket or something. And I think with 
being able to find ways to resolve these outside the court, it’s 
really important. But in saying that, it also needs to be looked at 
appropriately. And our critic for Justice, she will be on this. 
And I know she’ll work hard at, you know, looking at the 
different elements of this amendment and ensure that this is 
going to be not affecting people in a . . . [inaudible] . . . manner. 
 
Also I think one of the bigger things with regards to this 
amendment is that they’re looking at creating an assistant 
supervising Justice of the Peace officer. And so right now 
we’ve got the supervising Justice of the Peace, and this would 
be the assistant supervising Justice of the Peace officer. And 
that person will help and take over when the supervising Justice 
of the Peace officer is absent or needs some extra support in 
helping do their duties, you know. And so they had to make 

some amendments to this Act to add that in there. 
 
And there’s going to be some financial obligations with regards 
to this as well. And there’s no talk in here with regards to that, 
but I’m sure there’ll be plenty of discussion in committee of 
what that pay structure would look like because that’ll 
definitely have an impact on the budget. And I know we’re in 
tight circumstances at this time and we’re making, you know, 
cuts in some really serious areas. And so to add more constraint 
to the budget, I think that’s going to be needed to be discussed. 
And is this the appropriate time to be making these decisions 
when we are facing such difficult financial problems and some 
of our most vulnerable are paying that price? So I know there’ll 
be a lot of discussion with regards to that and so the pay 
structure with regards to that. 
 
Also in this amendment of this legislation they have some new 
category of justices of the peace. And the senior Justice of the 
Peace will be able to impose fines or order a driver to take a 
driver’s training for traffic offences. So my understanding is 
that usually judges would do that. They would be the ones who 
impose the fines or order the clients to take these training 
courses. And so now they’ll allow the senior justices of the 
peace in order to do that and make those decisions. And like I 
said again, my colleague who’s the critic of Justice, she’s more 
knowledgeable in this aspect, and I’m sure she will look into 
this and ensure that proper due diligence is done and discussed 
in committee. And so they’ll have some discussion with regards 
to that and yes, and the pay of the justice. 
 
So my fellow colleague, he’s a very, very intelligent colleague 
of mine, the member from Athabasca. I’m going to quote him a 
little bit, from when he . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . He 
wasn’t even listening when I said these very nice, kind things 
about my fellow colleague. And so I’m going to share some of 
the things that he talked about when he had the opportunity to 
speak with this bill. 
 
And so like what is the pay range going to be? And how are the 
people who are going to be in these positions, how are they 
going to be selected? What’s that decision-making process 
going to look like? And how about regional matters in terms of 
ensuring that we have senior justices of the peace all throughout 
the province? How’s this going to look like through the 
province? Is this going to be in the North? Is this going to be 
more southern? Is this going to be all throughout the province? I 
think we need to look at that because our courts are busy right 
through the province. And so we need to look at how this is 
going to be implemented. 
 
So I know that there’s going to be lots of discussion about this 
in council because this is a really important bill, and this is 
going to need to be evaluated and the amendments with regards 
to this bill. And I know my other fellow colleagues will have 
lots of things to add to this discussion and comments. And so 
with that I am going to move to adjourn this debate. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member from 
Prince Albert Northcote has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 29, The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2016. Is that 
agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



932 Saskatchewan Hansard October 26, 2016 

The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 30 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 30 — The 
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy 
Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise to enter 
debate on Bill No. 30, The Freedom of Information and 
Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I turn first to the notes from June from Hansard, 
rather from June the 14th of this year. When the minister spoke 
to Bill No. 30, he noted that many of the changes that are 
proposed come from recommendations by the Privacy 
Commissioner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that it’s very important when we have 
these arm’s-length officials that are tasked with very important 
areas of expertise such as protecting the privacy of citizens that 
we pay careful attention to what they have to say, Mr. Speaker. 
So I understand that it’s owing to some of those 
recommendations that these proposed changes to legislation 
were introduced. 
 
Some of the changes that are included . . . recommended 
changes include creation of a new offence for snooping on a 
person’s personal information, Mr. Speaker. And certainly as 
we have increased access to personal information increasingly 
that information is online, and ensuring that people that 
shouldn’t have access to that information don’t go seeking it out 
just to satisfy curiosity or for other malicious means, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Again I’ll reach back to my experience of working in a health 
care setting and being governed by the rules with the HIPA, The 
Health Information Protection Act. And certainly I’m a very 
firm believer in that those who don’t and shouldn’t have access 
to the information don’t unnecessarily have access to that 
information, Mr. Speaker, because to do so does breach the 
privacy that people should be able to expect and count on. So 
that is one of the proposed recommendations. 
 
Extending the rules for personal information protection to MLA 
offices and cabinet ministers’ offices, Mr. Speaker, this 
recommendation flows out of a very unfortunate incident that 
happened in our province where a man by the name — I guess 
his name is more than public now — Peter Bowden brought to 
light some concerns within the health care system, some, you 
know, very serious concerns. And his information was leaked 
publicly, and it was a really, really horrible breach of his 
personal privacy. And so I certainly applaud that 
recommendation and would caution all of us to be very careful 
with that information. 
 
We sometimes in the course of our duties as MLAs and 
members, we do come across very personal health information, 
and we should protect that and certainly never use that personal 

health information to harm those perceived to be our political 
opponents or those who are pointing out, certainly bringing 
forth legitimate concerns about what they see in their 
workplaces or otherwise. So I think that that is very, very 
important, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are some other sort of housekeeping notes within this 
legislation: changing the maximum time for response from 30 
days to 20 days, reducing that time, which I think is reasonable 
to look at that, when people are requesting information that they 
would be able to get that in a timely manner. 
 
Another anticipated change is that FOIP [The Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Act] include a 
requirement that it be updated every five years to respond to 
modern technology. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, it does seem 
that year after year the speed of the change of technology does 
change, so that does seem reasonable. I think, you know, 
looking back 5 or 10 years, the leaps and bounds that we’ve 
seen with regard to technology and how information is collected 
and disseminated, it does make sense that we would have 
regular checks into this legislation. 
 
One of the other things that this bill anticipates is mandatory 
breach notification. So not only is it an offence when your 
information is breached, but when your personal information 
has been breached, that you receive notification of that breach. 
And I think that’s really important, Mr. Speaker, that people are 
made aware that when their personal information . . . 
 
But there is a bit of a caveat, and that is when that information 
places an individual at serious personal risk. And I’d be very 
interested in looking at what that definition is, how we 
determine and deem what constitutes a very serious risk that 
you would need to notify the person about and what doesn’t. So 
that maybe is something that one of my colleagues will take up 
in committee or otherwise when this legislation passes through 
other hands for scrutiny and for debate. 
 
One of the other things that is noted in here is broadening the 
grounds for review by the commissioner to include reviewing 
complaints regarding fees. And, Mr. Speaker, this is something 
that’s really important. And I’ve heard tale of, you know, too 
often people, when requesting information, being given really 
high bills. And that sort of circumvents the intent, I think, of 
freedom of information, so I’m glad that that will be looked at. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, as I reach the end of my voice and 
my water and time, I would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 
30, The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy 
Amendment Act. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member from 
Regina Lakeview has moved adjournment on Bill No. 30, The 
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment 
Act. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — It is now being 5 
o’clock, the Assembly stands adjourned until tomorrow 
morning at 10 a.m. 
 



October 26, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 933 

[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 903 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 903 
  Olauson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 903 
  Steele .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 903 
  Cox ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 903 
  Makowsky.................................................................................................................................................................................. 903 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 903 
  Dennis ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 904 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 904 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 904 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 904 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 905 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 905 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 First Nations University Celebrates 40th Anniversary 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 905 
 Key Ceremony in Regina for Habitat for Humanity 
  Steinley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 905 
 Outstanding Achievements in Energy Management 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 906 
 2016 Lakeland Citizens of the Year 
  Wilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 906 
 Lives Transformed Through Youth for Christ Programs 
  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 906 
 Post-Secondary Institutions Welcome Indigenous Students 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................... 906 
 Wadena Joins Main Street Saskatchewan 
  Nerlien ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 907 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transaction 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 907 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 907 
  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 908 
 Husky Oil Report 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 909 
  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 909 
 Role of Government in Education 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 910 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 910 
 Funding for Medical Specialists 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 910 
  Reiter ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 911 
POINT OF ORDER 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 912 
  Merriman .................................................................................................................................................................................. 912 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 912 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 40 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’interprétation 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 912 
 Bill No. 41 — The Coroners Amendment Act, 2016 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 912 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 2 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Crown Corporations’ Fiscal Year End Standardization)  
 Amendment Act, 2016  
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 912 
 
 



 

 Bill No. 4 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2016 
 Loi modificative de 2016 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine  
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 913 
 Bill No. 5 — The Electronic Information and Documents Amendment Act, 2016  
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 914 
 Bill No. 6 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016  
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 915 
 Bill No. 7 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 (No. 2) 
 Loi no 2 de 2016 modifiant le droit législatif  
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 915 
 Bill No. 8 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2016  
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 915 
 Bill No. 9 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2016 
 Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens  
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 917 
 Bill No. 10 — The Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2016  
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 918 
 Bill No. 11 — The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2016  
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 920 
 Bill No. 12 — The Public Health (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2016  
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 920 
 Bill No. 13 — The Cancer Agency Amendment Act, 2016  
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 921 
 Bill No. 14 — The Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 2016  
  Forbes .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 
 Bill No. 15 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2016  
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 923 
 Bill No. 16 — The Adoption Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’adoption  
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 924 
 Bill No. 17 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2016  
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 926 
 Bill No. 19 — The Film and Video Classification Act, 2016  
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 927 
 Bill No. 26 — The Patient Choice Medical Imaging Act  
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 928 
 Bill No. 28 — The Extension of Compassionate Care Act, 2016  
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 929 
 Bill No. 29 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2016 
 Loi modificative de 2016 sur les juges de paix  
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 931 
 Bill No. 30 — The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016  
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 932 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


