




















































Hansard: May 24, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 4B  TUESDAY, MAY 24, 2016, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Hon. Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Hon. Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Merriman, Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 51; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Maurice Riou http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 103 

 May 24, 2016 

 

[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 

 

EVENING SITTING 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — It now being 7 o’clock, I will call the 

Assembly to order. Resumption of the debate and reply to the 

Throne Speech. I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Silverspring-Sutherland. 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 

 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Mr. Buckingham, seconded by Ms. 

Carr, and the proposed amendment to the main motion moved 

by Ms. Sproule.] 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and thank you to my team for all of the support, for 

coming back to listening to me tonight. I was told by a couple 

of my colleagues that I was speaking a little too quickly this 

afternoon, so I’ll try to slow things down a bit, especially for 

some of the older people in the crowd here to make sure that 

they understand what I’m saying. 

 

I’d like to start off by thanking my wife and my kids — Leane, 

who’s been at home, and I thanked her already this afternoon, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. But I have to thank my family for putting 

up with me, especially while I’m gone in the campaign, during 

the four weeks and the 12 months leading up to the campaign 

that my team and I were out door knocking. I want to thank my 

family for understanding that it does take a lot to be able to be 

here with my colleagues, forming the Government of 

Saskatchewan and hoping to continue to keep moving 

Saskatchewan forward, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I have to thank my constituency assistants, Michelle and 

Danielle, who keep things, everything going in the constituency 

office, especially when I’m out of town, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

And I would personally really right now like to thank the 

member from Walsh Acres for all of his supportive, kind words 

as he’s sitting in behind me. I very much appreciate that. As we 

all know in this Chamber, Mr. Deputy Speaker, his voice 

carries, so I’m sure whatever he’s saying is being picked up on 

Hansard, so I really appreciate that. 

 

One of the things that I think we’ve been a little bit remiss in 

saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is we haven’t thanked the staff at 

the Saskatchewan Party office. Patrick Bundrock, who certainly 

broke ground for me in Saskatoon Sutherland in 2003 running 

as a candidate, has since taken over as the general manager of 

our party. Patrick and his staff did a huge effort leading up to 

the election and during the election in the war room to be able 

to make sure that we formed government, not just formed 

government, that we increased our seat count. So to Patrick and 

his staff, I want to say thank you very much for everything that 

you’ve done in the background over the years to be able to 

move Saskatchewan forward from the background. So again I 

want to thank Patrick and his staff for that. 

I want to thank my door knocking team and my campaign team. 

They were absolutely outstanding. There was a lot of weird 

days out there in Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland. There was 

snow. There was rain. There was wind. My team was out there 

with cleats on their feet sometimes to get through the ice, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, to be able to go out and door knock five days a 

week. It was a very difficult time. We were into a new area, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, due to the redrawing of the boundaries. There 

was a new area that I had taken over from the member from 

Saskatoon Silver Springs, who is now the current member for 

Saskatoon Willowgrove, and I had to do a lot of new door 

knocking to introduce myself to the community. But my team 

was out there helping me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I very much 

appreciate that. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the Speech 

from the Throne because I’ve heard a lot of things in question 

period, and there’s only been a couple of question periods, and 

in some of the maiden speeches from the opposition about 

things that they aren’t quite aware of and the history of what’s 

happened in this Chamber. And I think they’re very unaware of 

what happened prior to 2007; they don’t want to talk about their 

history. So I’m prepared to give them a little bit of a history 

lesson, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on exactly what has happened 

when they were in power and what has happened when we 

formed government over here. And that’ll lead up to why we 

have continued to form government and the people of 

Saskatchewan have put their faith in us to be able to make sure 

that we keep Saskatchewan moving in the right direction. 

 

The most important number, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I 

apologize if this isn’t the last current number, but the most 

important number I think in here is 1.142 million souls living in 

Saskatchewan right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Under the 

opposition, our population declined. 

 

And you’ll get this theme of things going forward with our 

government and the decline under the NDP [New Democratic 

Party], everything from doctors to education to infrastructure to 

going from a basic where they thought we would always be . . . 

As the former premier said, that we will always be in and out of 

equalization, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have gone from a 

have-not province under them, with the worst job creation 

record, the worst record in the surgical wait-list — record after 

record of the bad things that they did while they were in 

Saskatchewan. And then what they do, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 

And all the improvements that we’ve done over here — and yes 

there is still more work to be done, Mr. Deputy Speaker — but 

what they fail to notice is, they fail to look at what they did not 

accomplish. They let things go. 

 

We have everything from the 440 wait-list where people with 

disabilities were left for years and years and years. And myself 

and a lot of my colleagues have been able to go to some of 

these homes that are now being opened that eliminated the 440 

wait-list, and we’ve gone further than that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

We keep moving Saskatchewan forward. 

 

The new members over there don’t understand that they are 

answering for the record of the New Democratic Party since its 

formation. And we are very clear in reminding the general 

public on what their record is, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We 



104 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2016 

reminded them during the campaign, which Saskatchewan 

people gave us an overwhelming majority. We remind them 

every day because they don’t certainly want to talk about that. 

They want to stand up and criticize everything that we’ve done. 

But when they were in power, they did very little. They had 

very low standards and they always just came underneath that. 

They would always say, well if we only had this, then we could 

have done that. 

 

I think it came out today through Minister of the Economy 

about the SaskPower and how much they pulled out of that 

Crown corporation just to try to be able to balance their budget. 

I think it was over 200 per cent, if I remember correctly, one 

year. I’m not sure how they did that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

And then they have the audacity to tell us that we’re not doing 

enough over here. But they don’t come up with any 

suggestions, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They came up with nothing 

in their plan, certainly nothing in their platform. We didn’t hear, 

I sat in this Chamber for four years, we heard nothing about 

their plan on what they were going to do. They just thought that 

they were going to keep speaking and it was the NDP and 

eventually everybody would come back. 

 

I don’t how many times I’ve heard them stand up here with 

their borderline arrogant behaviour. The member, the former 

member from Lakeview, would say, oh don’t worry, we’re just 

going to fix this. We’re going to fix everything that you guys 

messed up. That was their attitude that they didn’t put the faith 

in the Saskatchewan people. They didn’t believe in the voters. 

We’ve heard it time and time again how they blamed the voters 

for all of their misfortunes. They don’t understand. They take 

no ownership of it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that’s, I guess, the 

test of true leadership. If you make a mistake, you have to own 

up to that mistake and try to move forward. They haven’t 

owned up to any of their mistakes. They don’t want to look at 

their record behind them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They just 

certainly want to start looking forward. 

 

And I can understand why they wouldn’t want to look behind 

them. Pick a ministry, any ministry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 

we can tell you about how we’ve increased funding, how we’ve 

increased capacity with our doctors within the health region, 

that we’ve increased our exports across Saskatchewan, around 

the world, opened up new markets through STEP 

[Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership] and other 

programs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We could talk about all the 

things that we’ve done. 

 

They stand up here and talk about domestic violence, a very 

important subject, but they don’t recognize that we’ve opened 

the first women’s shelter in, I believe it is 16 years, in Melfort 

constituency. Nothing heard about that. They didn’t open 

anything in their time while they were in government. It’s 

absolutely shameful. And then they stand up here and criticize 

us for doing the right thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

They need to start looking backwards on what exactly they did 

while they were in power. And I’m not just talking about the 16 

years before that; I’m talking about their history in this 

Legislative Assembly and their history in Saskatchewan as far 

as the NDP — the old, tired dogma of the NDP. They need to 

answer that. 

And I think the new members should be educated by some of 

their veteran members on exactly what has happened in this 

Chamber and what some of their former members who are no 

longer sitting in this Chamber have said about their record. Pat 

Atkinson — and I believe I’m okay using her name as she’s no 

longer sitting, Mr. Deputy Speaker — has criticized. We’ve had 

many, many other NDP MLAs [Member of the Legislative 

Assembly] and ministers criticize that they could have done 

more and they didn’t. Why didn’t they do that? They have a 

hundred reasons why they’re blaming everybody and who . . . 

all these things that went wrong. 

 

But again back to the original point: they don’t take any 

ownership of what they have done wrong because they really 

don’t believe that they’ve done anything wrong, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

I want to talk a little bit about some of the other records that 

they had. Some of the records that they had from 2000 to 2007, 

worst job creation record in Canada. How do you expect a 

province to move forward if you cannot create any jobs? So I’m 

wondering what it was for seven years that was dogging them 

that they couldn’t create jobs in Saskatchewan, that they were 

creating less and less jobs every year. 

 

Now you flip that around, from 2008 to 2015, we had the 

lowest unemployment rate in Canada and the second-strongest 

job creation record in Canada. So what happened there, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker? Obviously the people of Saskatchewan had no 

faith in the government up until 2007. There was no creation. 

There was no passion for Saskatchewan. 

 

When the Sask Party formed government in 2007, the passion 

in the people across this province was ignited, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. It was coming in from other provinces. People were 

saying, oh, well there’s Saskatchewan. Why don’t we invest in 

there? They’ve got the potential. They’ve got fuel. They’ve got 

potash. They’ve got agriculture. We’ve got oil and gas. And the 

most important resource that we have within our provincial 

borders are our people, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

They had no faith in the people of Saskatchewan. It’s very 

disappointing that they continue to do this. 

 

Now again, here’s another thing. And I know the member from 

Athabasca is talking quite a bit here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But I 

would like to know, while he was in cabinet, how he raised 21 

. . . 21 times he raised the taxes in 16 years. At 16 budgets, 21 

tax increases. How does that happen, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 

They just keep spending money. They kept spending money. 

They didn’t even look at what they were doing. 

 

Bad investments, and I know that the minister from the 

Economy has his favourite list that he always likes to pull out 

about all the bad investments. I know the former member from 

Melville-Saltcoats used to do it as well. And it goes everything 

from SPUDCO [Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 

Company] to all of these bad investments, but yet they never 

ever took responsibility for that . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Yes, we had bingos, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Imagine that, the 

government involved in bingos. 

 

One of the other things that they criticize us about is not 



May 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 105 

mentioning children enough in our Speech from the Throne, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that’s very disappointing, considering 

the record that we have in investments of opening new schools, 

increasing enrolment in our elementary schools, high schools, 

and advanced education, our post-secondary institutions. 

 

They closed schools, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s all they did. 

They didn’t have any way of dealing with the problems, so they 

just simply closed things. Now just imagine if we had those 

schools that were still active right now, that we had some of 

those 176 schools that they closed over their 16-year term. 

 

And what did they do? They blamed everybody else. They 

blamed the government before them. They didn’t take any 

ownership for what they did. They just continued to blame. We 

take ownership for what we do over here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Forgot about rural. Forgot about rural. 

 

Mr. Merriman: — Yes, exactly. And my rural colleagues, as a 

city boy, my rural colleagues will certainly tell me how they 

forgot rural Saskatchewan. They had tax revolts. They didn’t do 

any infrastructure investments in Saskatchewan. 

 

The Minister of Government Relations has increased the 

funding to rural Saskatchewan to give them the ownership to be 

able to say, okay, we’re going to give you 1 per cent of the PST 

[provincial sales tax]. Here it is. You guys invest it how you see 

the best. 

 

They never even thought of something like that. That was 

absolutely beyond them because they couldn’t let go of the 

control of the purse strings, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They 

wouldn’t allow anybody in rural Saskatchewan to make their 

own decisions. Everything was done out of their cabinet, which 

was done at a pretty shabby job if I do say, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

[19:15] 

 

I want to talk about something that is certainly important to me, 

is our strategy on disabilities and vulnerable people, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. We have a fabulous record that is looked at around the 

world on how to promote and how to work with people with 

disabilities, not just take them and put them into an institution, 

but make them part of society, make them inclusive in what we 

do — include them in the workforce, include them in what is 

going on. 

 

I’m personally involved with the Special Olympics as a board 

member, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it makes me very proud to 

see those Special Olympians who are actually up in Saskatoon 

as of tomorrow doing their outdoor track meet. And 

unfortunately because of my duties here, I won’t be able to go 

watch my daughter participate. But the Special Olympics does a 

great job in promoting people with disabilities. But they don’t 

just do the athletic side of things. They also do the internal 

character building of all of the individuals to be able to make 

sure that they have the skill set, the social skills, the emotional 

skills, the physical skills, the mental mindset to be able to move 

themselves forward. 

 

And I think that’s a very important thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

is to move everybody in Saskatchewan — whether you have an 

intellectual disability, physical disability, or anybody else in 

Saskatchewan — that’s all we want, is the people to be able to 

move themselves forward and reach their full potential, just like 

all of us saw in Saskatchewan, all of us that stuck around during 

those dark 16 years because we saw the potential in 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

When I moved from Toronto in 1988, moving from what is 

commonly known as the centre of the universe of Canada — 

Toronto — moving out to Saskatchewan, we saw the potential 

here. We saw the lifestyle adjustments. We saw that this is 

going to be a place for the future, a place to raise a family, a 

place that I’m proud of to raise my family, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

I want to make sure that Saskatchewan lives up to its potential 

no different than any other province would want for them. 

Unfortunately the opposition wants the province to live up to 

what their idea of their potential is, which is way below what 

we can do here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I want to talk a little bit about the new schools. I touched on it 

before, but the new schools are something that is in contrast — 

and giving them and continuing them with their history lesson 

— in contrast with them closing down schools. We’ve opened 

schools. We’ve had huge enrolment, and we’ve opened nine 

joint-use schools. And as the former member from Canora-Pelly 

would say, don’t say nine joint-use schools; say 18 schools. So I 

want to make sure that I say that, for I’m sure Mr. Krawetz is 

watching this somewhere, wherever he is enjoying retirement. 

 

Well if the member from Athabasca is up next, you might turn 

it off after that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But I want to understand 

the huge infrastructure investment that we’ve put into our 

schools because, like when we formed government in 2007, we 

had no idea what the infrastructure deficit of Saskatchewan was 

within our schools, within our highways, within our hospitals. 

Everything was minimally funded by the New Democrats. And 

they have all of their excuses over there as to why they did that, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, but we have been trying to play catch-up 

with this. And they criticize us: well you haven’t done enough 

here; you haven’t done enough there. But again they don’t want 

to be able to talk about their own record. To be able to build 

nine joint-use schools . . . And they didn’t like the way that we 

were building it. 

 

When I was out door knocking and when all of my colleagues 

were out door knocking, all of the people said, we are so glad 

you’re building a school. They didn’t talk about the P3 

[public-private partnership] model. They asked, are there going 

to be our teachers there? Yes. Are our students going to be . . . 

Is it going to be the same as every other school? Yes. Thank 

God you’re building us a school here. That’s what we need is, 

we need a school here and we need it right now. 

 

In my constituency, Evergreen is one of those nine joint-use 

schools. I know Martensville, Warman, Regina, we’ve had a 

huge . . . And that’s just the joint-use schools. We’ve had 

additional schools that we’re building on top of that, one-offs. 

And I’m not quite sure exactly the number of that. If the 

Minister of Education would give me some indication of that, I 

would be very appreciative . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 

Thank you. 

 



106 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2016 

Anyways, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I see my time’s kind of 

wrapping up because I did take a couple of minutes before 5 

o’clock. I know the Minister of Finance would like to hear 

some more, but I’ll tell him a little bit later on. 

 

But what I want to talk about just in closing, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, is the confidence that the people of Saskatchewan have 

in themselves now, that the people of Canada have in 

Saskatchewan now, and the confidence that the world is having 

in Saskatchewan is unprecedented in our province since the 

beginning of the formation of our province. 

 

There was huge opportunity here back in 1905. This was going 

to be the place to be. This was the biggest Legislative Building 

that they were going to build in Western Canada, and the reason 

that they did that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is because of the 

potential here. 

 

Now unfortunately the tap got turned off as soon as the CCF 

[Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] and the NDP just 

decided to lower the standards of everybody, keep our 

population at a minimal, keep the expectations at a minimal. 

But now that this government has been given the mandate for a 

third term, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you’re going to see really what 

the potential is. 

 

And yes, we’ve had some good times within our province, but 

you’ll see how good we are at managing our finances and the 

opportunities about Saskatchewan into the future, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

So again, I will conclude. I will support the Speech from the 

Throne from the member from Saskatoon Westview and I will 

not be supporting the amendment. And I wanted to thank 

everybody for giving me this opportunity to speak today here, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. 

 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Deputy Speaker. As 

ever, it’s good to stand in my place, join debate and try to do 

some duty, do some justice to the work that the good people of 

Regina Elphinstone-Centre have set out for me in trying to 

bring some voice to their different issues, to their hopes and 

dreams, to the things that they find concerning or in some cases 

alarming, and to the things that they find important and want 

spoken about in the Legislative Assembly. So it’s always, it’s 

an honour to participate in this process, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and it’s certainly a humbling thing to join the debate. 

 

I want to acknowledge right off the top that we are here on 

Treaty 4 territory, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that we need look 

no further than that beautiful mace runner on the table in terms 

symbolizing as long as the grass grows, the water flows, and the 

sun shines, that responsibility that we have to each other here in 

Treaty 4 territory and indeed throughout the province of 

Saskatchewan. And I want to say thank you to those that have 

made this possible. 

 

I’m also reminded, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we’re here in this 

season of reconciliation, in terms of the Truth and 

Reconciliation Commission having made its final report and 

issuing its 94 calls for action not very long ago, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and that there is a big piece of work that need be done 

by the people of Saskatchewan in terms of responding to those 

calls for action. And we didn’t see that in the Throne Speech, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we look on with interest to see if there 

will be some action coming in the days ahead. 

 

I want to say thank you, as many have, off the top, Mr. Speaker. 

It’s almost sort of pro forma, but it’s where you start so that 

should be in your first order of business. But I want to say thank 

you very much to my wife, Theresa, for all the love and support 

that she gives me. And I want to say a belated happy birthday, 

happy 82-years-young to my father, Clifford Robert Douglas 

McCall, who is the head of the clan. I wear the Wilson tartan tie 

tonight, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which was my maternal 

grandmother Olive McCall’s tartan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 

for me and the story of her and my father and different of the 

things that they got through to make a living, to make a good 

life for those that came after, for my mom who’s passed on, and 

for us McCall kids is . . . means so much. And when I’ve got 

the big occasions, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s when I like to 

break out the Wilson tartan tie. But again it’s here as a means to 

say thank you to family. 

 

I want to say thank you to friends and neighbours in north 

central Regina and certainly throughout Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre. It’s where I was born and raised, Mr. 

Speaker, and that’s where I’ve lived, but for a year in Israel and 

a couple of years in Ottawa. And that’s my home; that’s where 

my roots are. And it’s where again I have the privilege to stand 

alongside my neighbours and do this work of trying to represent 

the good constituency of Regina Elphinstone-Centre in the 

Legislative Assembly. 

 

We’ve been through the campaign season of course, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and I want to say a word of thanks and 

congratulations to my opponents in that contest. And certainly 

they carried themselves honourably and went about 

campaigning diligently. 

 

And that leads me to yet another thank you, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, and that’s to my campaign team, and to folks like the 

Tims and the people that are too many to name, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. But as is the case with so many, I was aided by a 

tremendous group of people that stood with me through all 

kinds of weather and for whom the success on the election day, 

Mr. Speaker, was very much a testament to their hard work. 

 

I want to say congratulations to the new members on both sides 

of the House. I want to congratulate the Sask Party government 

on their victory, and I’d particularly like to congratulate the 

Premier on his victory. And I guess, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 

congratulate him on his choice of tailor because apparently the 

coattails that guy’s got are, you know, world-class in terms of 

hauling around some of the different issues and in terms of the 

popularity that that individual continues to enjoy. And I 

congratulate him for that. 

 

I want to say a word of congratulations to Cam Broten, and 

wish all the best to Cam and Ruth as they come into this 

unexpected chapter of their life. But to Cam and Ruth and the 

girls, I want to thank them for their service, for their sacrifice to 

the people of Saskatchewan. And put me on record as saying, 



May 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 107 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I hope we’ve not seen the last of Cam 

Broten in terms of public service in the province of 

Saskatchewan. 

 

Yourself, Mr. Deputy Speaker, welcome back. The Deputy 

Speaker rides again. I’ll try not to engage in debate too much, 

but certainly congratulations to yourself and congratulations to 

the new Speaker, the member from Eastview. And I also want 

to say a word of congratulations and thanks to the outgoing 

Speaker. Certainly, you know, there are few that are more 

passionate about this House than the member from Cannington, 

and I want to thank him for his service to this parliamentary 

tradition that we hold so very dear. 

 

I was interested to see again, if I can skip back to the new 

members, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that . . . I’m not sure about the 

House, where this is by the rules, but of course my first name is 

Warren. I was named for my grandfather on my mother’s side. 

And my middle name is from my grandfather on my father’s 

side, Gordon. But it’s interesting to see that we were close there 

for a while, Mr. Speaker, but I think it’s now safe to say that we 

were forewarned in this House and perhaps forearmed. But a 

special word of welcome to the member from 

Melville-Saltcoats and congratulate him on his victory in that 

particular contest. 

 

To the Throne Speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Certainly one of 

the traditional critiques of throne speeches is that they tend to 

be kind of light on detail and that the sort of principles that are 

identified await the budget. And of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

this underlines for us as the opposition, as the people that have 

been entrusted with the job of serving as Her Majesty’s Loyal 

Opposition, to hold this government to account being one of 

those first and foremost tasks. 

 

One of the traditional critiques of Throne Speeches is that they 

tend to be kind of light. The details come in the budget. And I 

guess that tends to vary a bit when you’ve got a Throne Speech 

coming after an election, when you’ve got a campaign platform 

to be brought to bear, and maybe a few more details would be 

forthcoming.  

 

But certainly, Mr. Speaker, one of the great sort of interesting 

historical, political developments in this province’s history is 

the fact that this is a government that got away without tabling a 

budget, without providing a full accounting of the financial 

situation for the people of Saskatchewan and then taking that to 

the polls. And there has been a bit of hand-wringing and a bit 

of, you know, details were still coming in and all of that, but 

usually you’ve got a budget that is available to the people of 

Saskatchewan by mid-March. 

 

[19:30] 

 

And we know for a fact that members opposite have been 

working away in treasury board and in other bodies of that 

government to come at a budget. So it defied belief, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, when that government opposite went to the people and 

said, we can’t come forward with a budget. Here’s a political 

document in terms of what we think the numbers are that hasn’t 

been investigated by the auditor, that hasn’t been signed off by 

the auditor. And you don’t have that sort of fuller accounting of 

where things are at and how that goes to the people, and then 

people making a fully informed decision about who they want 

to be serving as the government in Saskatchewan. 

 

So the fact that they were able to get away with that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I think is going to stand out. People will look 

back at this in years to come and say, you know, I don’t know if 

it’s the horseshoes or what, but in terms of the way that they 

were able to get that past the people of Saskatchewan, I think 

will be borne out in some pretty interesting ways in just the 

days ahead. 

 

So in the meantime, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re stuck with this 

task of debating a Throne Speech that is even lighter on details 

than the campaign that these members have run on, and the fact 

that we don’t have a full financial picture of what’s in front of 

the people of Saskatchewan. And that’s coming forward in 

different ways, Mr. Speaker, in dribs and drabs, and I’m sure 

we’ll get the full load come June 1st. 

 

But even then, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you cast your mind back 

to the last budget, this is a government that presented $700 

million of borrowing as an infrastructure investment or what 

have you — you know, all fine and good — but characterized it 

as anything other than what it was, which of course was adding 

to the debt and deficit load that is carried by the finances in 

Saskatchewan. They weren’t straightforward with that, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and we’ll be interested to see how that 

translates in the financial picture to come. 

 

In terms of the different actions that . . . You know, before the 

campaign, certainly the protestation was that they’d be 

supporting the Crown protection Act full, you know, full bore, 

Mr. Speaker, four-square, and on no lesser Crown than SaskTel, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. And we saw some discussion of that here 

today. We’ve seen the position change from one of full respect 

for the Crown protection Act and the way that that was brought 

forward for discussion, in terms of the motion of referral today 

as regards the Liquor Board stores that this government has . . . 

you know, fair enough, they were forthright to a certain extent 

in saying that that’s what they wanted to do, went out and got a 

mandate, and they did it. But when it comes to SaskTel, Mr. 

Speaker, it’s one thing to have a review. It’s another then to 

start making up your position as you go along, as we’ve seen 

with the prevarication from the former commitment to the 

Crown protection Act. 

 

And you know, we’ve seen the Premier suggest that maybe it 

could be put to a referendum. Maybe it could be put to some 

kind of a plebiscite. And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s 

not what the Act that they promised — you know, not just in 

this campaign, but in others as well — to respect, that’s not the 

promise that they made to the people of Saskatchewan. So we’ll 

be watching with great interest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to see how 

that evolves. And again, as my interim leader was saying today, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the greatest risks, if you’re doing a 

risk analysis for a corporation like SaskTel, is the 

cash-strapped, third-term, right wing, likes-to-privatize kind of 

government. And we’ll be watching very closely to see how 

that goes and see whether or not they’re as good as their word, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, which is one of the basic expectations that 

people have of their government. 

 

On the doorsteps that I was on in the campaign, Mr. Deputy 



108 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2016 

Speaker, one of the things that I was reminded of when the 

Throne Speech was delivered in the House, there was a 

reference to a verse from Matthew but it also referenced another 

verse that comes from Luke 12:48 where it ends off by stating 

that to whom much is given, much is expected. And certainly 

this is a government that has been given a lot. This is a 

government that’s had cash in the bank when they took over in 

2007. And on the more forthright moments in this government’s 

career, they’ve owned up to that. But certainly they’ve been 

given another mandate, but when it comes to the budget, again, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve got a bit of a blank-cheque situation 

there. 

 

When I had the privilege of knocking on doors in Elphinstone 

and talking to constituents, they wanted to see action on things 

like making sure that you’re serving both the economy and the 

environment. The member from Lakeview made some excellent 

points about the false dichotomy that this government is trying 

to promote when it comes to, you know, how you can’t serve 

the economy and the environment at the same time. 

 

I talked to seniors who are having a tougher time making ends 

meet than has ever been the case before, Mr. Speaker, and 

seniors that are living in places that that shouldn’t be the case, 

where it’s under the aegis of Regina Housing and how that 

shouldn’t be a problem. 

 

I heard concern about, you know, the dealings around the 

Global Transportation Hub. I heard concern about the way that 

we have far too much poverty in the midst of plenty, Mr. 

Speaker. And again going back to the verse referenced in the 

Throne Speech, to whom much is given, much is expected. 

 

When we have such prosperity in Saskatchewan, how it is 

alongside that that we’re not able to put away for a rainy day? 

We’re not able to eliminate poverty. We’re not able to take 

action on a mental health strategy that now sits on the shelf 

collecting dust. These are the things that people, they couldn’t 

understand how this goes. They couldn’t understand how it is 

that crime is going back up in the city of Regina, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. They couldn’t understand how it is that gangs have 

enjoyed a resurgence in terms of their activity and the terrible 

impact that they have on so many lives, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

and on communities. 

 

They couldn’t understand how it is that when we get the latest 

reporting from Statistics Canada as to the jobs number in the 

province of Saskatchewan that one in four First Nations people 

off-reserve are unemployed. That’s a devastating number, Mr. 

Speaker. And that’s a devastating day-to-day reality for far too 

many in this province. But we don’t hear about that from this 

government in this Throne Speech. In fact we hear things that 

say quite the opposite, Mr. Speaker.  

 

But the facts are that one in four First Nations people 

off-reserve, and again not even counting what’s happening 

on-reserve, Mr. Speaker, where in too many cases the situation 

is far worse. Nothing in terms of recognition from this 

government as to an emergency plan to address that, and that’s 

gone on for far too long, Mr. Speaker. Those are numbers that 

are going in the wrong direction. 

 

We see too much in terms of, you know, I was in one public 

meeting, Mr. Speaker, where we had a bit of a discussion about 

health care and the way that this government has spent, you 

know, plenty of millions of dollars on lean in this province, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and at the same time not putting the resources 

on the front lines in places like our emergency rooms. And the 

one debate I was at was down the street from the Pasqua 

Hospital, where of course they were very much over capacity 

that particular weekend. 

 

And in terms of the actual people’s experience as to how these 

things are working or not, there was cognitive dissonance, Mr. 

Speaker, in terms of the hype that we’d hear from the Sask 

Party, and the reality that the people in that room were 

experiencing when they would go to the emergency room at the 

Pasqua and the things that are going on there that should not be 

going on. 

 

On the streets but not in this Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, we 

see the proof of gross domestic products, our economy, the 

measure of our economy that has shrunk over the last year and 

the hardship that that places on people’s lives. We see concern 

about, you know, utility bills that continue to go up. And this 

Friday was no exception, Mr. Speaker, where yet again the 

people of Saskatchewan are going to be paying the price for 

Sask Party mismanagement when it comes to SaskPower. 

 

We’ve seen the growing lines at the food bank, Mr. Speaker. 

We’ve seen alarmingly again how that relates to both children 

and to seniors, people that we should be taking a greater interest 

in their well-being. But you know, there they show up in the 

lines of the food banks. 

 

We see a government that — and there’s no mention of this in 

the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, and there’s certainly, you 

know, scant mention of the details of this on the campaign trail 

— but we see where $3 million was pumped into one 

technology corporation in Saskatoon. And you see everybody 

else in the sector say, you know, what about us? You know, 

where’s our shot at this sort of resource? Where’s our three 

million? And how is this not picking winners and losers, Mr. 

Speaker — something which this government has said that they 

would never do, and something which was employed as the 

premise for which this government set about killing the film 

and video industry in this province, something for, you know 

. . . We await the utilization report from this government as to 

what’s going to happen with the sound stage. 

 

And you know, we’ve heard about one of the main responses 

was, to folks when they’re asked the question about what to use 

the sound stage for, well they say, you know, maybe use it for 

the film industry. Maybe use it as a sound stage, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. And again that’s something that I heard a lot about on 

the streets of Regina Elphinstone-Centre and on the doorsteps 

of Regina Elphinstone-Centre from far too many people that 

were on the cutting edge of that industry and then were on the 

getting-cut edge in terms of losing jobs and having to move out 

of country. 

 

And again we see this, we see this in the . . . Again I know they 

don’t like Statistics Canada over there, Mr. Speaker. That’s sort 

of the MO [modus operandi]. It’s like, you know, it’s stick that 

head in the sand fast enough when you see the Statistics Canada 

folks coming. But we had another report coming out from 



May 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 109 

Statistics Canada that showed that the cultural sector in 

Saskatchewan, which is the pride of so many communities and 

the pride of so many of us in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and 

of so many neighbourhoods throughout Saskatchewan, we’d 

seen that it has not flourished under this government. We’d seen 

that it is in fact trailing what goes on in most of the rest of the 

country. And again, Mr. Speaker, they don’t like the facts, but 

there you go. 

 

We’d seen in the campaign a fair amount of concern around the 

Global Transportation Hub. We’d seen concern around the P3 

aspect of so many of the different projects that this government 

is getting up to, certainly as it relates to the Regina bypass. And 

we’d seen concern about whether or not there was a true 

accounting of the tab that the people of Saskatchewan were 

going to be stuck with, Mr. Speaker, in terms of underwriting 

these different projects. And again, Mr. Speaker, that’s not a big 

surprise because when it came to delivering a budget, this 

government couldn’t get it done. They could not provide that 

fundamental information to the people of Saskatchewan. And 

again I think we’re going to see pretty plainly how it is that why 

they did not want to campaign on the budget will be 

forthcoming in the days ahead. But that doesn’t mean that the 

people of Saskatchewan didn’t deserve that information. Far 

from it. 

 

We’d seen concern with the growing HIV [human 

immunodeficiency virus] epidemic, Mr. Speaker, and the way 

that this government — you know, good on them — they’ve got 

a strategy in place for a couple of years at least that wrapped up 

in December. And again nothing has followed in the train of 

that. We’d seen a lot of different things from this government, 

Mr. Speaker, and there are a lot of them . . . The people from 

Elphinstone, they’re a pretty canny bunch, and they had a lot of 

different things to say about them in the campaign. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this Assembly I’ve been given responsibility by 

our leadership for a number of jobs in terms of working to 

provide a critique around SaskTel; around the Public Service 

Commission; around Central Services; around Parks, Culture 

and Sport, around the Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation, 

around Advanced Education and Employment; Trade, 

Innovation, and Tourism. And certainly I’m also very glad to 

serve as an associate critic for indigenous issues on behalf of 

the official opposition, alongside my great friend and colleague, 

the member from Cumberland, and our lead critic, the member 

from Athabasca. And those are jobs that I will seek to do as best 

I can, as well as do as best I can as the Opposition House 

Leader, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[19:45] 

 

And in that, I’m sure that folks will be interested to hear that, 

you know, for whatever misgivings as to how I had about the 

members opposite campaigned . . . the people made a decision. 

And in a democracy that’s to be respected, and the people, you 

know, the people were right. They elected the government, and 

now it’s up to them to live up to that trust that has been placed 

in them, Mr. Speaker. Again that to whom much has been 

given, much has been expected. Much is expected. But certainly 

I am thankful for the constituents from Regina 

Elphinstone-Centre who’ve once again placed their trust in me, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, to serve as their representative. 

And I guess to wrap up some of the comments, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I’d make a few observations. There’s some good 

things — you know, scant though they were — there were some 

good things in the Throne Speech. I look forward to seeing 

what the partnership with the First Nations Power Authority 

looks like. I look forward to seeing what the uptake is on the 

reverse mortgage with seniors as regards property tax. 

 

I look forward to seeing how the uptake is on the graduate 

retention program. And again, Mr. Speaker, there’s a bit of sort 

of running past the truth of what’s gone on in terms of that 

program, Mr. Speaker. Certainly it’s been converted to . . . It 

was much more lucrative previously, and in terms of the change 

from refundable to non-refundable tax credit, it’s going to be 

very interesting to see how that impacts lives in a way that I 

would predict will be much different than the help that it had 

been before. 

 

And it will be very interesting to see how that, you know, 

back-end resource combined with institutions that have big 

questions about their budget, you know, we’re going to see how 

this impacts students, Mr. Speaker. We’re going to see how this 

impacts the teachers and the faculty that are doing the work on 

those institutions. 

 

And we’re going to see, I would submit, Mr. Speaker, again the 

terrible box that these folks get put in, in terms of is it cuts to 

services or increases to tuition, or both? And we’re going to see 

that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And when that happens, my hope is 

that, you know, there’s not yet another sort of turning of the 

head away from the folks making this clear to them. Because 

this has been clearly stated by the institution’s leadership 

themselves for years now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in terms of how 

they will be impacted by the choices that this government is 

making or not. And so we’ll look forward to see how that goes. 

 

There’s some great things happening in Elphinstone-Centre, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker. And again it’s always sort of difficult 

because you’ve got, you know, finally action being taken on the 

replacement of Scott Collegiate and the building out of the 

North Central shared facility, Mâmawêyatitân. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, you know, it only took eight years from the 

announcement in the 2008 budget — you know, like land speed 

record kind of action — but we’ll take it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

We’re glad to see the work on Sacred Heart. And you know, 

that’s a school that does a tremendous amount of great work 

and should have the tools to get the job done of educating those 

students and to making that better life for our community. 

We’re interested to see the work continue on Connaught. And 

again in one of the debates that I had the honour of participating 

in in the campaign, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education 

didn’t answer my question. When you close one school, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, and merge it with another one, so you’ve got 

two schools closed and you replace it with one, where does that 

add up into the Sask Party stump speeches, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker? How do they account for that? Well they account for 

that by yelling you down, Mr. Deputy Speaker. No surprise 

there. No surprise there. 

 

Anyway, it’s good to be part of the debate here tonight. I guess, 

you know, to close Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve never laid claim 

to perfection in this Assembly. And I’ve certainly never laid 



110 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2016 

claim to it for my party. I guess what I would hope for is a little 

more self-awareness or a little more sort of, I don’t know, a 

little less sledgehammer, a little more sort of thoughtfulness as 

the members opposite get up and say their speeches. Because I 

asked one of my colleagues how their one speech had gone, and 

the summary that was given to me was, not surprisingly, that 

NDP bad, Sask Party good. And you know, again it speaks to 

the sort of yelling approach that gets taken by some of the 

members over there. 

 

So I guess my hope is this: that some of the new members, you 

know, continue to be thoughtful in their approach to public 

policy — same for some of the older members over there as 

well — that they don’t drink the Kool-Aid from the firehose, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that they certainly don’t get into chugging 

back their own bathwater, you know. Because ultimately that’s 

going to be bad for public policy in Saskatchewan. 

 

We hope to see that the humility that was counselled by the 

Premier on election night, you know, lasts more than the rush of 

getting off the stage and that it actually brings itself to bear 

somewhere in this Chamber, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But to say it again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s a privilege, it’s an 

honour to join debate in this place. I try to do my best, and in 

that I’m thankful for the support that’s been given me yet again 

by the people of Regina Elphinstone-Centre. And in that 

connection, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the issues that I had a lot 

of discussions with the folks on the doorstep and through the 

campaign, I will not be supporting the Throne Speech, Mr. 

Speaker, though I will be supporting the amendment. And if 

that works out then, Mr. Speaker, you know, all bets are off. 

But with that I conclude my remarks. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

University. 

 

Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d 

first like to congratulate the hon. member from Cannington, our 

longest serving MLA, for his service. And I congratulate you on 

your recent election to Deputy Speaker of this House. I’d also 

like to recognize that we’re on Treaty 4 territory. 

 

I’d like to congratulate all members on both sides for their 

recent election, and a special thank you to all of you veteran 

members who I think have gone out of your way to make us 

newbies feel pretty welcome. 

 

As a discerning person of faith and a member of my 

neighbourhood Christian church, I want to especially welcome 

the member from Regina Pasqua, Mr. Speaker. I look forward 

to learning more about the Muslim community so that we can 

build the kind of respectful interfaith relationships I frankly 

think the world needs more of. 

 

Most of the members here in Regina fought hard for our seats, 

and I’m ever mindful of that. I need to say a very special thank 

you to all of our volunteers, but especially to the core team who 

helped get me here and who all hold a very special place in my 

heart: Bonnie, Norma, Deron, Jennifer, David, Cathe, Dan, and 

Darin. You guys are the best. 

 

The Sask Party staff, particularly Patrick, Sam, and Kaitlyn, 

were indispensable. A local business owner of 30 years, Jim 

Baton, was an unbelievable source of support, and of course 

some pretty great pizza. Tim, you’re an amazing asset to all of 

us. Tessa, who door knocked with me in blazing heat, torrential 

rain, gale-force winds, and bitter cold. My Jeremy, who was 

invaluable with our data management and candidate 

management, and finally my campaign manager, Grant, who 

went through the highs and lows of campaigning with me and 

was a fierce and loyal defender when I needed someone. These 

folks have become like family, and I feel blessed to have them 

in my life. 

 

And of course, I need to thank my husband, Kevin, and my 

kids, Kayman and Montana, my 14-year-old twins, who are 

with me always either in person or in my heart or by text. As 

some of you know, my husband is a sole practitioner with a 

very busy law practice, and my two kids are highly competitive 

athletes in multiple sports. We’ve been able to make our lives 

work because I’ve always made career adjustments and 

sacrifices to be able to be an engaged parent. 

 

When we sat down to talk about running for office, my husband 

said, honey, it’s your turn. I want to thank him for that and 

know that this adjustment to our family life has been especially 

challenging for him. I thank him for supporting me regardless. 

For their part, my kids have always been important players on 

my team, as I am on theirs. They can work a room better than 

most of us in here, especially me. And if I may say so, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker, I’m glad that our family can contribute a party 

football team player, outside of the member from Gardiner 

Park, who doesn’t actually require a defibrillator on standby 

during the annual party game. 

 

It is an honour to be able to stand in this room the Premier 

characterized as august. And I’m deeply humbled by the service 

of the many men and women in history who have served this 

province from this place, who have come before me. So many 

times I’ve watched this Assembly as an observer and have 

studied the displays of leadership, policy debate, oration, and 

sometimes rancour. Much more often than not, I’ve admired the 

men and women here for their passionate conviction in what is 

best for the people and the province of Saskatchewan, even on 

points where I’ve disagreed on how to get there. John Maxwell, 

the noted public speaker, author, and leadership coach has been 

famously quoted as saying “You are the average of the five 

people you spend the most time with.” I believe I’m in pretty 

good company then. 

 

I would be remiss not to note that it is a special honour to be the 

first elected MLA in the brand new constituency of Regina 

University, as both a woman and as a long-time member of the 

U of R [University of Regina] political science department, 

representing the Saskatchewan Party. I admit, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that’s pretty fun to say. 

 

My constituency of Regina University is composed of three 

neighbourhoods. They are Whitmore Park, Hillsdale, and over 

the Ring Road, University Park. During the campaign I counted 

no less than 18 churches that I represent. There are also 

significant homes for seniors: in particular the Chateau Marian 

. . . retirement community where I’ve made many friends, Selo 

Gardens, Wascana Manor, and Storie Manor. 

 



May 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 111 

We also have a number of fantastic locally owned businesses — 

many, by the way, that are owned by women — such as Cade, 

Coda; Elizabeth’s; Magpies; Stone’s Throw Coffee House; 

Crocus & Ivy; Tumblers Pizza; Havik; Track & Trail; The 

Cottage Restaurant; and Level 10 Fitness. 

 

While door knocking I met many folks who are newcomers and 

permanent residents to Saskatchewan from all over the world. 

While they couldn’t vote and often struggled with English, they 

were so very grateful and appreciative to have someone show 

up at their door as part of our political process. It was an 

important reminder not to take these freedoms and 

responsibilities for granted. 

 

I also had the great fortune, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of meeting 

and chatting with a wonderful lady, Ms. Rachel Clark, who 

turned 101 years old in April and still lives in her own home on 

McNiven. She wanted the Premier to get re-elected for her 

birthday, and I’m really happy that we were able to oblige. 

Sharp as a tack and clearly very self-reliant, she told me and, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I quote, “I’m not much of a housekeeper 

anymore, but I don’t give a damn what anyone else thinks.” 

 

But I think it’s safe to call my constituency the education 

constituency. I represent three high schools, the U of R, SIAST 

[Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology], 

and a dozen or so elementary schools in the public and private 

systems. Campbell Collegiate is Regina’s largest public high 

school, with over 1,500 students, and which is home to the Ivey 

national-Case-Competition-winning Campbell Business Club, 

whose students will be here for the budget. Campbell is also 

home to a voluntarily initiated student gay-straight alliance. I’ve 

always believed, Mr. Speaker, that people are capable of doing 

the right thing without being forced by government to do so, 

and this is a great example. I look forward to supporting them in 

their work to prevent bullying and homophobia and will be 

participating in and supporting Pride Week here in Regina next 

month, as I have in previous years. 

 

LeBoldus High School is also part of my constituency. It is part 

of the separate system, and is home to not only the city, but also 

the provincial championship football team for the last few 

consecutive years, as well as the city championship junior and 

senior basketball teams. And we even have an associate school, 

the Regina Christian School, which is a faith-based combined 

elementary and high school. The minister and I are looking 

forward to attending the opening night of their performance of 

the Mary Poppins musical this Friday. 

 

As most of you know, I’m a policy nerd, and so I’m pretty 

anxious to get into the work of the Standing Committee on 

Human Services and the mandate given us in the Throne 

Speech to examine organ donorship, and I’m also looking 

forward to working with and learning with my colleagues on 

the Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 

 

[20:00] 

 

But most especially, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m really looking 

forward to continuing to work with young people. This, as 

everyone here knows, is a passion of mine. I’m excited to 

welcome one of the interns to work with our team beginning at 

the end of this month. And I’m hoping to work alongside the 

Speaker to guide some long overdue program improvements 

like terms of reference, for example, with former colleagues at 

the two universities and also with the member from Saskatoon 

Centre across the aisle on the advisory committee for the 

Saskatchewan Legislative Internship Program. I expect that’s 

going to be quite rewarding. 

 

In the words of the Chinese philosopher and the author of the 

Tao Te Ching, Lao Tzu, new beginnings are indeed often 

disguised as painful endings. 

 

In her very eloquent maiden speech, the member from 

Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota talked about leaving her mark. 

I’ve thought about that a lot as I’ve written and rewritten this 

speech, and I’ve decided to cast my fears aside and do just that. 

 

You see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my sister and I were largely 

raised by my mother on her own because, for the majority of 

our life, my family dealt with a family member who struggled 

with serious addiction. This addiction stemmed from surviving 

childhood abuse at the hands of a trusted authority and the 

depression and anger which arose from that experience. 

 

As children, we moved 21 times in 18 years, in part to follow 

the trades which my father was a part of, but also during periods 

of temporary marital estrangement as a result of the many 

unchecked mental health issues and their consequences I’ve 

identified. We struggled to make ends meet. Moving this often 

as a child was very hard, but it taught me early on how not only 

to adapt to isolation from peers, but also how to thrive in spite 

of it. 

 

My mother worked a full-time job and usually added two more 

part-time ones on top of that to provide for us, and so my sister 

and I learned from a very young age to be self-reliant and 

hard-working. Having come from a strict French Roman 

Catholic family of 11 kids, my mother was a resourceful 

woman who knew how to manage with limited means. Thus 

when things at home with our family member got really bad, 

she at least had the ability to be able to take us to spend a night 

or two in our van at the Buffalo Lookout Campground just out 

of town on the way to White City. 

 

As many of you already know, I have deep empathy for women 

and their children who simply have no resources to go 

anywhere other than the shelter, if they are lucky enough to get 

that far. I am proud to have been sitting as a guest in this 

legislature when this government made budget investments in 

emergency shelters for women. I am proud of its work with 

STOPS to Violence [Saskatchewan Towards Offering 

Partnership Solutions to Violence], the Who Will You Help 

campaign, and Bill 144 on the domestic violence Act. 

 

I am proud that Sofia House, which is a second-stage shelter, 

will be the recipient charity of our event in August. And I’m 

extremely proud that we have worked with community partners, 

the federal government, and the city of Melfort to construct a 

16-bed shelter there, which should be opening soon. To be 

clear, it is not a good thing that the need for support services 

like this endures, but I sure am glad that more women and 

children fleeing danger have a place to go. 

 

Some of the members opposite are clearly not aware that many 



112 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2016 

in our party were hit personally by stories like mine last year, 

with the tragic passing of a long-time colleague who I 

regrettably never had the chance to know but many I know 

cared about. I am therefore hopeful that we will continue to 

engage in meaningful dialogue to continue to address this 

problem in our province, because there is more work to do and 

we are indeed humble enough to know it. As we say in the 

academy, the personal is the political. 

 

Mr. Speaker, my mother taught us to rise above our station by 

always demonstrating professionalism and basic human 

decency while putting 150 per cent into every endeavour. I 

never did get a chance at a track and field scholarship, but I did 

work hard to get many academic ones throughout my university 

studies. This, along with working multiple jobs and living on 

my own, is what got me through nearly three degrees of an 

otherwise self-funded education. 

 

Some of my graduate and postgraduate work was done while 

pregnant with twins and later with toddlers who were twins, and 

at a time in Saskatchewan when jobs were hard to come by. As 

you can imagine, it was a challenge to persevere, particularly 

when you consider that Saskatchewan had the lowest ratio of 

available child care spaces during that time. I’m so thankful that 

our government recognized that this created an opportunities 

barrier for families and has invested in increases in child care 

spaces nearly every year since coming to power in 2007. 

 

I’ve been a part of the Regina University constituency now for 

26 years. My husband and I had our first home on Darke 

Crescent just off of Kramer Boulevard. And as many of you 

know, I grew up on the U of R campus where I am a proud 

graduate of Campion College, a postgrad, an administrator, and 

a faculty member. 

 

The University of Regina is a very important constituent, my 

home away from home, and a partner in keeping Saskatchewan 

moving forward. But I’ve been struck by some pervasive 

assumptions about the role of government, the academy, and the 

people in it. The minister for post-secondary education 

addressed some of that narrative in question period earlier 

today. These assumptions were recently challenged in a brave 

piece written and published by Hill business student Scott 

Pettigrew in the university’s student newspaper, The Carillon. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’ve shared my very personal story despite my 

fear of doing so because I think it illustrates something very 

important about our government. My story is not unique. I 

suspect many of my colleagues could share many stories of 

struggles and perseverance. What I hope it demonstrates is 

similar to what the young Mr. Pettigrew wrote about in the 

student newspaper, and it is this: we on this side of the House, 

and our supporters, are not out of touch. We are not entitled. 

We and Saskatchewan Party voters are not for, and I quote, 

“racism, violence, etc.” as was tweeted and deleted last 

Thursday by an NDP candidate in the recent election. And we 

definitely do not have a tin ear when it comes to human issues. 

 

Contrary to what they propagate, the NDP and their supporters 

on the political left do not have a monopoly over social issues 

and basic human empathy. Our difference — and it is an 

important difference — is that we see the way forward not as 

reducing everyone to the lowest common denominator, but by 

creating a culture that aspires to inspire and celebrate excellence 

through an environment that works to build opportunities for 

people to realize their potential. That is why we have the SAID 

[Saskatchewan assured income for disability] program and why 

we amended the Human Rights Code to protect rights for 

transgendered people in Saskatchewan. 

 

It is no accident that we are seeing more athletes, musicians, 

artists, and businesses from this province compete and succeed 

on the world stage than ever before. It is because we encourage 

them to believe that they can do it, and so they do. We believe 

in human potential. This does not make us uncaring. But we 

cannot be all things to all people. 

 

Our job is to create the best possible environment for people to 

thrive by finding the best and most efficient ways to invest and 

manage our resources to build a competitive economy and to 

make targeted investments where they make sense to give 

people a hand up. That is why we forged a new partnership with 

the First Nations Power Authority to develop 40 megawatts of 

clean energy generated from solar power and flare gas. We 

want to continue to build on a diversified energy portfolio and 

we want to create jobs and skills training people for our 

Aboriginal people to succeed and to thrive. I look forward to 

more of these kinds of partnerships and this kind of thinking. 

 

Mr. Speaker, for a long time my best and my brightest students 

asked me to write reference letters for them to go elsewhere, to 

graduate schools or jobs, before this government got elected, 

because they wanted to go where the opportunities were and 

those weren’t here. Do you know why? Because for a long time 

we were okay with mediocrity. We were okay with equalization 

payments. We were okay with the lack of a competitive 

environment because then everybody is special. And when 

everybody is special, no one is. I remember when people were 

embarrassed to say they were from here, and they felt the need 

to downplay success stories, something which was also noted 

by the member from Saskatoon University earlier. This culture 

of mediocrity led to youth out-migration, closed schools and 

hospitals, a stagnated economy, and a virtual invisibility on the 

national stage for decades, let alone the global one. 

 

I get fired up about this, Mr. Speaker, because for me the great 

irony of the absolute rhetoric, particularly around education, by 

some of the members opposite and some of their supporters 

over the recent campaign is that they see themselves as the great 

vanguards of education and its students, even though it has been 

a while since any of them actually taught. 

 

Everyone who’s actually read Marx, Lenin, and Trotsky, and 

who knows a bit of history about the Bolsheviks and the 

proletariat intelligentsia knows what happened to the vanguard 

party. Their self-righteous belief that no one outside of their 

strictest adherence to their ideology could possibly have viable 

solutions to social issues, let alone care about them, led them to 

campaigns of fearmongering and paranoia that quickly replaced 

the Tsarist dictatorship with Stalin’s. Because of the lack of 

humility and open-mindedness, the vanguard party eventually 

fell into obscurity because they lost touch with the very 

everyday people they purported to champion. 

 

While the members opposite pontificate about how we don’t 

care, they should really ask themselves why ordinary 



May 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 113 

Saskatchewan people have kept them reduced to a 10-person 

caucus. 

 

In my experience, Mr. Speaker, students actually do not rattle 

off NDP campaign talking points when you run into them. That 

must be a shock. But these steadfast blinders are maybe the 

reason why op-eds, like the young Mr. Pettigrew’s in the 

student newspaper, or the fact that the Saskatchewan Party won 

the poll on campus, is viewed as an anomaly, an accident. Talk 

about false consciousness. 

 

The hard, cold fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that by denying jobs 

and opportunities for nearly two decades by upholding a culture 

of mediocrity, our most promising students and some of our 

brightest academic minds were driven straight out of this 

province. It caused the closure of schools. People were not 

better off. 

 

It is not a coincidence that our government has pushed for jobs, 

scholarships, and innovation and that the U of R had a record 

enrolment this fall of just over 14,000 students. About 14 per 

cent of those was young people from the global community 

who want to come here. 

 

Over half of our graduates are women who are likely to 

contribute to the one-third of female entrepreneurs starting up 

local businesses, creating jobs, and competing with the best. 

And while I commend the members opposite for reaching 

gender parity, I feel the need today to use this opportunity to 

challenge some pretty tired, old narratives, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

We do not need to be victims. We need a government that 

creates a culture where we celebrate and inspire excellence and 

optimism, new heights to reach and hope for, and then gets out 

of the way so we can rise to the Saskatchewan occasion and 

compete with the best of the best. 

 

And so yes, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to support the Speech from 

the Throne without amendments. Let’s put our minds to work to 

find innovative ways to give people access to MRIs and CT 

scans that often leave anxious families waiting, not knowing 

what to do to care for their loved ones. Yes, let’s continue to 

use and explore new partnerships to build schools, hospitals, 

and long-term care facilities for the record population who call 

this place home. Let the liquor stores compete. And let’s look at 

how the patent box might be the first of a series of steps in 

building a knowledge economy that our schools, our 

universities, and our technical institutes can feed into. 

 

Last Monday, my parents and my kids sat in this room and saw 

me being sworn in. My father, who’d never set foot in a 

legislature before, sat right back there alongside my mother. 

They’ve been married for over 40 years, through some very 

serious ups and downs. My mom retired after 28 years as a 

public servant. My dad retired his small construction company 

after having strapped on the tools and gotten up on a scaffold 

for 30 years. They worked hard. They persevered. They 

committed. They believed it could be better. Those issues that 

plagued our family for most of our life and the deep hurts that 

led to it finally got some attention. And so I was able to see my 

parents teary-eyed with pride, with the grandchildren they adore 

at their side, see me begin to make my mark. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan’s best days are still ahead 

of us, and I for one can’t wait to get going. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member for 

Moosomin. 

 

Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank my colleagues 

for their warm welcome into this distinguished body. It is truly 

humbling to be here representing the good people of Moosomin 

constituency. I thank them for selecting me to represent them in 

this twenty-eighth sitting of the Saskatchewan legislature. 

 

Before I begin the main thrust of my address, Mr. Speaker, I’d 

like to make a few acknowledgements to those who have helped 

me on my journey to get here. Again the electors of Moosomin 

constituency are high on that list as they saw fit to support me 

and allow me to have a four-year lease on this seat. I truly 

appreciate their support and pledge to represent them to the best 

of my ability. 

 

[20:15] 

 

And I’ll always be grateful to the volunteers who helped me get 

nominated and ultimately elected to this House. I would like to 

say a special thank you to Jeff Baran, my campaign manager, 

for making everything run smoothly and look effortless. I 

would like to thank my campaign Chair, Cam Taylor, for his 

wise counsel; my campaign team, Stephen Scriver, Tim Taylor, 

Jay Malo, Tatum Duryba, Tim Hovedestad, and Robert and 

Kimberley Taylor for their enthusiasm and willingness to help. 

 

There are so many others who volunteered on the campaign 

with their hard work and sacrifice. I regret I can’t mention them 

all individually today but I want them to know truly how much 

I appreciate their efforts. We became a formidable team. 

Everything was done on time and with precision. 

 

Mr. Speaker, please allow me to acknowledge my predecessor, 

good friend, and mentor, Mr. Don Toth, who gave this House 

and this province 30 years of distinguished and selfless service. 

The citizens of Moosomin constituency always felt the high 

regard he held for them. Don was a man who wouldn’t miss an 

opportunity to visit his constituents anywhere, any time, and he 

was a wonderful example to all of us of the importance of 

having strong principles, integrity, and putting family first. 

 

He is one of the most ethical men I have ever met and we would 

all do well to follow in his example. He has my deep respect 

and the deep respect of the Moosomin constituency. I thank 

Don for his knowledge that he so kindly shares with me. I thank 

him for his support, and we thank him for his part in the 

formation of the Saskatchewan Party. My family and I wish 

Don and his wife, Lois, many years of good health and much 

time spent with his beloved grandchildren. 

 

But my deepest and most affectionate gratitude goes to my 

family. As a good portion of my business has been conducted 

abroad, my wife, Candace, my daughter Emma, and I have had 

to make some sacrifices but have gotten used to making the 

most of the time we’ve had together. And as I move into this 

next phase of my life and me taking on the responsibility of 

being an MLA, I’m grateful we’ll be at least in the same time 

zone. 

 



114 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2016 

Candace has been unwavering in her support and is a constant 

source of encouragement to me. Her kindness and her empathy 

have taught me to always look deeper, to feel deeper, that 

everyone has their own unique set of circumstances and 

challenges. I look to her for her insight, for her compassion, and 

her honesty. I could never thank her enough for all that she has 

taught me. 

 

I want to also thank my daughter Emma for her absolute 

optimism. This year Emma was elected as her school president, 

and she’s quick to remind me that she’s the first elected official 

in our house. During the recent provincial election, she door 

knocked with Candace and I, not only in our constituency but in 

seven others as well. She was fully committed and it would be 

difficult for anyone to have outworked her. She is the perfect 

example of the new Saskatchewan, a 12-year-old entrepreneur 

with three businesses. Her favourite thing to say to everything 

is, I’ll try. I love her curiosity and her thirst for knowledge. I’m 

very proud of her. 

 

Of course I have to acknowledge a profound debt of gratitude to 

my parents. My father and mother, Lorne and Diane, instilled a 

solid work ethic into my siblings and me. The reality of 

growing up on a farm is that there’s chores, then school, then 

chores again. My parents never argued the fact that we needed 

to have hobbies, sports, and other interests, and we had plenty 

of those, but after the work was done, my parents made sure to 

expose us to different languages, cultures, arts, and take us to as 

many events as possible. I thank them to this day for instilling 

in me a keen interest and deep curiosity about the world in 

which we live. 

 

I remember as a young boy having an early interest in politics 

and one day asking my father to explain the difference between 

left and right. He made it very simple. He said that those on the 

left wanted the government to have more control in our lives 

and those on the right wanted the government to have less. I’ve 

never forgotten that lesson. And that lesson’s been starkly 

confirmed as I’ve had the opportunity to live and work in many 

countries around the world, and I’ve seen first hand the very 

different results of both of those political philosophies. 

 

Mr. Speaker, please indulge me in borrowing a line from my 

favourite play, The Importance of Being Ernest, by Oscar 

Wilde: “On an occasion of this kind, it becomes more than a 

moral duty to speak one’s mind. It becomes a pleasure.” And it 

is indeed a pleasure to enter into the Throne Speech debate 

about the three pillars. And the three pillars of the Throne 

Speech and our government’s plan to keep Saskatchewan strong 

mirror the very reasons why I decided to enter politics: to keep 

our economy strong, to keep our finances strong, and keep our 

position in Canada strong by always standing up for 

Saskatchewan’s interests. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we live in an ever-globalized world and if there’s 

one thing I can attest to, the world wants what Saskatchewan 

has to offer. Mr. Speaker, look at my home constituency of 

Moosomin. In fact, the name of our constituency is a bit of a 

misnomer. Although we do take in Moosomin, a thriving town 

and largest centre in our constituency, we also include much 

more. From Wolseley, Carry the Kettle Nakota, and Francis in 

the west to the Manitoba border in the east, from the beautiful 

Qu’Appelle Valley in the north to the Moose Mountains in the 

south, we have a diverse and varied landscape. 

 

Our constituency is a microcosm of the Saskatchewan 

economy. We have oil. We have potash. We have agriculture. 

We have world-class manufacturing. And one thing that all 

these sectors have in common is that they rely heavily on 

exports. I’ve had the good fortune to promote Saskatchewan 

know-how, technology, and products around the world. And the 

Saskatchewan Party government has made this job so much 

easier and continues to find ways to facilitate the process. Her 

Honour the Lieutenant Governor stated clearly in the Throne 

Speech how our government can accomplish this, and that is by 

working with Saskatchewan exporters to open and expand new 

markets for Saskatchewan products around the world. 

 

As I was campaigning in the Moosomin constituency, an old 

friend, a financial planner, was concerned that his 15-year-old 

daughter had no interest in the political process or at least didn’t 

see how it affected her. He asked me if there was any way I 

could explain it to her. 

 

I knew that the most important thing in this young lady’s world 

was her horse, so I asked her, I said, you love your horse, don’t 

you? She agreed, and I said, you know that farm machinery 

manufacturer down the road? Well he employs a lot of people 

in this town, a lot of people that go to your father with help with 

their finances. Well one day that manufacturer looks over his 

books. He sees that the export tariffs he has to pay and the red 

tape he has to endure in getting those machines exported to 

other countries, it’s not going to be that good of a year. He sees 

the only way he can survive is to reluctantly lay off a few 

employees, and some of those employees will be clients of your 

father. And they might not need a financial planner, will they? 

And your father says to you, well it hasn’t been that good of a 

year. We might have to cut back on some expenses. And what if 

one of those expenses is your horse? 

 

Mr. Speaker, after calming her down and assuring her that this 

was just an analogy and her horse was fine, she got it. And our 

government gets it. They get it by making sure that we support 

people with initiative and ideas, that we make sure that these 

people won’t be held back by an unreasonable tax burden or 

trade barriers or red tape that ties their hands. This is how we 

get Saskatchewan products, technology, and know-how to a 

world that sorely needs it. Because yes, the world wants what 

Saskatchewan has to offer. 

 

And much of this is being done at the grassroots level. I’ll tell 

you, Mr. Speaker, when you give someone from Saskatchewan 

a challenge, they’ll come up with an idea because after, and all 

they need after that is an opportunity to realize it. And why not 

add some encouragement to this kind of innovation with a tax 

incentive? And this is why our Saskatchewan Party government 

has come up with the patent box incentive. For the first time in 

North America, a government, this government, has come up, 

will offer an advantageous tax rate for the commercialization of 

patents and intellectual property. 

 

And from this will come jobs, an increased tax base, and more 

opportunity to get Saskatchewan products and ideas to the 

world because, as you know, the world wants what 

Saskatchewan has to offer. We have the know-how. We have 

the technology and we have the products the world is looking 



May 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 115 

for, but we need to get them to market. This is why our 

government, starting this year and for the next three years, will 

fix more highways through a $70 million surge in highway 

repair and maintenance. This is part of the new highways 2020 

plan to invest $2.7 billion in highways and transportation 

capital over the next four years. It is why our government stood 

up for farmers, ensured they had access to railcars to move their 

grain. 

 

By standing up for our province’s interests, this is how our 

government keeps Saskatchewan strong. It boggles the mind to 

think of those years that this province languished under the 

NDP when there was little encouragement to think outside of 

the box, when we were too meek to even think about promoting 

Saskatchewan products and ideas to the world. Do you 

remember when, and I quote from a StarPhoenix editorial, “the 

NDP government considered the entire Asian region to hold 

little positive impact on this province or its economy”? I’ll 

repeat that, Mr. Speaker. “The NDP government considered the 

entire Asian region to hold little positive impact on this 

province or its economy.” 

 

But, Mr. Speaker, we know that since 2007 the Saskatchewan 

Party government has aggressively marketed Saskatchewan 

exports throughout the world. And as a result, since 2007 

Saskatchewan exports have increased by 65 per cent. This 

includes 45 per cent increase to Japan, 218 per cent increase to 

India, 297 per cent increase to China. In 2015 alone, these 

countries exported more than $4.8 billion . . . or we exported 

more than $4.8 billion. Now there’s some positive impact. 

 

In a world that’s looking for energy security and food security, 

Saskatchewan has a lot to offer. This is our business. This is 

what we do best. This is why our government stands up for 

Saskatchewan and strongly supports trade agreements such as 

CETA [comprehensive economic and trade agreement] and TPP 

[Trans-Pacific Partnership]. Saskatchewan exported more than 

25 billion in goods to the 11 TPP countries in 2014. This 

represents about 71 per cent of Saskatchewan’s total 

international exports. 

 

To highlight just how important this is to our economy, about 

one in five or 20 per cent of the jobs in Saskatchewan depend 

directly on international exports. Lowering taxes, cutting red 

tape, rewarding innovation, aggressive marketing — this has 

led to 32.6 billion in exports in 2015. A good example of how 

effective and practical this government’s plan has been are the 

results we are now seeing in agri-food exports. In 2015 we 

reached nearly $15.3 billion, surpassing our growth plan target 

of 15 billion in exports by 2020. Saskatchewan remains the top 

agricultural exporting province in Canada. Reaching this 

growth plan five years ahead of schedule speaks to the 

incredible efforts of our farmers, ranchers, and agribusinesses, 

and is further proof that the world wants what Saskatchewan 

has to offer. 

 

The Saskatchewan Party government has been a strong 

advocate for our energy and pipeline sector, supporting projects 

like Energy East. This is another example of how our 

government stands up for the interests of Saskatchewan, and I 

am so proud to stand with them. 

 

Projects like Energy East hold huge importance for the 

Moosomin constituency and our province. Our government also 

has a strong commitment to develop green energy. We have 

pledged to produce 50 per cent of our power from renewable 

sources by 2030. To that end, we have forged a new partnership 

with the First Nations Power Authority that will see the 

development of 40 megawatts of clean energy generated from 

solar and flare gas. 

 

The Boundary dam carbon capture facility in Estevan can 

capture 1 million tonnes of CO2 a year, convert it to liquid, and 

store it deep underground. It would be the equivalent of taking a 

quarter of a million cars off the road. The world is watching 

Saskatchewan closely to learn how they too can produce 

environmentally sustainable clean coal power. This is 

world-leading, homegrown Saskatchewan technology. 

 

Saskatchewan is already a leader in carbon sequestration with 

the advent of minimal-till or zero-till technology, much of it 

pioneered and developed right here in Saskatchewan. And with 

the planned grazing and extensive management systems that are 

being used and constantly improved, our farmers and ranchers 

have greatly increased the organic matter of the soil, increased 

water infiltration, recharged the water and nutrient cycles, and 

are pulling huge amounts of carbon out of the atmosphere and 

storing it in the ground for centuries to come. 

 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan farmers and ranchers are world 

leaders in this area, and have moved far past sustainable 

agriculture and are now practising regenerative agriculture. This 

technology and know-how is in high demand globally, and 

proves once again the world wants what Saskatchewan has to 

offer. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this government also has a proven record of 

prudent fiscal management. Our province has the second lowest 

GDP [gross domestic product], debt-to-GDP ratio in Canada. It 

has the security of a AAA credit rating. It has the competitive 

advantage of a stable royalty regime. These factors in 

Saskatchewan’s strong and diversified economy continue to 

attract new investment to this province. This is how our 

government will keep our economy strong. This is how we’ll 

keep our province’s finances strong, and this is how we will 

strengthen Saskatchewan’s position in Canada and, yes, the 

world. 

 

Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard the numbers and the statistics, and 

the fact is that since 2007 we have new schools, better schools, 

more teachers, more support staff. We have new hospitals like 

the one in Moosomin or the new integrated health care facility 

in Kipling. We have more doctors, more nurses, more long-term 

care beds. We have 138,000 more people living and working 

here and, among these, 58,000 post-secondary graduates who 

could stay and work and build a life in Saskatchewan because 

of our government’s graduate retention program. And now 

these recipients will be allowed to use up to $10,000 of their 

GRP [graduate retention program] benefits towards the down 

payment of their first home right here in Saskatchewan. 

 

[20:30] 

 

Mr. Speaker, we will help our seniors, the ones who built this 

province, remain in their homes longer by allowing seniors with 

household incomes under $70,000 to defer the education 



116 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2016 

portion of their property taxes. And this year, we will be able to 

make record infrastructure investments by ministries and 

Crowns of $3.6 billion. 

 

Our government’s plan will keep our economy strong. It’ll keep 

our finances strong, and it’ll keep our position in Canada and 

the world strong. And this is how we maintain and improve the 

services we all rely on. 

 

Mr. Speaker, in closing I would like to read a passage from the 

Throne Speech itself: on April 4th this government was 

re-elected on a campaign that made few specific promises, but 

instead made one significant commitment — to keep 

Saskatchewan strong. In a world that wants what Saskatchewan 

has to offer, this Throne Speech delivers just that, to keep 

Saskatchewan strong. 

 

Mr. Speaker, it is indeed with great pleasure that I offer my full 

support to the motion put forward by my colleague, the member 

from Saskatoon Westview, in supporting the Speech from the 

Throne. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 

Melfort. 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

Congratulations first of all to yourself on being elected Deputy 

Speaker once again. Look forward to the next four years and a 

little bit under partially your Chair.  

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, a few weeks ago I did a Q & A [question 

and answer] with the local newspaper the Melfort Journal, and 

one of the questions was who, living or dead, would you most 

like to have a beer with. And my answer was Sir Winston 

Churchill. He’s always fascinated me. He’s been somebody . . . 

To me, he’s an inspiring person. He’s an inspiring leader that 

took Great Britain through its darkest hours and a truly great 

man. And when I’m speaking, I often use a quote or two from 

the former prime minister, and one of my favourites I used a lot 

recently during the campaign. “We contend that for a nation to 

try to tax . . . [its way] into prosperity is like a man standing in a 

bucket and trying to lift himself up by the handle.” Seems to me 

we’re seeing that in various constituencies around the country. 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, there is one more obscure quote that I 

feel is very appropriate today, very appropriate for myself, 

when Winston Churchill said, “My most brilliant achievement 

was my ability to be able to persuade my wife to marry me.” 

This applies to me every day. My wife April is my rock. She’s 

my guiding light and very well may be the reason that I’m here 

today. I would like to thank her very much for all that she is, all 

that she does, and thank her for being so strong when she is by 

my side. 

 

I would also like to thank the best campaign team in the 

province. Let me prove this to you. I’m going to name them, 

then I’ll prove this. 

 

An Hon. Member: — Because they got you elected. 

 

Mr. Phillips: — And there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, goes the 

punchline. Chairman, Doug Terry; business manager, Zach 

Moskal; office manager, Peggy Gordon; assistant office 

manager, Debbie Perkins; chairman of volunteers and cookies, 

especially the coconut ones, Darlene Campbell; sign crew, Bob 

McPherson, Tim Hoenmans and Raeanne Renouf; and 

transportation chairman, Dustin Friesen. 

 

Mr. Speaker, when all is said and done there were some 200 

volunteers involved in our election campaign including 

community chairpersons and organizers, e-day personnel, 

drivers and telephone people, office helpers, and there’s an 

assortment of other campaign . . . other positions required to run 

an effective campaign. I will not name each and every one of 

them today but I do appreciate all of them. 

 

Mr. Speaker, I called them the best campaign team in the 

province and I hold this up as proof. They got me elected. The 

Minister of Highways already may have mentioned that just a 

couple of minutes ago, but I would be amiss if I didn’t thank 

Linsey Thornton, the New Democratic candidate for his hard 

work during the campaign. 

 

I would also like to thank 100 per cent of the voters in the 

Melfort constituency for showing up to make this democracy 

work. As with everyone else in this great legislature, I only 

wish that every eligible voter would accept voting as a privilege 

and an obligation. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Melfort constituency office opened in the 

same location in the Melfort Mall on April 11th, and I’m very 

pleased to report that Peggy Gordon and Debbie Perkins are 

back as my constituency assistants. They are a great team that 

work very hard to help the constituents with their individual 

problems, and my appreciation for all that they do especially 

during the periods that I am here in Regina. 

 

I have no doubt that last year’s economic problems are going to 

continue in the short term. The resource revenues for the 

government will continue to be lower than normal for the next 

year or two, and that leaves the Government of Saskatchewan in 

a position where choices have to be made. We as a government 

could raise taxes. But as Winston Churchill said, “. . . for a 

nation to try to tax itself into prosperity is like a man standing in 

a bucket and trying to lift himself up by the handle.” The harm 

it would do to this economy would not be worth it. 

 

Or we could cut programs, stop infrastructure projects, and shut 

down the province as a former government chose to do when 

they were the Government of Saskatchewan. And this 

government and the people of Saskatchewan and the Crown 

corporations of Saskatchewan are still paying off the 

infrastructure deficit that that decision caused. No, the answer is 

to control expenditures but also to continue to build 

Saskatchewan’s economy, continue to keep Saskatchewan 

strong. We recognize that a short-term deficit can be repaid as 

the province revenues return to normal. This is what was shown 

in the Throne Speech and this is what, is the path that the 

people of Saskatchewan chose on April 4th. 

 

The member from Athabasca, who I almost always mention in 

my speech, pointed out in his speech last week over 60 per cent 

of the Saskatchewan voters got it wrong. The opposition does 

not have to change. No, sir. The people of Saskatchewan have 

to change. Mr. Speaker, as a member of the government I like 

his arrogant way of thinking. 



May 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 117 

Mr. Speaker, when I was on the campaign trail there was one 

particular story that really touched me and was a true 

Saskatchewan story. It’s about a couple from the small 

community of Spalding and they farmed just outside the 

community. And back in 1998, Mr. Speaker, Ken and Kathy 

Johnson were having trouble on the farm. They were having 

trouble with revenue and making things work as so many 

farmers do. And they decided maybe he should go and work off 

the farm for awhile but he didn’t really want to do that. And so 

they looked at a cash crop that might work, take a small area of 

the farm and put in a crop called borage. Borage is a crop that 

was very seldom heard of in that time. And they grew it, and 

they grew it very well, and apparently it was a little difficult to 

harvest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but they got through it. And they 

ended up and they had this bin full of seed, but the question 

was, who would buy the seed? And nobody around, because it 

was a new crop, would buy borage. 

 

So they decided that what they had to do was they crushed it. 

So they took it to a crusher and they crushed their crop of 

borage on a small piece of land. They got it back and it was one 

barrel of oil that they had back. 

 

Now the problem was who was going to buy the oil for it, 

because there was no national market or hardly an international 

market at that time. So they looked up on the Internet. They 

found 135 companies throughout the world that may buy this 

product. So they sent out — remember, 1998 — they sent out 

135 faxes to these companies. They got eight or nine faxes back 

expressing interest in this, and they picked out one and they 

sold their one barrel of oil to a company. And I asked them, so 

how much did you get for that? Was it worthwhile? And Ken 

said it was around 8 to $9,000. 

 

But it was a start, and the next year they grew a little bit more 

and a little bit more and then they finally decided that rather 

than having people crush it for, they would buy a building and 

they would crush it themselves. And so they did that, and when 

I was out there in March, I was out in their plant. Their plant is 

now crushing hemp seed; it’s crushing borage; it’s crushing 

flaxseed, crushing sesame seeds, and employed six, seven 

people. It runs at times . . . During a hemp run, they will be 

running 24 hours a day. 

 

They have this plant, and there in the plant was probably maybe 

40, 50 barrels of oil ready to be shipped plus semis that are 

ready to go. This is from that one barrel of oil and this is from a 

need of just having to do a little bit better. 

 

And now this company is exporting right around the world. It’s 

quite amazing. With the help of STEP, the Saskatchewan Trade 

and Export Partnership, they have markets now in Germany. 

They have markets in Taiwan. They have markets in India, in 

China, in the Philippines. It’s growing all the time from this 

plant in Spalding, Saskatchewan. It’s a Saskatchewan success 

story. It’s one that I’ll continue to tell because to me that’s what 

Saskatchewan is all about, and I wish them continued success 

and I know by talking to them, they will have that. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have been up in the House a few times 

before, and I like to talk about industry in my constituency. In 

Melfort we’ve got Dwayne Enterprises. We have M & K 

Welding in St. Brieux. We’ve got, of course, Bourgault 

Industries, Bourgault Tillage Tools. We have Dry Air, Assie. 

We have Doepker’s in Annaheim. In St. Gregor we have 

Michel Industries. In Englefeld we have Schulte Industries; 

Watson, FPS [Failure Prevention Services] and Sapphire Water. 

We have amazing industries in there. And I haven’t mentioned 

BHP, which is in the Melfort constituency, no matter what the 

member from Arm River says. 

 

And I talk about those today because I’m excited about the 

future . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . You may have the potash; 

we’ve got the hole. 

 

So I’m excited about the future. I’m excited about the patent 

box that’s introduced in this Throne Speech. You look at some 

of the names I’ve mentioned like Bourgault Industries and 

Tillage Tools and Dry Air. And where did they come from? 

You know, Bourgault Industries running six, 700 people there. 

Where did it come from? It came from a patent. It came from 

people like the Johnsons who had an idea and they carried the 

idea and built on it. And what the province of Saskatchewan, 

what this government is doing, is to saying that’s how we build, 

not only to expand Bourgault Industries and Tillage Tools and 

Schultes and Doepkers and FPS, but to actually start the next 

generation moving forward so that in two years or three years I 

can be standing up here talking about more people like 

Northern Nutraceuticals, which is Ken and Kathy Johnson’s 

company. So I’m excited about that and I’m excited about the 

opportunities that that will bring. 

 

But I would like to take a few minutes, and it’s been talked 

about tonight, but the fact that Saskatchewan has always had 

great people. And that’s what sustained this province between 

1944 and 2006, is the great, innovative people of Saskatchewan. 

They were born and bred from the agricultural background in so 

many ways, people who could fix anything. Because it was 

harvest, you know, give a person a roll of haywire and a pair of 

pliers and he’ll fix the machine; then after the harvest was done, 

they would build a new part and put it in. And that’s the type of 

innovation that this province was built on. 

 

[20:45] 

 

But you take those 63 years. Saskatchewan’s population grew 

from 832,000 to 953,000 in 63 years. That’s an increase of 

fourteen and a half per cent in 63 years. Canada’s population, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, exploded from 12 million people to 31 

million people — two and a half times — and we had an 

increase of 14.5 per cent. 

 

Saskatchewan was governed by the CCF-NDP [Co-operative 

Commonwealth Federation-New Democratic Party] for all of 

those years with the exception of 16. The last time that they 

were in power, from 1991 to 2006, we actually dropped 3.5 per 

cent. I’ll tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the experiment with 

social democratic government has failed. It has failed for you; it 

has failed for me; it has failed for the innovative, hard-working 

people of this province. 

 

Now you know, we could sit back and say, well does a 

government really make a difference? Well since 2007 

Saskatchewan has been the second-fastest-growing province in 

Canada. We’ve grown 132,000 people in this province in the 

past eight years. Now if you take the . . . what were the 



118 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2016 

numbers, 832 and 953? That’s about 120,000 people over 63 

years, and we’ve grown 132 in the past eight years. The 

population of Canada has increased 13.5 per cent. The 

population of Saskatchewan has increased 18.5 per cent, and 

that’s very important, and it’s more important because of who 

these people are. 

 

Yes, we have immigration from other provinces, in-migration 

from other provinces, and we have immigration from around 

the world, and we accept these people with open arms and they 

make us better. But the big difference, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

our kids. That’s the difference. You see, our kids have always 

done great things. They have just done them someplace else. 

 

I remember graduating from Kinistino quite a while ago. I 

remember that — it’s funny how your memory sharpens up 

with age — and walking out to Highway No. 3 which ran 

through the town, and saying goodbye to all my friends from 

the grade 12 class who were lined up, thumbs out, heading west 

to Alberta ready to do great things somewhere else. I also think 

about my wife, April’s, mother’s family, a family of 13 kids 

that grew up in their loving home in a great community, St. 

Brieux, Saskatchewan. But in order to find suitable 

employment, 12 of the 13 left the province and did great things 

someplace else. Now our kids are staying right here with us. 

 

We have increased the student support by 350 per cent since 

2007. The Sask Advantage Scholarship contributes $500 to 

each graduate’s tuition, towards their tuition for four years of 

university. And as the revenues improve, we’ll see that 

increasing to $750 towards their tuition in university or 

polytech. Then after they graduate, and if . . . No, no, not if. 

And when they build their future in Saskatchewan, we have the 

graduate retention program that refunds 100 per cent of their 

tuition in tax credit up to $20,000. In the next term, in this term, 

it can be used ahead to buy a house to deepen those roots in 

Saskatchewan. We have 58,000 students on this program today, 

58,000 of our young people building Saskatchewan’s future, 

building their future, building their children’s future, and 

building our future. 

 

And yet today we still see the negativity of the NDP 

government across the way. Even this morning they were 

talking about the carbon capture program, the world’s first and 

largest carbon capture project on a coal-fired power plant, 

designed and built in Saskatchewan by Saskatchewan people. 

Yes, it’s had glitches. It’s a world’s first. And when the switch 

went on, it wasn’t perfect. Imagine that happening. They can’t 

understand it. I’m very, very proud of the Boundary dam CCS 

project, the world’s leading technology right here in Estevan. 

And what does the NDP say about that? Boondoggle, they yell. 

That woke you up, didn’t it? They still don’t get it. They just 

will not get it. They don’t get it today, not tomorrow. They will 

never get it. 

 

And just before I shut down, I want to talk a little bit about one 

of my pet peeves. And one of my pet peeves is the critic . . . 

 

An Hon. Member: — From Cumberland. 

 

Mr. Phillips: — No, actually not. It’s the member from Nutana, 

and pointing out all the time that Saskatchewan has the highest 

per capita environmental pollution. Welcome to Saskatchewan. 

Has she ever visited this province? Look at Saskatchewan on a 

map sometime. Our population is spread all over the province. 

It goes from one end to the other. It’s not like Ontario, where 

something like 85, 90 per cent of Ontario is even south of 

Estevan. It’s not like Alberta where it’s all kind of concentrated 

because they have those big piles of rocks. No, welcome to 

Saskatchewan. We have prairie. We have cold weather. Have 

you noticed? It goes down to 40 below here. Really, it goes 

down to 40 below. I’m going to keep my house warm. It’s 

going to take me a little more natural gas to do that. It’s going 

to take me a little more gasoline to drive to the community 

that’s 50 miles away. We’re not all packed into one small area 

in Saskatchewan. 

 

You know, the member talks like she’s never been to 

Saskatchewan. And has she ever noticed those fields out there 

that grows, what was it, $15.3 billion of exports? But they drive 

around in big four-wheel drive tractors burning up all kinds of 

energy. Can you imagine one farmer burning up thousands of 

gallons of . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, cattle methane. 

Yes, there’s some of that in this building. But you know, it’s 

almost like she’s never been to Saskatchewan. Because that’s 

what we are. And yes, we can do better, and we will do better as 

we move along. 

 

But I’m pretty sure that the farmers don’t throw gas out the 

back. They burn it as efficiently as they can in order to feed the 

world. We don’t drive Priuses. I don’t even know if I like the 

word. I know. Forty below, you’re out on your farm. You’re 

driving to town. The wind’s blowing. The snow’s 2 feet deep, 

and you’re driving a Prius. No, thank you. We’re not that way. I 

don’t know why we keep hearing about it, but we’re not that 

way. 

 

I have got that off my chest, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I thank you 

for your time, and I will be supporting the motion on the floor 

and the Throne Speech. Thank you very much. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Rochdale. 

 

Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would like 

to start by congratulating you on your position of Deputy 

Speaker. 

 

This is an exciting time for all of us in the House, and I’d like to 

start by extending some thank yous to my campaign team. 

Everyone here has extolled the virtues of their campaign team, 

feeling that each and every one of them have had the best team, 

but in fact I think the whole Saskatchewan Party had the best 

team. 

 

I had an absolutely incredible campaign team that worked so 

hard to ensure that Regina Rochdale stayed in the Saskatchewan 

Party column. I had a new campaign manager, Enyinnah Okere 

who was just fabulous. He was there day in, day out, making 

sure that everything came together. And my data and GOTV 

[get out the vote] manager was Andrea Smotra, who just made 

sure that all the boxes were ticked and all the work was done. 

 

And then we also had a volunteer Chair, Donna Rybchuk. 

Donna is absolutely fabulous in her ability to convince people 

that they’re going to come out, they’re going to volunteer and 



May 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 119 

have a good time. And in fact they did. 

 

We had a great volunteer team of managers. We had Paula 

Steckler. We had Michelle Grunerud and Lex Ewen. Those, 

along with other volunteers, made sure that we covered the 

constituency numerous times. 

 

Our sign Chair was my husband, Terry Ross, and his brother 

Robert Ross. And so they made sure that we had people 

phoning, emailing, Facebooking, and asking for signs like 

we’ve never had before. It was wonderful to have that kind of 

buy-in from the constituents of Regina Rochdale. 

 

And then we had Judy Langford. Judy made sure that every day 

she cooked a homemade meal for our campaign team. So all of 

our volunteers felt special because she made sure they were fed 

appropriately. 

 

Now some people said, it’s only a 28-day campaign, and how 

fast was that. But in reality it was a four-year campaign. In fact, 

I should probably say it’s been an eight-year campaign because 

we haven’t stopped campaigning in our constituency since I 

was first elected in 2007. 

 

We’ve had hundreds of volunteers come out and give us a hand. 

We appreciate the time and energy that they have dedicated. 

But it was also a really good learning experience for so many of 

them because a lot of them were brand new to politics and they 

came out saying, you know, I’m not sure if I know all the ins 

and outs of politics. But in fact it was a really good opportunity 

for them to become engaged and realize that all the work that 

they did, the contributions that they made were . . . made a big 

difference. 

 

I would be remiss if I didn’t thank some of the, I would call 

them the party builders who retired this past election. We had 

June Draude, Bob Bjornerud, Ken Krawetz, and Don Toth. 

Now those stellar MLAs have been replaced by new MLAs. In 

fact we’ve got quite a few new MLAs on this side of the House. 

And listening to their maiden speeches to the Speech from the 

Throne, I think we can all be very proud of our new MLAs. 

They have stood up and made some of the most incredible and 

passionate speeches that I think we’ve ever heard in this House. 

 

I mean we all know Bob Bjornerud. Bob Bjornerud had the 

ability to have each and every one of us sitting at the edge of 

our seats, appreciating his ability to either answers in question 

period or to make a speech. He had this whole place enthralled. 

 

But you know, we have so many of our new MLAs are going to 

have that same kind of ability to make sure that when they stand 

up and speak, that people listen. People in Saskatchewan listen. 

And I’m so proud and so pleased because I think we have the 

right mix on this side of the House. Now we have a substantial 

amount on this side of the House, but that’s because, that’s 

because the people of Saskatchewan heard our message and 

they liked what they heard. 

 

[21:00] 

 

I’d also like to say that when we were out door knocking in 

Regina Rochdale, the design of my constituency is quite 

different. It’s a completely urban constituency, so I do miss my 

rural aspect. But however, one of the things . . . A lot of people 

that live in Regina still are very connected to the country and 

appreciate all the hard work that our rural folks do for us. 

 

But one of the things I heard loud and clear, and I think 

probably each and every one of us heard it when we were out 

door knocking in this past campaign, was how proud we are of 

our Premier and how proud we are that he’s standing up for 

Saskatchewan. I think each and every one of us can say that we 

. . . You know, we talk about him being the most popular 

Premier in the country, but in fact this is all based on his ability 

to connect with people. But one of the things that, like I said, 

we can be very proud of is that he is strong leadership but he’s a 

humble man, and there is nothing more valuable than a leader 

who has those kind of attributes. I think we can all be very 

pleased with that. 

 

I’d also like to thank my constituency assistant, Kelly Zazula. 

After the election night, Kelly just rolled up her sleeves and got 

back to work, making sure that the big pile of mail was 

answered, emails were answered, and phone calls were 

returned, because people in Saskatchewan, especially in Regina 

Rochdale, were pleased that I was re-elected, but also they 

needed to make sure that their files were being looked after. So 

she has done an absolutely incredible job. 

 

And I would be remiss if I didn’t thank Larry Aitken. He’s the 

general manager, the district manager for Boston Pizza. On 

election night, our campaign office was pretty small and we had 

hundreds of volunteers. And we thought, how are we going to 

be able to muster them at the end when they all bring back their 

information? Larry was very kind to offer us the lounge part of 

Boston Pizza on Rochdale. And so on election night, guess 

what? Every TV in that bar was turned to the election. And 

there was a couple of tables in there that weren’t part of our 

group, and you could tell this is the first time they’ve ever sat in 

a lounge and realized there wasn’t a hockey game on, there 

wasn’t a baseball game on. There was . . . it was politics. So it 

was kind of fun to see those, the people saying, hey, this is a 

little different. 

 

But we really do thank Larry for being able to accommodate us 

because we were between a rock and a hard place in Regina 

Rochdale, finding a facility large enough to be able to 

accommodate our whole campaign team and all the volunteers. 

 

Regina Rochdale is an absolutely incredible area in the 

northwest sector of the city. It is growing leaps and bounds. I 

mean, Lumsden is just on the horizon for us. But also to the 

commercial, the commercial area has, there isn’t any space for 

lease. So because of that, it was a challenge having a substantial 

size of a campaign office. So we, you know, all make do. So 

one of the things in Saskatchewan we can all be proud of is that 

we don’t sit around and whine or anything. We just get the job 

done. 

 

In regards to the Throne Speech, on page 8, I think that this is 

just so indicative of what we heard on the doors. And I’d like to 

read this portion: 

 

STANDING UP FOR SASKATCHEWAN 
 

My government believes in a strong Saskatchewan within a 



120 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2016 

strong and united Canada. 

 

But it is troubling that today, there are some in this county 

who, given the opportunity, would shut down major parts 

of Saskatchewan’s economy and put thousands of 

hard-working Saskatchewan people out of work, all in the 

name of some misguided dogma that has no basis in 

reality. 

 

There are those who are not comfortable with and even 

oppose much of what we produce in Saskatchewan and 

how we produce it — oil and gas, coal and uranium, 

livestock and grains. 

 

They would prefer that those sectors did not exist and that 

the thousands of jobs in those sectors . . . [do] not exist. 

 

They look at those jobs like they are somehow harming the 

country and the world. 

 

To those people, my government has a message. 

 

You are wrong. 

 

You could not be more wrong. 

 

Saskatchewan feeds Canada and the world. 

 

Saskatchewan supplies energy to Canada and to the world. 

 

What we do here makes Canada a better place. 

 

What we do here makes the world a better place. 

 

My government will take every occasion to stand up for 

this province, to defend those [whose] vital sectors, and to 

stand up for every one of those jobs. 

 

That’s what we have in our province. That’s what we have with 

the Premier who stands up proudly for Saskatchewan. 

 

One of the things we can . . . You know, we have the 

opposition, the NDP in the opposition. They stand there and 

they wring their hands, and some of them in fact have even 

signed on or agree with the Leap Manifesto. I think Rex 

Murphy . . . I love Rex Murphy. Rex Murphy makes my 

Thursday. He’s got a way with words. He’s not the prettiest 

man, but my goodness that guy’s got a way with words. And 

what Rex said about . . . He said it best. He said that Leap 

Manifesto is like leaping off a cliff, and that’s what we have in 

the opposition. They’ll stand there; they’re wringing their 

hands. 

 

You know what’s on this side of the House? This side of the 

House, the Saskatchewan Party government, we believe that in 

fact what you do is you don’t stand there wringing your hands. 

You take those two hands, you roll up your sleeves, and you get 

the job done. And that’s what this Speech from the Throne 

does. It lays out a blueprint for us to get the job done. And with 

that, I will be supporting the Speech from the Throne. Thank 

you very much. 

 

The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the 

Opposition Whip. 

 

Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To join in 

on a little bit of a comment to the Throne Speech and maybe 

what’s in it, what wasn’t in it. But before I start out of course, I 

want to take an opportunity to thank, you know, those that did 

the good work and made the effort to get out and vote and cast 

their vote for who they wanted to represent them. 

 

And you know, when I think about this, there’s teams out there. 

And everyone has teams, and everyone thinks they have the 

best team, and that’s good. I think we all feel the same way. We 

have the best team. 

 

Before I start out I just want to again acknowledge those that 

were re-elected, those new ones that were elected, and those 

that have made their maiden seat . I just want to welcome you 

to the Legislative Assembly on both sides of the House. Also, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know we’re on Treaty 4 territory, and I 

just want to acknowledge that as well as many others may 

acknowledge that. I think it’s important to acknowledge our 

First Nations and the treaty land that we, you know . . . We are 

a part of this province and honour that in the way it is. 

 

Now having said that, I want to thank of course my family, my 

wife, kids, seventeen grandkids. I had them all door knocking, 

so it kind of helps when you have the kids out there doing it, 

what they can today, wearing T-shirts and just, you know, being 

happy and doing the good thing. 

 

You know, none of us get here, I think, by accident. There’s a 

lot of work that goes on, by all candidates and all political 

parties, do the work that they do to get re-elected. It is an 

honour to be re-elected, and I’ve said that, to serve the people of 

Cumberland constituency, to be a voice, to raise the issues. But 

also government, you know, has a job and a role to do. 

 

But having said that, my team that worked hard, dedicated. You 

know, I think about my campaign manager, Marty, Devon, you 

know. There’s so many that are out there doing the good work 

— door knocking, putting up signs — whether I think about 

Jordan. There were so many that did the good work — whether 

you get advice from the leaders, whether you get advice from 

our seniors that are in our community, our elders — you get 

advice and direction. 

 

At the end of the day the campaigns are, you know, are fought 

hard. People put their name forward. But at the end of the day 

the people of this province decided the Sask Party would be the 

government, and I respect that. I wish it was differently. It’s the 

way it is, and we’ll deal with what it is. We’ll be the official 

opposition. And being a member of the official opposition, it is 

an honour. It’s an honour to serve the House and do the good 

work that needs to be done, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

But having said that, you know, those individuals, as you go 

along and you hear the challenges when you’re door knocking, 

there are many challenges people are facing. And I’m going to 

go into some of those challenges that they’re facing that I was 

hoping would be in the Throne Speech. It’s a vision, and 

government’s going to give a vision of where it’s going to go. 

And you know, you’re hoping that there was quite a bit and 

would have been quite a bit in the Throne Speech, especially 



May 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 121 

from the North and the seat that Cumberland . . . I was hoping, 

you know. 

 

And when I think about that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about the 

issues, you know, I’ve never had an opportunity to have the 

Premier and many ministers visit the Cumberland constituency 

as much as they did during the campaign. And it was good to 

see them door knocking, talking to people, hearing the true 

issues that are facing northern people, the challenges. And I’m 

going to get into those challenges. I was hoping that when they 

were door knocking and having those conversations with the 

individuals and those leaders and community members that are 

struggling and having issues, that the government would’ve said 

in this document, the Throne Speech, we’re going to make sure 

that we address Saskatchewan needs by this Throne Speech. 

And I’ll get into what’s not in it and why and where, you know, 

where I’ll be going and where will my support be. 

 

So having said that, you know, we’re going to talk a little bit 

about what wasn’t in the Throne Speech, the issues facing many 

northern people, the people in my constituency. You know, we 

talk about keeping Saskatchewan strong and, you know, we 

want our province to continue doing well. We want our 

business people to do well. We want our citizens to do well. We 

want our youth to do well. Doesn’t matter where they go. We 

want to work together. 

 

And sometimes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we may disagree, and 

that’s okay. We may disagree, but I hope . . . And I’ve heard 

some of the members opposite and some of my colleagues say 

it’s the right thing to do sometimes; you need to work together. 

And you know, you can have your way of thinking of things 

and we’ll say back and forth. You have the little bit of the . . . I 

guess you drink the Kool-Aid. You believe that, and that’s fine. 

Those debates go on, and the back and forth, I understand that’s 

part of the process. 

 

But I think sometimes it’s time for seriousness. It’s time to talk 

about the issues that face many residents, not only in the 

province, but in the Cumberland constituency that I’ve been 

honoured to represent. I think about our seniors, the challenges 

they are facing. I think about long-term care. The need is 

overwhelming. We’ve known that. 

 

We keep hearing about there’s more work to be done. Well I’m 

hoping this government, come budget day, will deal with some 

of the issues they heard while they were there, the Premier and 

the ministers were there door knocking, talking to citizens. Like 

I said, we’ll truly meaningfully take some of those concerns that 

they heard. Doesn’t matter who those individuals, you know, 

elected or chose to support. It’s saying it’s the right thing to do. 

And I talked about that, doing the right thing, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, that it is important to do the right thing. 

 

But I think about some of the challenges that we’ll be facing. 

The cost of living, we look at the cost of living and some of the 

challenges that many families are facing. And some may say, 

you know, the economy is doing great in certain sectors, but I 

know back home, some of the residents that I represent have 

lost their jobs to layoffs due to slowdown. 

 

But at the end of the day, you know, you hear a government that 

talks about everything’s going good and everything’s good. 

And I understand that; they want to say that and they’re 

keeping, I think the comment, keeping Saskatchewan strong. 

Well you go talk to some of the families and those people who 

have lost their jobs and see how they feel about that. That’s fine 

to say that, but then you have to have the meaningful 

conversation after and the meaningful budget and, we’re 

hoping, that vision. 

 

And so maybe a lot of those answers that people are having or 

wondering about what’s going to happen with them, with their 

jobs, with affordability, maybe it’s going to materialize come 

June 1st in the budget. And I hope it does, you know, for those 

citizens that have raised the concerns, whether they’ve been 

done through petitions, whether they are municipal leaders, 

First Nations, Métis leaders, that they have raised their 

concerns. School divisions and the challenges that they’re 

facing, I hope the government is meaningful, that it’s going to 

address those issues. 

 

[21:15] 

 

You know, we talk about a government that had — and we’ve 

said this many times in the House — record revenue. They’ve 

had year after year of record revenue. Well when the tough 

times come, there was no money put away. They’ve spent 

everything and now, you know, you look at the Crowns; you 

look at the . . . And it’ll be up to the people to decide. I 

understand that. I’ll say what I need to say and those individuals 

will say what they will say and government at the end of the 

day will say what it wants to say. And they will spin it how they 

want to spin it and that’s fine. That’s the process that we go 

through and that’s what we’re given, and we’ll deal with that. 

Saskatchewan people are strong. They’re committed. And they 

will, we will get through this. We have no choice. 

 

But you know, when you think about the affordability, and I’ve 

talked about some of the power bills that some of our seniors 

and some of the citizens are getting in the North. Their power 

bills are more than their rent. When that is starting to be the 

issue, why is the government not looking at that meaningful to 

say, are there problems? What exactly is it? Is there things we 

can do better to deal with some of our seniors, some of our 

northern residents? And I’m hoping and I was hoping in this 

Throne Speech, like I said, that there would be that vision, that 

they were moving along, that they’re going to address some of 

the needs of our seniors, and long-term care. And there’s so 

many. The list goes on about affordability, about challenges 

when, you know, families, young families are trying. 

 

You look at the poverty and you look at those challenges many 

families are facing. You look at the numbers, and I’ve heard my 

colleagues talk about this on this side of the House, the numbers 

in the food bank going up. People are struggling. It’s struggling 

and I see the good work that many local food bank 

organizations are doing. I know in La Ronge and in the 

community, you know, in Air Ronge where I come from, the 

good work that the food bank is doing because of the 

struggling. And they’re having . . . The usage is going up, going 

up, and it’s young families. It’s kids, more and more are the 

ones suffering. 

 

So hopefully, you know, at the end of the day we can sit here 

and we can go back and forth about the seriousness of what’s 



122 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2016 

going on. And I hope that the budget has vision and I was 

hoping there’d be more vision to deal with that. And all I can do 

is go back home and tell people, let’s hope this government has 

heard the issues, has heard the challenges that you as families, 

that citizens are facing and will address it. 

 

But it’s pretty hard to address it when you had years of record 

revenue and you’ve put nothing away for the tough times. And 

everyone knows you have to do that. I mean, you know, I think 

about the challenges that many do. That’s a way of budgeting. 

This government has gone through everything, spent 

everything. And some of the priorities, you know, when you 

think about it that this government has chose to support. And I 

think my colleague from Lumsden centre talked about $3 

million for a project, picking winners and losers. And you 

know, it’s decisions like that that a government makes where 

you could do more, helping individuals. 

 

You know, we think about the wildfire management concerns 

that were raised on the doors while people were door knocking, 

and we’re talking about serious issues. Government needs to 

respond now to wildfire management, and people are 

concerned. They are. They are very concerned and they want 

some action. And they want to see this government . . . Very 

little mentioned again. So we’ll see where that goes. People 

would love the money reinstated that’s been cut from the 

wildfire management budget that’s constantly, you know . . . So 

let’s just hope the government looks at that and deals with that. 

The leadership, the community members, those citizens that are 

concerned have raised that, so the government can’t say they 

don’t know about that issue. 

 

You know, I think about mental health and addictions and I 

think about the suicides. If there’s ever been an opportunity for 

a government to say, okay, once and for all we need to address 

this. Let’s put the past behind, back and forth, and the heckling 

and the bickering, back and forth. Let’s be serious about this. 

 

When you go to a community to support a family because they 

lost a loved one because of suicide, because of mental health, 

addictions, those issues that are facing them, you know, you can 

say you’ll do all you can. And you try to console them as a 

citizen, as a friend, as a community member, as a leader. You 

try to do that. But what they’re going through, and then you 

find out some of the details, you know, and you hear people 

saying they need supports. They need mental health. They need 

addiction services. You look at the poverty and you look at the 

troubles that families are facing. 

 

And sometimes when . . . I had a mother who said to me, Doyle, 

I’m trying to reach out. I’m trying to get help for my daughter. 

We need help. But you know, unfortunately when I say that we 

need help because we’re an isolated community, there’s not. I’d 

have to drive her to Saskatoon, P.A. [Prince Albert]. You’ve got 

to take her somewhere. They don’t have the resources to get 

there. 

 

So unless the services come in and they have the supports in the 

community, they are left there. So is there more work to do? 

Does this Throne Speech address that? A vision of the 

government? I don’t believe it does. But we’ll see, come June 

1st. Maybe I’m wrong. Maybe the government has heard the 

issues and maybe they’ll respond to that. 

You know, when you think about poverty in general . . . And 

I’ve talked about that, the rate going up and where we’re going, 

and I talked about the food banks, and it’s those issues. And I 

talked about affordability. I talk about power bills. And we look 

at the power bills. Again this government has just now, after an 

election, asking for power rate increases, you know, over 10 per 

cent in the next six months. Like I mean, people . . . And then 

they say, you know, oh well, we’re cutting taxes and 

everything’s going great, everything, the economy, and keeping 

Saskatchewan strong. Well there’s many families out there that 

are struggling right now to pay their power bills. They’re 

unemployed. They’re struggling. Putting 10 per cent more on 

their bills. 

 

And I talked about previous, the seniors, their power bills are 

more than their rent. So when you see those challenges, you’re 

just adding more and more stress to those families, to the 

seniors, to community members, where a government that said 

they would do better. They were going to take care of 

Saskatchewan citizens. That’s what they asked. 

 

You’ve got as big a majority as you could ever want. You can 

pretty well do anything. You can deal with these things. We can 

even work together. We can even work together to address 

some of these issues. We talk about that. You know, we talk 

about . . . And we’ve been asking. I did it in a previous session 

and I know my colleague that asked for the apology for the 

Sixties Scoop from the Premier. Said he would do it, I believe, 

last summer. We’ve been waiting. We’re asking when is it? 

They’ve got to work through it. Well let’s just hope that that’s 

done. I was hoping that would have been here. Let’s deal with 

it. But we’ll see where that goes. That’s one area. 

 

I know my colleagues have talked about the TRC [Truth and 

Reconciliation Commission] recommendations, the 94 of them. 

Let’s see. We need to work together. As a province, as a people, 

we have to come together to work together, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. We’ll see where this government is. And we’ll see as 

those leaders and as those survivors, those families ask for 

government support, we’ll see what this provincial government 

does. And will they respond? Because you see very little 

mentioned in First Nations and Métis people in this document, a 

Throne Speech, a vision, when we’re supposed to be, you 

know, moving together, working together. You know, very 

little, very little in there. 

 

Now you know, I talked about while we were hearing stuff on 

the doorsteps. And whether it’s myself or the members opposite 

that were doing some door knocking, I’m hearing issues. I’m 

hoping they’re genuine. They know the issues now and I hope 

they will address some of those. 

 

We talk about education. We have left our boards of education 

unsure. They’re not quite sure what to figure out. They’re 

feeling this way, that way, so I could see where my colleague 

today talked about that. And being that she’s a past, you know, 

sat as a board of education member, as well as myself as a 

board of education member, they’ve got a pretty important job 

and a huge challenge. And we hear that. And we’ll see, come 

June 1st, exactly where they’re going to be. So many people 

don’t know. 

 

But maybe we thought by, you know, this Throne Speech 



May 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 123 

would have had that vision, but we don’t see it. Everything’s 

kind of quiet and secretive. And we’ll see at the end of the day. 

We’ve been saying that. They say no, it’s not. We’ll see where 

it all goes. 

 

We talk about individuals and we talk about those with 

disabilities. And there is more work to be done. And I keep 

hearing that, more work to be done. That’s a theme. More work 

to be done. But it’s fine. You can have a cop-out and say there’s 

more work to be done. But you need to start addressing the 

serious issues. And it’s time I think at the end of the day. And 

yes, you’ve done some good work in some areas. You know, 

I’ll give you credit where credit is due. It’s not always negative. 

You’ve ran some programs that are working, and that’s good. 

 

But we’ll go back to the vision that you talk about. You know, 

you talk about some of the communities, and I do say this, that 

the leaders in some of the communities when we look at roads, 

infrastructure, the challenges that municipalities on our northern 

roads . . . But it’s not just in the North. Highways are . . . 

[inaudible] . . . and then you hear the government talking about 

putting $70 million into highways over I believe it’s four years. 

And that’s going to fix what the problems are? It’s not going to. 

People know that. You talk to people out there, and my 

colleagues . . . And you know, you guys had to have those 

conversations. You know that that’s part of it. You know, and I 

talked a little bit about picking winners and losers, and at the 

end of the day you’re picking winners and losers and that’s 

frustrating to many people. They want to have an opportunity so 

they’re wondering why. 

 

You know, and I think about some of the highways when I was 

talking about that, whether it’s Highway 123 to Cumberland 

House, whether we, you know, we had the highway through 

Pelican Narrows to Southend, the roads, the 102. We have 

many challenges, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Those community 

members are saying, yes, those leaders. People are getting 

frustrated and angry. They buy new vehicles. They want an 

opportunity. They want to buy a new vehicle, but the wear and 

tear that their vehicles are getting on . . . And I think about, you 

know, there’s different ones. It’s the transport companies. I 

think about the ambulance. We have La Ronge ambulance, 

EMS [emergency medical services] that go out doing the great 

job they do trying to get into communities. Some of the wear 

and tear on the vehicles that they have to endure. And I think 

about the businessman in La Ronge, you know, what he goes 

through and his vehicles go through. You know, there needs to 

be something done and it needs to be addressed. I don’t see that, 

and I’m hoping that the government will sit down and have that 

conversation and hopefully will address some of those issues 

that, whether it’s a business person, whether it’s individuals that 

are feeling those challenges, I’m hoping they will deal with 

that. 

 

Now we talk about a government’s cuts and the government say 

there are no cuts, you know, to the public sector. We’ll see 

where we’re going. Privatization agenda that they say doesn’t 

exist, we heard that today by the Premier. It’s just something 

. . . It doesn’t exist. What I find really, really funny and 

interesting is, you know, this government says oh no, no. We 

would never, we would never do any of that. 

 

You know, we talk about and I’ve listened to lots of the 

government MLAs, members opposite, and their response. And 

you know, they love talking about CCF, the NDP. They did it 

all. They were terrible and it’s all their fault, everything. 

Everything’s their fault. You know, that’s they would like you 

to believe, to drink the Kool-Aid, but the reality is they don’t 

want to talk about the ’80s. They don’t want to talk about 

Conservatives. Oh, we’re not Conservatives. Yes, you are. It is 

your party. You changed the name and then you think you don’t 

have to claim that. But the people of this province, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, are very smart, very wise, and you don’t pull the wool 

over their eyes. They don’t. We know that, you know it, but you 

can sit there and spin it the way you want, and that’s fine. 

 

But having said that, I know at the end of the day, this vision 

statement that this government said they would have, there isn’t 

much in it to address many of the issues I talked about. And I 

haven’t had the opportunity to talk about every issue that was 

based on the doorstep that we heard about. And I know my 

colleagues will share the challenges that are being faced. But 

this government has to do a better job. You have to be serious. 

You have to listen to the people. 

 

At the end of the day, yes, we can and we can talk about that. 

You have your side and we can do the heckling and the back 

and forth and that’s fine and dandy, but let’s be clear. When our 

Saskatchewan citizens elect a government, we all respect that, 

and I’ve said that you are the government. The people have 

decided that. Please, I ask you, hear the issues and the concerns 

that are out there. Don’t play the politics. There is no need for 

it. There is a time for it, and a place. You’ve got your mandate. 

Now I just want to be very clear, be very clear on this: 

sometimes do the right thing and deal with the issues. 

 

The members over there, I can hear you. You can heckle all you 

want and say what you want. I understand that. We all do it and 

it’s part of the process, but I hope when the issue is facing 

whether it’s suicide, whether it’s addictions, mental health, 

whether it’s the roads, the conditions, housing, seniors dealing 

with long-term care, leaders saying things have to change, we 

have many people in the North are getting tired of it. And I 

think the member from Athabasca talked about that. The leaders 

are getting tired and the people are getting tired. They want 

some action. So more needs to be done. 

 

We have to have a meaningful partnership with First Nations 

and Métis. We have to actually mention them, mention them in 

this vision statement. Be bold, if that’s what you’re saying. But 

I don’t see that. I’m hoping at the end of the day, you know, we 

put in an amendment and I know my colleagues will have more 

to say on this, and there is more challenges. But this 

government, yes, you can give yourselves a pat on the back and 

just say you got elected again and all that stuff, and that’s great. 

You’re the government. 

 

[21:30] 

 

But now, you know, this last thing I want to share with them. 

And I think you’ve had eight years, and I’ve said this, of record 

revenue. You’ve spent everything. There’s no money left. 

You’ve drained the Crowns. And that is a shame that you didn’t 

put anything away for our young kids. Instead you borrowed 

money and you say, oh well that’s to do infrastructure or, you 

know, we have to do that to keep the economy strong. Whatever 



124 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2016 

your excuse is at the end of the day, it’s a mortgage and it’s 

debt that our Saskatchewan children, my grandchildren, your 

children, and your grandchildren will have to pay. Spend it, and 

over eight years you spent it. 

 

But you know, you’ve got another four years. You’ve got four 

years now to clean up your own mess that you’ve created. You 

created a mess and you get to clean it up now. And yes, you can 

laugh and think it’s funny. Members over there may think that’s 

funny, but you’re going to get an opportunity to clean up the 

mess that you created. You won’t be able to blame the NDP, oh, 

the NDP. But you’ll probably try to do that anyway. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the end of the day, the good people 

of this province are going to ask, and I know they do, the 

government to do the right thing, to take care of our province 

and take care of all of the province, not pick, choose winners 

and not pick areas where they want to take care of. It’s 

important, and I think the people of this province and our 

children deserve nothing but that, the respect. So hopefully at 

the end of the day, government will hear the issues and, you 

know, like I said, very little vision for the issues I talked about 

and I think my colleagues have shared, and we’ll go back and 

forth. So at this point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will not be 

supporting the Throne Speech but will be supporting the 

amendment. Thank you. 

 

The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 

from Yorkton. 

 

Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees. 

It’s a pleasure to join this debate tonight in regard to our Throne 

Speech for this session of 2016. 

 

Of course it’s customary, Mr. Chair of Committees, but I think 

that it’s something that’s very needed to be done, is thanking 

those people that are significant, that help us not only to be 

here, to get here, to represent our communities, but also that 

support us every day back at home. And of course that’s our 

families, Mr. Chair. 

 

So of course the first one I must, I must thank would be my 

wife, Leone, back home in Yorkton. And you know, it doesn’t 

matter whether it’s our business dealings or whether it’s 

supporting some of the needs back at home or the family or our 

charity work, Mr. Deputy Chair. It would be impossible without 

a strong support back home, and regardless if we’re male 

members or female members, having that strong spousal 

support back home is so very, very important. 

 

So I firstly want to acknowledge my wife, Leone, and say that I 

just couldn’t do this job without her strong support and her 

prayers every day, Mr. Chair. And of course, children back 

home are very supportive, always have their dad’s back which 

is always an encouragement, and so I want to acknowledge 

them as well. My daughter Rayanne and my son-in-law Austin, 

great young people that actually saw the opportunity back home 

in Saskatchewan and moved back here after spending some 

years in Ottawa, and building their life here which includes our 

new granddaughter, Wynnslet, who at this time last year 

would’ve only been only a couple of months old. And she’s just 

been a true joy and having her nearby is just really, really 

special. 

Right now they’re building a new home around Yorkton, so 

they’re spending a lot of time at our house. So I’m pretty 

blessed some mornings to be able to see her in the morning. 

She’s maybe awake when grandpa’s up and getting dressed. So 

it usually takes me an extra half hour to get out of the house 

because she wants to have breakfast with grandpa. So we enjoy 

a lot of time early in the morning, Mr. Chair. 

 

And of course, the community for their confidence and trust to 

allow me to serve them in this majestic place. As you know, we 

just celebrated the unveiling of the new dome here and more 

scaffolding is coming down by the day. So it’s going to be 

really interesting to see that fully uncovered in its true 

splendour and glory that it would’ve shown back over 100 years 

ago when it was first put up there. 

 

You know, speaking about my community, Mr. Chair, it’s very 

interesting some of the comments I get from time to time, 

especially serving in the position that I do, and that is Minister 

of Rural and Remote Health. And they understand the 

challenges that we have, any human service has, when you’re 

dealing with human issues, and there’s quite often emotion 

wrapped up in some of these issues, and of course there’s issues 

to be dealt with from time to time. And they’ll ask, how do you 

do it? Like how do you keep up with the job? And, Mr. 

Speaker, it is because of that support we have. It’s about the 

staff that we have around us. It’s about the colleagues. It’s 

about the leadership we have in this House and in the Premier 

and that makes it all easier at times, Mr. Chair. 

 

But when it comes to the issues around the community, I found 

that the community is very understanding. I’ve committed to 

them and it serves I think members here well. I know it served 

me well that I’ll commit to them, that I’ll bring their issues 

forward. I might not always agree with them, but I’ll bring their 

issues forward. And I can’t guarantee we’re going to win every 

one, but I can guarantee I’m going to advocate for you and do 

the best job we can. And more often than not, Mr. Chair, that 

does, it serves my constituents well, and again I tell them we 

might not win them all but we’ll show up for the challenge and 

the fight. And we do that every day. 

 

And that includes my staff back in Yorkton, Mr. Chair. 

Lauretta’s been with me for coming on nine years. She served 

with the former member from Melville-Saltcoats for 12 

previous to that, so a very experienced constituency assistant in 

the province and very capable at keeping things, keeping things 

in check back in the constituency and representing the 

constituents very well when I’m not there. 

 

As well as a fairly recent addition to our constituency staff, 

Rachelle Sawatsky who is involved in the community in many, 

many different ways, still involved somewhat in her previous 

community in Lanigan, but also very much in Yorkton, partially 

with the Dream Centre, a Pentecostal Assembly of Canada 

project there that’s inner-city youth, family . . . family and 

youth centre that really does do amazing work in our 

community. And I’m very blessed to have both of those ladies 

working in the office and representing so well, and representing 

the issues that the constituents come forward, so very aptly, Mr. 

Chair. 

 

With that as well, the Regina staff that I’m blessed to have here. 



May 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 125 

I’ve had a few different chiefs of staff. All of them seem to 

come back and visit from time to time, so I don’t think it’s me. 

But a very capable staff I’ve had. And of course the staff I have 

now is just I think second to none. The work ethic they have, 

the commitment they have to not only running the office but 

serving the people of this province, can’t go unmentioned. So 

I’m just so appreciative of the staff in the office here in Regina 

as well. 

 

We know we just came through a campaign and some 

constituencies were a little bit harder fought than others. We 

had a very successful campaign. I think we were close, about 73 

per cent plurality so I think we picked up a little bit from even 

the last time. 

 

But you know, Mr. Chair, what I would like to say in regard to 

the election was, you know, locally, we got a little bit of 

criticism, mainly from the media, saying, you know, nobody’s 

putting in an effort and, you know, there’s not really much of a 

contest. But you know, Mr. Chair, I did take some of those 

people that would say things like that to task in saying, you 

know, if you actually pay attention to what’s going on here, the 

team that we’ve assembled for Yorkton — the Sask Party team 

we assembled — the signage we’ve committed to, we never 

turned down an event, we never turned down a meeting, door 

knocked faithfully every day, multiple different community 

events and meetings, and everything that came our way, we 

made a strong commitment to do the best job we could. 

 

And, Mr. Chair, I know it’s the same as my colleagues have in 

the House. It’s the same demands that our Premier and Deputy 

Premier put on us is to do the best job you can every day. And 

we do that. And I think, if you look around this floor, that’s 

why we have 51 members on this side of the House — 50 on 

this side of the House plus the Speaker, Mr. Chair, is that 

because of that work ethic, because of that hard work. 

 

And again I challenge some of those community members back 

home that, if you actually pay attention, you’ll notice that we 

never put in any less effort than I did in 2007 when we first won 

this seat from the NDP. And we put in just as much effort in 

’11. And, Mr. Chair, we definitely put in just as much effort this 

time. So I want to acknowledge my campaign team for all the 

hard work that they did and all the strong support that they did 

provide as well. 

 

Of course I touched on some of my colleagues here, the 

Premier, the Deputy Premier, cabinet, all the colleagues around 

on this side of the floor, Mr. Chair — a really good, strong 

group of people. And you know, I think it’s maybe a bit of an 

anomaly when you see a caucus this large but to still have the 

camaraderie, the family mentality, the friendship that members 

do have on this side of the floor, the Sask Party team on the 

government side. It is one, I think, one reason why we do have 

a strong government, we do have a strong caucus is because we 

do have that strong leadership but very much a friendly and 

family attitude that supports each other on this side of the 

House. 

 

The member I get to work with every day, the Minister of 

Health, the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy, I really 

appreciated his comments today, but I would turn the tables on 

him. I’m truly blessed to be able to work with him alongside 

him, and although he’s probably, I don’t know, 15 years 

younger than me, I would count him as a mentor. His 

leadership, his work ethic, his dedication to his job is second to 

none, Mr. Chair. And this province has been well served with 

Health ministers, of course only two to this point: the first one, 

our now Deputy Premier serving for around five years; and our 

current Health minister serving for pretty well four. And I think 

that’s why we do have a strong record when it comes to health, 

because we have the continuity. We have that knowledge base. 

We have that work commitment that does provide a lot of 

successes for the people of this province. And I’ll touch on 

those, I think, in a little bit. 

 

Of course the colleagues on this side of the floor as well, I 

talked about how much of a family we are and a friendly group 

we are, and it really does make it a lot easier to do this job and 

work every day. And of course, I don’t know if it’s been 

mentioned tonight here yet, but the caucus office . . . although I 

don’t spend as much time in there as I used to, the support the 

caucus office has for all the members on the government side is 

truly commendable, and I do want to acknowledge and show 

appreciation to them in my remarks tonight. 

 

Of course congratulations has been all around the floor. I want 

to congratulate, of course, you on your appointment, the Deputy 

Speaker on his appointment, our new Speaker on his 

appointment. I again also acknowledge the member from 

Cannington on his years of service in that chair; as well as the 

former Speaker, the member from Moosomin that was referred 

to here tonight as well, the former member from Moosomin, 

Don Toth, who served as our Speaker for our first four years, 

but also I would count as one of my best friends and mentors 

since I did come to this place. His influence — and again his 

mentorship, for me anyway — will be truly missed, and I do 

really appreciate all the input and all the impact he’s had on this 

Assembly in his almost 30 years of service to the people of this 

province. 

 

As well as the former member from Canora-Pelly, Ken 

Krawetz, another mentor I would count that is a large part why 

I’m here. So I think members on this side could either criticize 

him for that or give him credit for that, but a large part why I 

did come to this Assembly and decide to run was because of 

Ken Krawetz and his leadership. 

 

Of course thank you to all the even unsuccessful candidates that 

ran, put their name forward. We know it’s a big deal to put your 

name out in the public to run for political office, and I want to 

thank them for their . . . Of course I want to acknowledge our 

members on this side of the floor as well, the newly elected 

members and the re-elected members for their success in the 

last election, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

You know, a lot of members on this side of the floor were able 

to share some stories, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and there’s one 

story I was able to share at our candidate’s forum in Yorkton 

that I think I’m going to . . . It’s not too long of a story but it 

acknowledges somebody I never thanked was my parents. My 

dad passed away now a couple years ago, again a very strong 

influence in my life; my mom, very hard-working. 

 

But one thing I’ve noticed is, you know, especially when, in my 

situation anyway, you grow up in a community and you’ve been 



126 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2016 

there your whole life, but you attain some level of success in 

business and in the community, and people tend to forget where 

you came from, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But I’d really like to 

acknowledge the work ethic and the commitment and the 

sacrifice that my parents put in to not only building, helping 

build this province but into our family. 

 

For example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, my dad, he came out of the 

navy. He served seven years in the navy in the ’50s. He came 

out and met my mom. Shortly after they got married, he got a 

job as a milkman, kind of a contract run. Got a job at Dominion 

Bridge, which was a union job. And the thing that really 

frustrated him is he just wanted to provide for his family, but 

you know, they ended up going on strike. He tried to cross the 

picket lines to provide for his family, to provide a better life for 

his family. And what he experienced in that work environment 

didn’t sit well with him, so he decided to get into private 

business on his own. So he ventured through a partnership, he 

ventured into the waste disposal business. He started the year I 

was born, in 1963, and continued to build that company. But 

you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it wasn’t easy back then. In 

fact, my mom, who worked very hard, she took on full-time 

jobs but putting money back into the company to cover wages. 

 

And you know, what I took from that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 

that, you know, putting something back into a company, very 

often taking home combined . . . taking home less money than a 

lot of the employees working for their company, but trying to 

build a better life for their family, putting investment, and 

blood, sweat, and tears into a business to build a better life but 

also to provide employment opportunities for people in the 

community. And you know, years after they did achieve some 

success and, fast-forward into about 1990, took over the 

company and ended up building up a bit more, Mr. Speaker. 

 

[21:45] 

 

But I remember back, you know, vaguely I remember back in 

those days where the casino now sits in Yorkton was when my 

dad was trying to build his company, be entrepreneurial, 

actually taking on a second job or second business in managing 

a trailer court there. And remembering back to that house we 

lived in in that trailer court, it was actually ended up being a 

chicken coop just out of town — the manager, my dad, and 

mom supporting them and living in probably the worst housing 

opportunity on that trailer court. But still working hard doing 

that, investing money back into our company to build it up and 

again provide for the employees, provide for our family, and 

help drive the economy. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about my 

constituency. It’s changed a little bit over the years. Now it’s 

become quite an urban, a city-type constituency. Mostly the 

rural is gone. I have a little bit on the west side. Again most of 

it’s just within the city limits. But still, you know, it’s a strong 

constituency, a lot of support. And I’m very honoured to have 

the two new members that surround my constituency, the 

member from Melville-Saltcoats and the member from 

Canora-Pelly, and I’m looking forward to working with them. 

 

A strong community made up of very diverse economic 

background. We have a lot of potash influence because of the 

mines being nearby. A lot of the employees from the mines live 

in Yorkton. It’s helped it become a very strong retail centre 

where we were formerly years back more of a commercial and a 

manufacturing centre. That has become quite strong, but again 

our agricultural ties have really strengthened our economy. So 

now we’re very diverse, reflective I think of a lot of the 

province, how diverse the province has become, where we’re 

agriculture, manufacturing, retail centre, and drawing from all 

areas around, even into Manitoba, which really builds a strong 

and diverse economy for our area. 

 

And you know, very strong support for each other in a 

community like that. We find Yorkton’s large enough to have 

all the amenities you’d want. Some very large stores that would 

be seen in populations of 40 and 50,000, but because of our 

trading area, we have some significant retail opportunities. But 

still having that small-town attitude where most people know 

each other, and if there’s somebody that has a need, there’s 

somebody there to step up and help them out with that need. 

And I’m really appreciative of the constituency and very 

honoured to serve Yorkton the last eight and a half years, and I 

look forward to years in the future. 

 

Before I go too much further, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to 

acknowledge, as well, some of the struggles that we’ve seen 

around our neighbouring provinces — example Fort McMurray 

and how they’re coming together and how the province, our 

province, and neighbouring provinces are supporting them. Of 

course, in our home territory, La Loche . . . I happened to have 

the opportunity to be up at La Loche only three days before the 

tragic events, and you know, I was really impressed with the 

community and their resilience and their wish to just build a 

really strong and healthy community. And then having that 

setback was really, I know, a struggle for them, and the whole 

province’s hearts and prayers go out to that community. But I’ll 

look forward to continually working with them to find a place 

of healing and success, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

Even locally, just recently we had a very major fire in Yorkton. 

Parkland Greenhouse was totally lost. And so just in 

recognition of that, I just want to send our prayers to everybody 

in the province that might be suffering some sort of hardship or 

difficulty, but really want to acknowledge that. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to touch on the implications in 

the Throne Speech when it comes to my constituency. You 

know, I’ve heard the members opposite criticize how there’s 

not really much there but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a lot in 

this document. 

 

If we look at the history of the Saskatchewan Party, what we’ve 

been able to accomplish with the help of the communities in 

Saskatchewan, the strong will of the people of the province, this 

is just a reflection of the ongoing work that we have done and 

we’re going to continue to do. 

 

Again I heard the member from Moosomin refer to our pillars 

of course — keep our economy strong, finances strong, and 

keep Saskatchewan’s position in Canada strong by always 

standing up for Saskatchewan’s interests — and I think at the 

tail end of this Throne Speech, you do see that. And I’m very 

proud of our Premier and our cabinet ministers and our caucus 

members at how we do stand for Saskatchewan values and will 

continue to stand for Saskatchewan values. And I think the 



May 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 127 

numbers in the House truly do reflect that people recognize that 

this is the party that will stand for our province and help to 

foster an environment to continue opportunities for people. 

 

So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we look at the Throne Speech, 

we’ll notice that one of the first headlines in here is keeping our 

promises. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is one thing I know 

I’m very proud of that the Premier is very adamant about — say 

what you’re going to do and do what you said you will. And 

you know, without fail I think we’ve come through virtually 

every commitment we made. I know in 2007, the Premier’s 

document, 100 promises for the next 100 years, virtually all of 

those fulfilled. Promises from 2011 for the most part fulfilled or 

begun work on. And we look in this document, continue . . . 

[inaudible]. 

 

When we look at infrastructure investment, I know the Minister 

of Highways is very dedicated to her portfolio. And we hear 

criticism across the floor about the $70 million investment, Mr. 

Deputy Speaker. We have to recognize, though, the $70 million 

is for repair and maintenance tied in to our 2.7 billion, a record 

investment in infrastructure targeting $70 million to that much 

needed infrastructure, repair, and maintenance. So it’s not 70 

million investment. It’s part of a $2.7 billion investment over 

the next four years. 

 

Of course our continued investments . . . And I know we get 

criticism across the floor about our different models of putting 

this infrastructure in place, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but when we 

look at what has been delivered in this province — 18 schools 

that likely wouldn’t have been built in the timelines they were 

without the innovative approach of the Sask Party government, 

hospitals including a children’s hospital under construction, the 

Saskatchewan Hospital in North Battleford, the new mental 

health facility that is under way that is going to serve all the 

people of this province including, you know, to some extent 

constituents of Yorkton, record construction of long-term care 

facilities — I think I would say that. 

 

We came into a place where we found long-term care facilities 

falling apart and, you know, recognizing that needed to be 

addressed fairly shortly, so we identified 13 off the start. 

Twelve of those projects are either completed or under way. 

One is still in the planning stages and then two other additional 

facilities through alternative partnerships, of course the Swift 

Current one and the one in Saskatoon, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 

are serving seniors now and into the future. 

 

When we look at our investments in infrastructure included in 

our Crown corporations, we know that all the Crown 

corporations, specifically SaskPower, is in a terrible deficit 

position when it came to their infrastructure. We hear stories. 

I’ve got friends still working for SaskPower, have told stories 

about 20 years ago going through rural Saskatchewan painting 

Xs on power poles and then, you know, previously, shortly 

before 2007, having to put the Xs back on because they were 

faded. The power poles weren’t replaced, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

But we see the action on this part of the government: $1 billion 

a year investment back in SaskPower, investments like BD3 

[Boundary dam 3], innovative approaches to cleaning up our 

coal, and ensuring that those plants are going to serve our 

province into the future, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

I think it’s investments well made and highly successful, 

especially when you look at outside investment like BHP 

Billiton where, you know, a mining company, but investing in 

carbon capture investment in technology, $20 million 

investment in there. I think that private enterprise and 

investment wouldn’t be coming if they didn’t see the promise, if 

we didn’t see the successes of that project. We wouldn’t see the 

interest from all over the world in BD3, other countries looking 

at what’s happening here and how they can better serve their 

countries by cleaning up their coal. So what’s happening here 

on a small scale, I can only see great things for the whole world 

really when it comes to cleaning up the environment in that 

technology that was of course spearheaded here. 

 

The growth of our province is unprecedented. I know the 

members across, the previous members would ridicule our goal 

of, you know, 1 per cent growth, growing at the national 

average, and very happy to report as I think many members are 

very aware that we have outpaced that by a huge margin — 15 

per cent growth over the last 10 years, whereas we look under 

the NDP, Mr. Deputy Speaker, under their last 10 years a drop 

of 24,000 people. So we’re seeing great strides there in growing 

our province, and in large part that’s because our young people 

are finding opportunities to be able to stay here, which includes 

again my daughter and son-in-law and my older daughter who 

graduated her nursing degree a year ago and is practising in our 

province, in fact in our home of Yorkton. 

 

Innovative things. We talk about innovation, but innovative 

new ideas like the tax incentive for the patent box tax incentive 

that would encourage investment here in the province. And you 

know, I was really encouraged by that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

through the election. We’re hearing stories from outside of 

Saskatchewan where the first time ever proposed in North 

America, this incentive in Saskatchewan. I think two other 

jurisdictions in Europe had tried it and found success with it. 

But how much interest was generated in the province just after 

that one announcement, I’m looking forward to what that’s 

going to bring to our province and, you know, quite likely, 

Yorkton being a bit of a manufacturing hub as well with major 

arteries running through it, what that might mean for our home. 

 

You know, a lot of different incentives and proposals, like the 

home-based food regulations that we have proposed where it 

gives an economic opportunity to somebody to start a business, 

a growth opportunity, they might start it in their home, stay in 

their home as a home-based business, but we see a lot of those, 

when they have that start, that they actually build into very 

strong and vibrant businesses. And you know, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, I was quite troubled through the election when I heard 

the comments of the previous leader of the opposition calling 

this idea half-baked. And we see from Moose Jaw, the Queen of 

Caramels, how this is going to affect her business and other 

businesses around. I know there’s a successful business in 

Indian Head-Milestone that will probably benefit from this as 

well. And really looking forward to how that’s going to 

generate strong economy. 

 

You know, we go down the list: reducing red tape, which we’ve 

been continually trying to do; expanding our export markets; 

telling the Saskatchewan story, which has served our 

agriculture-based businesses very well. I know the canola-based 

businesses around Yorkton are very well served by the 



128 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2016 

expanded markets. Our pulse crops, all the different crops, the 

diverse crops that we grow in our province now and how these 

markets are expanded into Asian Rim, to European, to Indian, 

and even farther, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it’s in no small part 

due to the work and telling the Saskatchewan story the Premier 

and our cabinet ministers have been able to do around the 

world. 

 

When I look at investing in skills training, labour market needs, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just have to think about the Trades and 

Technology Centre in Yorkton. Although it’s up and running 

and it’s not new news, it all fits into this. It fits into our Throne 

Speech because that’s all part of it, something that’s been done. 

But we can talk about it and build on it and recognize what it’s 

going to serve in the future. 

 

I would be remiss if I didn’t refer to what I know has been 

referred to in the past as megaprojects. And I know 

governments love megaprojects. We have to recognize 

agriculture and the hard work of the Minister of Agriculture, the 

work that he puts into that portfolio, that seeding and harvest 

are two megaprojects that happen every single year. And 

barring . . . We’re very appreciative and very supportive of all 

our other manufacturing and other industries, recognizing that’s 

the backbone of our province. And Yorkton area, east central 

part of the province is a hub of canola growth and very huge 

other diverse crops, and recognizing how strong that makes our 

economy in east central Saskatchewan, also our whole 

province. 

 

Our continued work with New West Partnership that served our 

province very well, and I know now it’s very encouraging to 

hear the new Manitoba government’s going to engage. Alberta 

still seems engaged. BC’s [British Columbia] engaged. So 

looking at how the West has become a powerhouse 

economically and in no small part due to the work of our 

Premier, and the New West Partnership, is something that we 

can point to as well and again mentioned in the Throne Speech. 

 

I’m not going into detail on these other significant investments 

but, you know, significant investment after investment, whether 

it’s up in Carrot River, whether it’s around the province down 

in the oil field through Crescent Point; Husky Energy, billion 

investment; helium facilities; enhanced oil recovery; more 

mining, brand new mining operations coming to the province; 

again BHP Billiton’s investment in the BD3 project; 

technology; new housing development here in Regina, $75 

million development. 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it just, it goes on and on. And even we 

recognize that we’re in a bit of a slowdown in our economy, but 

it just points to the resilience and the strength of our economy 

that we continue to see investment in Saskatchewan where 

years past we’d see zero investment. We’d see investment 

leave. We’d see people leave. We’d see our children leave. 

And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that just isn’t happening anymore. 

 

You know, a lot of these investments I spoke about, they don’t 

impact Yorkton and my constituency directly, but there are so 

many other local Yorkton companies, too many to list, that are 

such strong contributors to our economy and employment that, 

you know, I have to at least give them a brief mention. 

 

You know, programs that we put in place, we can point to 

58,000 students that are engaged in the graduate retention 

program that likely wouldn’t be here if it wasn’t for initiatives 

like the graduate retention program — highly successful. But 

I’m very, very happy and really encouraged by the feedback 

that I’ve gotten by the change that we’re going to do, allowing 

students that can take $10,000 of their unused portion of the 

GRP and put it towards their first home. So not only do they 

have the opportunity to stay here, work, and get some of that 

investment or that money back, unused portion they can 

actually use to start not only their business life and their work 

life but their home life with the purchase of their first new 

home. So that’s really encouraging. 

 

[22:00] 

 

When I look at the line underneath the Throne Speech, better 

quality of life, that speaks to the human services which I’m 

involved in to a large extent. And I really like to read the 

outside sources, especially when they’re, you know, maybe 

partisan or definitely unbiased sources. 

 

And when we look through the many successes that we’ve had 

in health care, recognizing as the member from Cumberland 

was referring to, more work to do. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

you’ll never hear us stop saying that because I think, you know, 

no criticism intended, that was the fault of the NDP. They’d get 

something sort of done and they’d stop. They wouldn’t carry 

through, so then the wheels would come off the cart. You’d 

have people that are waiting for disability, waiting for all kinds 

of different supports that just weren’t there. 

 

We’d see a lack of investment, a lack of revenue sharing to 

municipalities. We’d see a lack of investment in the Crown 

corporations, lack of investment in infrastructure, lack of 

investment in health and education infrastructure, and the list 

goes on. In fact we’d see such a slowdown or a pullback in 

investment that we’d actually see losses, whether it was losses 

in medical training seats or not training enough doctors, not 

training enough nurses, getting to the point of actually closing 

facilities. Whether it’s education and losing 400 or 600 teachers 

that ended up losing work through the years of the NDP, when 

176 schools were closed, or whether it’s the losses in jobs, 173 

doctors, 455 nurses when we lost 52 hospitals. We lost a major 

tertiary centre in the Plains. We lost 19 long-term care facilities 

and the professionals that went with those. 

 

And then we have to play catch-up. So we’ve committed to a 

host of different opportunities when it comes to training and 

recruitment and retention of these professionals, whether it’s the 

SIPPA program, the Saskatchewan international physician 

practice assessment program, teamed with Saskdocs that serves 

rural Saskatchewan very well — 180-some-odd new SIPPA 

doctors in the province. Eighty-seven per cent of those are 

serving in rural areas, where the expansion of nurse 

practitioners doubled the number of practising nurse 

practitioners in our province, 75 per cent of those serving rural 

centres, 650 new doctors in total. 

 

A lot of those are grads from the University of Saskatchewan 

through the added new seats there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that are 

graduating now 100 doctors able to sit in those seats. Tied to 

that, 120 resident physicians spread throughout the province, 



May 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 129 

along with some of those medical seats that are spread 

throughout the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But I may get 

into some of those a little bit in depth in a few more minutes. 

 

The reference I was referring to a little bit earlier was of course 

the former NDP Finance minister Janice MacKinnon, when she 

recognized the work of this government when it comes to 

surgical wait-lists and the reduction in surgical wait-lists. You 

know, again more work to do, but we have gone, as the Minister 

of Health pointed out earlier today, from the longest wait-list in 

the country under the NDP to the shortest wait-list under the 

Saskatchewan Party. And all the barking across the floor will 

not do any good against the comments of the former NDP 

Finance minister who definitely acknowledges that, as do 

sources from outside our province. 

 

Now when we look at innovative programs like the private-pay 

MRI, two-for-one, private-pay MRI, where somebody can 

private pay for an MRI in the province where formerly they’d 

go to Calgary or Minot or who knows where else they’d go, 

they can access that service as others have in the past right in 

the province but also pay for one more on the public system. So 

we see a shortening of the wait-lists on the MRI list because of 

that innovative solution, and now committing to expand that to 

CT scans to investigate how that’s going to help us in the future 

when it comes diagnostic imaging wait-lists. 

 

Now something that I’ve come to get a lot more familiar with is 

remote presence technology. Up to this point, you know, a lot 

of what we would recognize as remote presence technology 

would be Telehealth. And I remember my first experience with 

Telehealth was actually in Yorkton. It was the first Telehealth 

suite outside of a major centre in Yorkton for the heart and 

stroke initiative. And I thought, you know, this would be cool if 

this was actually available in more centres around the province. 

 

Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can say in the 30-some-odd tours 

I’ve taken around the province, multiple facility tours, the 

meetings with different boards and different community leaders 

around the province, virtually every facility I toured had the 

Telehealth suite in it, whether it’s for training, whether it’s for 

patient consultation, but bringing those medical services to the 

patients instead of having them travel to see a specialist, to see a 

medical professional elsewhere, to see how that has enhanced 

rural and remote health in this province is something that is 

really recognizable. 

 

But to also see where the work of Dr. Ivar Mendez from 

Saskatoon, one of the most worldly recognized people in 

remote presence technology, where he’s gone with the nurse 

robot, with the doc-in-a-box, and some of the things he’s talked 

to us about that probably aren’t public yet so I won’t refer to 

them, but how that’s going to enhance medical treatment and 

trauma treatment and health care in rural and remote parts of the 

province through the hard work that he’s done. So our 

government continuing that investment with the $500,000 

investment in furthering innovative remote presence technology 

through his work is something I’m very, very encouraged by. 

 

Another thing that really strikes close to home for me anyway is 

our initiative when it comes to organ donor engagement. And 

you know, when our family was going through our cancer 

journey with my son, there was something we realized pretty 

quickly: the value of the need for blood products. So in pretty 

short order, we all became blood donors. Shortly after, a few 

years after that we had a young friend that was going through 

cancer treatment. He needed a bone marrow transplant, so we 

engaged, did a bit of a drive to engage more people with bone 

marrow registry and had quite a bit of success. I found out that I 

may be getting a bit old. They really want to target the 18- to 

25-year-olds, so anybody that happens to be listening tonight, if 

you’re in that age group, university, I would strongly encourage 

you to look at not only blood donation but bone marrow 

donation. 

 

And now something that we’ve been very involved with is 

organ donation that, you know, it’s not really hard to do. Some 

people, for personal reasons or maybe your religious reasons, 

wouldn’t want to do that. But it’s something that’s so important 

that, as the Canadian Blood Services would say, you have it in 

you to give. You have it in you to save a life, and I would 

strongly encourage people to consider that. But I’m really 

looking forward to what our Human Services Committee’s 

going to come back with in that regard. 

 

You know, another thing, Mr. Speaker, when I start getting into 

the better quality of life, what we’ve been talking about with 

The Saskatchewan Employment Act and then expanding leave, 

palliative leave to 28 weeks. And that’s something I realized I 

was pretty lucky in the job I have that, you know, with the use 

of technology I could actually . . . My dad, I was pretty much 

his major caregiver for his last couple of months and his last 

month in palliative care, and having that opportunity, that 

flexibility to be able to do that with my technology and 

constituency staff, to be able to look after him. But so many 

families don’t have that opportunity. And expanding the family 

leave to 28 weeks per year to give them that opportunity to 

spend those last days in support of their palliative family 

members is something I’m very proud that we’re pursuing, and 

I think very needed as well. 

 

And when we get further into health and we start looking at 

some of the commitments we’ve made in our Throne Speech, 

the $7.5 million a year savings in administration, redirecting to 

front line, specifically to long-term care, whether it’s RNs 

[registered nurse], LPNs [licensed practical nurse], continuing 

care aids, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a commitment that we made, 

you know, many times, that we’re going to continue to pursue 

better care in our long-term care facilities. And again realizing 

there’s more work to do, there’s a lot of needs out there, but 

really encouraged by the successes that we have had, 

recognizing some of the places that we need to do more work 

and focusing on those to make sure we get to a point of having 

the best quality care, not only in acute and other care but also 

long-term care in the province. 

 

Just briefly, when we come to finances, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 

looking at how strong our province is and recognizing, looking 

within our borders we are having some challenges. But on the 

world stage, on the national stage, seeing that we still have the 

second-lowest GDP in Canada is something that . . . the 

second-lowest GDP ratio in Canada is something that’s fairly 

recognizable. A strong financial position there and recognize 

the independent rating agencies when we retain our AAA credit 

rating, which serves us not only in economic recognition but 

also when it comes to finance rates that we have to pay. It gives 



130 Saskatchewan Hansard May 24, 2016 

us a very attractive rate. 

 

Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I referred to standing up, our 

government and our party standing up for the interests of the 

people of our province and our province. And again, very proud 

of our Premier on every occasion standing up and defending our 

interests in this province. 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, you know, when I look at the conclusion of 

this Throne Speech, referring to Matthew 5:14, I thought that 

was quite ingenious actually, referring to the shining city on a 

hill and the dome, and that was very good. But you know, 

reflecting on the Premier’s comments when we were doing the 

dome unveiling, the vision that our first premier had for this 

province, the vision he had for this building and the 

requirements that he had, for it to be able to look around not 

only towards the city at the time but around the whole province 

in every direction because he recognized that this was going to 

be a symbol of growth and hope, you know, it’s just so great to 

see our province, although again recognizing we are still facing 

some challenges, to see where we’ve come in Canada and to 

recognize our leadership through our Premier and our province, 

the leadership that we show in the country and how it’s been 

recognized, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

 

You know, just to quote one of the last paragraphs in the 

Throne Speech, “Let our new shining dome remind us of where 

we have been, where we are headed and that Saskatchewan 

should always be a beacon of hope whose best days are still 

ahead,” Mr. Deputy Speaker. I don’t think anybody could say it 

any better than that. 

 

So I know my time is coming to an end here, and I don’t have 

to worry about the heckling across the floor. Our own members 

give it to us enough. I’ll have more opportunities I think 

standing in this Assembly in the coming days to reflect on our 

record, our health record when it comes to the Throne Speech 

and where we plan to go and what we’ve done, Mr. Deputy 

Speaker. So I think I’ll just leave that at that. Over the next 

couple of days again, probably answering some questions I’ll be 

able to refer to a lot of our successes and our record. 

 

So with that, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the main motion 

brought forward by the newly elected member from Saskatoon 

Westview. I will not be supporting the amendment, and I wish 

to adjourn debate. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Rural and Remote 

Health has moved to adjourn debate. Is it the pleasure of the 

Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government 

Deputy House Leader. 

 

Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 

would move that this House do now adjourn. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — The Government Deputy House 

Leader has moved that this House does now adjourn. Is it the 

pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. This House stands 

adjourned until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 

 

[The Assembly adjourned at 22:12.] 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 

SPECIAL ORDER 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 

  Merriman .................................................................................................................................................................................... 103 

  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 106 

  Beaudry-Mellor........................................................................................................................................................................... 110 

  Bonk ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 113 

  Phillips ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 116 

  Ross ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 118 

  Vermette ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 120 

  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................... 124 

 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


