






















































Hansard: November 22, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 46A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 22, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (Ind.) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10; Independent (Ind.) — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1425 
 November 22, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s with great pleasure that I introduce to you and 
through you to all members of the legislature, a group of nine 
guests seated in your gallery. We have the members of the 
board of the Estevan Host Society for the 2016 Saskatchewan 
Summer Games here with us today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Estevan was a happening place this summer. The 
member from Estevan tells me it’s always a happening place, 
but this . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Even Weyburn’s 
agreeing. So hey, we’re all good. 
 
They’re seated in your gallery in their smart-looking Summer 
Games golf shirts. Joining us today — if you wouldn’t mind 
giving us a wave — are Brian Smith, Brenda Lyons, Blaire 
Ulrich, Jeff Walters, Josh Leblanc, Greg Hoffart, Sheila 
Guenther, Mark Bracken, Lorne Lasuita. And Nicole Clow was 
the manager. She’s not able to join us today, but we’d like to 
recognize her contributions as well. 
 
The games ran from July 24th to 30th this summer, and there 
was great involvement from the community, both supporting 
the athletes and holding all the community events. Over 2,000 
athletes from across Saskatchewan were treated to great Estevan 
hospitality. And, Mr. Speaker, one of the lasting legacies of 
hosting the games are the facilities that the community gets to 
use into the future. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask all members in joining me and 
thanking all these volunteers for their work on the 2016 
Saskatchewan Summer Games, and I’d like to welcome them to 
their Legislative Assembly this afternoon. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And you 
know, I just want to get my words in before the member from 
Estevan. I’m sure hers will be better. 
 
But I just want to say congratulations on behalf of the official 
opposition, and thank you very much to the Estevan hosting 
committee for this 2016 Saskatchewan Summer Games. One of 
my neighbours was there swimming, Mr. Speaker, and was just 
. . . couldn’t have been more excited to be there participating. 
 
And certainly as the minister states, the games were well run; 
the hosts were wonderful, hospitable; and our young amateur 
athletes had an amazing time, which is the point of the thing. So 
again, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition, as the 
critic for Sport, I just want to say thank you so much to the host 
committee from Estevan and job well done. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you and 
through you, seated in your gallery as we already know is this 
wonderful group from Estevan. I want to send a special thank 
you to . . . We have one of the Co-Chairs with us today, Brian 
Smith. There was also Brian Senchuk. Give a wave, Brian, so 
they know exactly who you are. Awesome. He managed to 
assemble an army of volunteers that helped put this entire thing 
together. And I just want to thank him and Brian Senchuk for 
their leadership in being able to do this. 
 
I had the opportunity of volunteering at several of the venues, 
and it was just amazing — the comments from the people that 
were there visiting, the athletes that actually took part in the 
events. If anything went wrong, I didn’t see it, and I was just 
about everywhere. So thank you so much to all of you for being 
here in your Assembly today, and thank you from Estevan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m still on my feet, there are two other 
gentlemen seated up in your gallery. First I’d like to introduce 
Gary St. Onge. Gary is a former mayor of Estevan. When I was 
elected in 2003 to Estevan City Council, he was there with me 
and he became a great mentor and leader for myself. So thank 
you so much for Gary for being here today. 
 
And also seated in the gallery is Mr. Don Kindopp. Don, could 
you stand up? Don Kindopp is the . . . Well he was my grade 6 
teacher way back in the day . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . and 
Greg’s also. So everybody knows Mr. Kindopp. 
 
He’s a great leader in the community now. He’s head of the St. 
Joseph’s board and is actively pursuing the new Estevan 
Regional Nursing Home that will come our way some day. And 
just thank you, gentlemen, for being a part of our community. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the House, 
a gentleman sitting in your gallery, someone who is not a 
stranger to this Chamber. He’s been a visitor many times — 
Gunnar Passmore. We often think of Gunnar in terms of the 
building trades and the good work that he does for especially 
the sheet metal workers, and he’s here probably watching the 
proceedings thinking of how it’s affecting working men and 
women. 
 
But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, today, this month during 
Movember many of us . . . And I just talked to Gunnar. Gunnar 
is a survivor of prostate cancer, and he’s very proud of that, the 
good work. He took that on bravely, and we talked a bit about 
that. I know he talked even with the Minister of Agriculture 
about the situation at a time. 
 
And so I know there’s just a few days left in Movember for us 
to give generously, and I have seen that happen. But please, 
everyone, this is about men’s health and men’s prostate cancer, 
so give generously for all the people that have had that happen 
in their lives. So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all 



1426 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2016 

members to welcome Gunnar Passmore to his legislature. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the member opposite in welcoming Mr. Passmore to the 
legislature today. I’ve had the opportunity of introducing him as 
well, many times, when he would sit in the east gallery as a 
labour representative. And I’m pleased to see that he has now 
moved into your gallery. I suspect it’s only a matter of time 
before we see him in the west gallery, but I leave that to him. 
 
And I want to as well, Mr. Speaker, commend him for the great 
work that he’s done with regard to prostate cancer, and I want 
to wish him very well with both regard to his health and his 
endeavours. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege to introduce in the west gallery 29 grade 12 students 
from the Bert Fox Community School in the beautiful 
community of Fort Qu’Appelle. They’re accompanied by their 
teachers, Kaitlyn Geis and Michael Koops. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had an opportunity to meet with them earlier, 
and they had done a little bit of a homework assignment where 
they had a list of names that . . . or a list of words that they kind 
of had to find the definition of on their tour. I got one too. I see 
one guy waving at me. I’ve got one too. 
 
And it was going along very well. We were kind of going 
through some of the words and I was covering off some of the 
words, and then one of the students asked me what bicameral 
means. And so as I look across the benches, how many know 
what bicameral means? Some do. I had to kind of do what I 
used to do in question period every so often is just talk for a 
while until I kind of understood what the answer might be. And 
I think I came up with it. 
 
But anyway, I just would like all members to welcome this 
school group to their Legislative Assembly and have a safe trip 
back to Fort Qu’Appelle after your visit here. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure today 
to rise and introduce to you and through you one of Regina 
Lakeview’s newest residents, Monique Goffinet Miller. 
Monique and her husband Dean are homeowners in Lakeview 
as of this morning, and are relocating to Regina from Victoria. 
 
For the past four years, Monique worked in the Lieutenant 
Governor’s office in British Columbia. She has a background in 
broadcasting and worked previously for the Legislative 
Assembly of British Columbia with Hansard broadcast. She’s 
also a board member with the Canadian Women Voters 
Congress. 
 
Monique’s partner Dean will be teaching applied police 

sciences at the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] depot 
here in Regina. And I wish to welcome her to Regina, to Regina 
Lakeview, and I invite all members to welcome her to her 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I ask for 
extended introduction of guests, leave for that please. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. With us 
today are the Tobac and Shae family, who have moved to the 
city and have moved to Saskatchewan 21 days ago. And this is 
quite a story, Mr. Speaker. It’s quite a journey for the 
Shae-Tobac family because originally they are from Fort Good 
Hope, Northwest Territories. And Fort Good Hope is 25 miles 
from the Arctic Circle on the shores of the Mackenzie River. 
And the population of Fort Good Hope is roughly 750. Mr. 
Speaker, Fort Good Hope is only accessible by boat in the 
summer and the winter road. And obviously, Mr. Speaker, to 
travel this distance it is a total travel time of 11-hour flights and 
of course stay-overs at different airports. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Shae-Tobac family, one of the things 
that’s really admirable about this family, is they have come to 
Regina and to Saskatchewan to participate in a family program 
aimed to help them in building a better life for themselves and 
their family. They’ve been in the city 21 days and are really 
enjoying their time here. And as the Deputy Leader of the 
Official Opposition, we wanted to share with them that 
Saskatchewan, as well as all of our cities and towns and 
villages, is an excellent place to raise a family. 
 
And I want to quickly recognize some of the children because 
these are my heroes. First of all we have, well the mother I 
think is . . . The father, Derrick Shae, enjoys watching and 
playing hockey. He enjoys hunting and cooking. He also likes 
to work and spend time with the children. 
 
Melanie Tobac enjoys reading and listening to music and loves 
to learn and spend quality time with her children as well. And 
the children are Melina Tobac — and this is the big sister I 
believe — and Melina enjoys visual arts, drama, and dancing. 
And she currently attends Thom Collegiate High School and is 
in grade 11 and she’s very good at math. 
 
We also have Angie Tobac, enjoys visual arts, dancing, and 
music, and attends Imperial elementary school and is currently 
in grade 6. Ashton Shae Tobac couldn’t be here as he’s on a 
school trip, but Ashton enjoys playing sports and being active 
and he also attends Imperial School and is in grade 4. 
 
The two little ones, Samuel and Madeline Tobac. Samuel is a 
very adventurous three-year-old but is very independent. He’s 
active and enjoys watching Toopy and Binoo. And finally, 
Madeline loves to draw, sing, and interact with people, and 



November 22, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1427 

she’s always smiling. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the people that have sponsored the family to 
come this distance to make themselves a new home is, of 
course, the people attached to the Ranch Ehrlo Society. And I 
want to give them a plug as well because it’s such an admirable 
task raising families nowadays. To have those kinds of supports 
in place is very key, but to the family that moved here such a 
distance to create a new life, especially for their children, is 
something that we all admire. 
 
So as an Aboriginal member of this Assembly, it’s always nice 
to see Aboriginal families try and better themselves, especially 
for the sake of their children’s education. And leaving the 
comforts of home is always a daunting task, but I want to say to 
you, we wish you very well in building your brand new life. 
And we wish your children great success, health, happiness, and 
prosperity. 
 
On behalf of the entire Assembly, I would ask all members to 
welcome the Shae-Tobac family to Regina, to Saskatchewan, 
and to their new Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 
want to thank the Deputy Leader of the Official Opposition for 
the advance notice of our special guests here today. I want to 
thank him for his warm introduction here in the Assembly for 
the Shae-Tobac family, and I want to offer on behalf of 
members on this side of the House, the Government of 
Saskatchewan, a similar welcome, Mr. Speaker. Obviously 
what the member has just said couldn’t have been better said. 
This province has a wonderful reputation for welcoming 
newcomers. 
 
[13:45] 
 
They have come a long, long way and so it’s heartening to hear 
that they’re enjoying their time here. We want that to continue, 
Mr. Speaker. And I would also ask all members to join with me 
in welcoming the Shae-Tobac family to their Legislative 
Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I see someone else that’s entered the east gallery 
that I would like to briefly welcome, and that’s someone I am 
proud to count as a friend. That’s Graham Barker, someone 
who’s a business leader for many years within our province, a 
key builder of Phoenix advertising, somebody who’s given back 
on so many fronts within our community, has always had that 
sense of compassion to give strength back to our community 
and to be involved on so many fronts. He grew up just south of 
Weyburn, in fact down at Midale. And he’s a good golfer and 
all around good person. It’s a pleasure to welcome Graham to 
his Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 

Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my constituents opposed Bill 42 that was introduced in this 
House in 1973 by the NDP [New Democratic Party] 
government. They opposed the national energy program of the 
1980s. And I’m pleased today to rise to present a petition from 
citizens of my constituency who are opposed to the federal 
government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the province 
of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people of 
Ogema, Glasnevin, Oungre, and Weyburn. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise again in this House today to present a petition to reverse the 
cuts to the Lighthouse program. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners 
point out that in April 2014, the minister of Social Services said 
that the Lighthouse in Saskatoon would “. . . take pressure off 
of existing detox facilities, hospitals, and police cells while 
keeping people safe, especially in our brutally cold winters.” 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners also point out that that very same 
day, the then minister of Health said, “We want to ensure that 
individuals with mental health and addictions issues have a safe 
place to stay.” 
 
And they also point out that since that time, since those two 
statements, Mr. Speaker, this government continues to repeat or 
has repeated over time that the Lighthouse stabilization unit 
keeps individuals out of hospital emergency rooms and jail 
cells. We couldn’t agree more, Mr. Speaker. We just need to 
look to the Saskatoon Health Region where they’ve experienced 
record over capacity in the last month, Mr. Speaker, and 
obviously the Lighthouse isn’t the whole part of the problem 
there with over capacity, but making this cut to the stabilization 
unit certainly does not help, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately reverse 
their recent cuts to funding that allows extremely 
vulnerable people to access the services of the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit in Saskatoon, and revisit their imposition 
of a strict and narrow definition of homelessness in 
November 2015 which forced the Lighthouse to cut back 
its hours of essential service in February of 2016, and take 
immediate steps to ensure that homeless people in 
Saskatoon and in Saskatchewan have emergency shelter, 
clothing, and food available to them before more lives are 
lost. 

 
Mr. Speaker, today the citizens who have signed this petition 
are from Regina, Warman, P.A. [Prince Albert], and Saskatoon. 
I so present. 
 



1428 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2016 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I stand 
in my place today to present a petition as it relates to a second 
bridge for Prince Albert, Saskatchewan, and that the 
Saskatchewan Party government refuses to stand up for Prince 
Albert and this critical infrastructure issue, and that the need for 
a second bridge for Prince Albert has never been clearer than it 
is today. Prince Albert, communities north of P.A., and 
businesses that send people and products to Prince Albert 
require a solution. So, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan ask that the 
Saskatchewan Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric, and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and to begin immediately to plan and then 
quickly commence the construction of a second bridge for 
Prince Albert, using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said time and time again, there are 
many pages of petitions that have been signed. And on this 
particular page that I’m presenting today, the people that have 
signed are primarily from Regina and Saskatoon, and I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition regarding surface rights in Saskatchewan. The people 
who have signed this petition want to bring to our attention the 
following: that The Surface Rights Acquisition and 
Compensation Act is an old and outdated piece of legislation 
that remains largely unchanged, despite amendments over the 
years. It is in desperate need of modernization to reflect the 
current challenges that farmers and ranchers are facing today. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we know that this government introduced 
. . . tabled legislation to be introduced two years ago now, and 
there’s still no sign of that legislation forthcoming. So I’d like 
to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Government of Saskatchewan to introduce legislation 
that would modernize The Surface Rights Acquisition and 
Compensation Act, classify land value as industrial rather 
than agricultural when oil and gas development takes 
place, remove pipelines and flow lines from the surface 
rights Act, and establish a new maximum in compensation 
to be paid for damages. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens from Saskatoon. I so 
submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in support 
of renewing funding for heritage language instruction here in 
Saskatchewan. And we know that after 25 years, the 
Government of Saskatchewan has discontinued all support for 
heritage language learning in Saskatchewan. Since 1991, 
heritage language schools have depended on this modest 

funding from the Ministry of Education to help sustain their 
programs. 
 
The heritage language schools contribute to the retention of 
immigrants in Saskatchewan by helping them maintain their 
cultural identity and traditions while at the same time learning 
about Canadian ways of life. Furthermore, studying additional 
languages offer many benefits for all Canadians, especially in 
today’s growing international markets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to reconsider this decision and restore funding for heritage 
language education in Saskatchewan heritage language 
schools. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
the cities of Regina and Saskatoon. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition regarding child care in Saskatchewan. Those citizens 
signing this petition wish to draw our attention to the following: 
across Saskatchewan, licensed non-profit child care centres are 
taxed inconsistently and many of our licensed non-profit centres 
pay commercial property taxes. Mr. Speaker, this is not done in 
Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, BC [British Columbia], or New 
Brunswick. 
 
Child care is essential to the economy yet most centres struggle 
to balance their budgets. This issue threatens both the number 
of child care spaces as well as the quality. Quality child care has 
an enormous impact on a child’s future outcomes and yields 
high rates of economic return. Child care centres are institutions 
of early learning and childhood development, and it is 
appropriate that they have the same tax treatment as schools. I’ll 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognize 
that licensed non-profit child care centres provide 
programs that are foundational to a healthy society by 
including them in The Education Act, and exempt all 
licensed non-profit child care centres in Saskatchewan 
from property tax through changes to the appropriate 
legislation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, residents signing this petition today reside in 
Rosetown. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 



November 22, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1429 

present a petition calling for a stop to the Sask Party sell-off of 
SaskTel. The petitioners point out that in the recent election 
campaign, the Sask Party promised that they would not 
privatize SaskTel, but the petitioners also point out that instead 
of looking at their own waste and scandal to address the budget 
shortfall, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party is now talking about 
breaking their promise and looking to sell off SaskTel to make a 
quick dollar, among other things, Mr. Speaker. 
 

In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners 
respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan call on the Saskatchewan Party government 
to keep their promise, stop their plan to sell off SaskTel, 
and to keep our valued Crown corporations in the hands of 
the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular set of petitions is signed by citizens 
from Saskatoon, Regina, and Biggar. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise yet again today 
to present a petition calling on the government to reverse the 
cuts to the Aboriginal court worker program. The Government 
of Saskatchewan cut the budget for the Aboriginal court worker 
program in the 2016-2017 provincial budget, resulting in 
layoffs of Aboriginal court workers throughout the province. 
Those on this side of the House know that Aboriginal court 
workers play an important role helping Aboriginal people in 
criminal and child apprehension cases. Aboriginal peoples are 
disproportionately represented in Saskatchewan’s correctional 
centres and Aboriginal court workers successfully help to make 
our communities safer through reduced recidivism rates. I’d like 
to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan reverse its 
short-sighted and counterproductive cuts to the Aboriginal 
court worker program. 

 
The individuals signing this petition today come from Regina, 
Saskatoon, and Broadview. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
to stop the redirection of funding of the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, Inc. A recent report shows that 94 
per cent of NORTEP [northern teacher education program] 
grads found employment in the North. NORTEP has improved 
teacher retention rates in the North. NORTEP has a positive 
economic impact in northern Saskatchewan. NORTEP provides 
a high-quality, face-to-face instruction and services to students. 
The province’s financial deficit cannot be fixed by cutting 
indigenous education in the North and a program that has 
served the North for over 40 years. And the prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to immediately restore the 
five-year agreement to fund the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, Inc. and to continue funding 

NORTEP-NORPAC programs in La Ronge. 
 
It is signed and supported by hundreds and hundreds of 
signatures and leaders in northern Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

New Canadian Blood Services Office in Saskatoon 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On a beautiful day 
in September, it was my pleasure to bring greetings from the 
province at the Canadian Blood Services grand opening of their 
Saskatoon office. It is great that this new office, which is the 
first modernized office in Western Canada with new techniques 
and automation, is in my constituency. The grand opening 
showed the local support for this vital part of our health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, giving blood is one of the most important things 
that someone can do. It is literally giving life to someone. The 
fact of the matter is that on any given day someone in Canada 
needs blood every minute, and that someone may be a close 
relative, a friend, a loved one, or even you. Mr. Speaker, I am 
proud to say that I am a blood donor and have passed the 
30-donation mark. 
 
I would ask all members of this Assembly to join with me in 
recognizing the hard work of the staff, professionals, and 
volunteers that are a part of the new Saskatoon office, and all of 
those at Canadian Blood Services nationally who ensure there is 
a safe supply of blood and blood products for all Canadians. 
Further, Mr. Speaker, I would encourage all my colleagues and 
everyone watching and listening to call 1-888-TO-DONATE 
and book an appointment to give blood today. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Revera and Reel Youth Film Project 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was delighted to be 
part of a special audience, together with several dignitaries, 
including Sheri Benson, MP, Saskatoon West, at The Franklin 
in Saskatoon on the evening of November 8th to watch a 
Saskatoon premiere of the Revera and Reel Youth Age is More 
film project. 
 
Revera, a leading owner, operator, investor in the senior living 
sector, have partnered with Reel Youth, a charitable 
organization that empowers youth to create engaging films 
about important social issues. Together they have created the 
Revera and Reel Youth Age is More film project. 
 
Ageism and breaking down the myths and stereotypes that 
surround it is the reason the Revera and Reel Youth Age is 
More project exists. Revera has an initiative called Age is 
More. They have conducted two national research studies on 
ageism and published two Revera reports on ageism. Both of 
these studies showed that ageism is Canada’s most widely 
tolerated form of social discrimination. 
 



1430 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2016 

Mr. Speaker, through this project, 10 Saskatoon youth were 
paired up with 10 older adults from The Franklin. They all 
spent two weekends together getting to know each other and 
creating the 10 films that we saw that evening. There have been 
110 films produced as part of this project over the past four 
years. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me in 
acknowledging Mr. Stephen Foster of Revera, Mark Vonesch 
and the team from Reel Youth, Jillianne Nagy and all the staff 
at the Franklin, but even more importantly the 10 seniors and 
youth who’ve participated in this great project. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[14:00] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 

Melfort Citizen Celebrates 109th Birthday 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise today to speak about Reita Fennell. Reita 
celebrated her 109th birthday this past Sunday. This wonderful 
lady still lives on her own where she still does her own 
cleaning, cooking, and laundry. And, Mr. Speaker, at 109 that’s 
pretty good, but it doesn’t stop there. She is an avid baker, 
known for her cookies, cakes, and especially her famous 
cinnamon buns. And at her 109th birthday party, she walked 
around the room and greeted all her guests and even played a 
couple of tunes on the piano. 
 
Reita is fondly called “Grandma Deat” by family and friends 
and most of Melfort. The name “Deat” originated with her 
younger brother, who could not pronounce Reita when he was a 
little boy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Reita remains healthy and has a great sense of 
humour. She loves practical jokes, especially on family 
members. She is active in her church and loves to visit with her 
grandchildren, nieces, and nephews that live in Melfort. It’s 
very fortunate that Reita has many family and friends that live 
close by, as her nephew picks her up every Saturday to take her 
to get her groceries for the week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Grandma Deat is a wonderful, gracious lady, and I 
am proud and honoured to stand here and invite fellow 
members to wish Reita a very happy birthday with many more 
to come. Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Remembering Sheila Martin Roberts 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Sunday, 
family and friends gathered at the Mackenzie Art Gallery to 
share memories and celebrate the life of Sheila Martin Roberts. 
A long-time resident of Regina Lakeview, Sheila passed away 
on September 19th of this year after a long struggle with illness 
and injury. Sheila’s husband, Joseph Roberts, was a companion 
and faithful caregiver to the end. Sheila’s also survived by her 
daughters, Natalya Kuziak, Sara Kuziak; her stepchildren, Eric 
and Mona, Chris and Katherine; as well as her grandchildren, 
Bryony, Adam, and Claire. 
 

Sheila attended the U of S [University of Saskatchewan] and 
obtained a Bachelor of Arts degree in 1964, and continued her 
studies throughout her life. She was an accomplished organizer, 
negotiator, facilitator, and leader in the Saskatchewan arts and 
cultural community. From 1974 to 1989, Sheila was the 
Saskatchewan representative for the Alliance of Canadian 
Cinema, Television and Radio Artists, ACTRA, in Regina. In 
the early ’90s, Sheila became a visual and literary arts 
consultant for the Saskatchewan government, liaising with 
cultural organizations and contributing to the status of the artist 
legislation. She was a lifelong community activist who believed 
in social justice, civil rights, women’s rights, and she 
participated in countless social movements. 
 
Sheila was a passionate woman. She had many interests 
including theatre, dance, art, music, gardening, and birding. She 
was also a great fisherwoman, and I’m told an expert filleter, 
taking many fish out of her beloved Jan Lake. She was known 
for her cooking, gourmet family meals, and fabulous dinner 
parties. She loved to travel, including time spent as a child with 
her parents in Asia, in England, and Scotland for school, later to 
China, Europe, the US [United States], and across Canada. 
 
As her obituary noted: “Hers was a rich, satisfying, but too 
short life.” She was someone to admire, and I invite all 
members to join me in offering condolences to Joe and her 
family in celebrating the life of Sheila Roberts. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cut 
Knife-Turtleford. 
 

Local Farm Families Featured in Advertising Campaign 
 
Mr. Doke: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great pleasure 
that I rise today to recognize a couple of multi-generational 
farms from my constituency. The Schaefer family farm and the 
Scott Carson farm were recently featured in area newspapers as 
part of the fall advertising for Dekalb. These exposés are not 
only promoting Dekalb’s canola hybrid, but features farms that 
show the best of Saskatchewan agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Schaefer family, the first family featured, have 
been farming in the Meota area for 112 years, over 5 
generations. The youngest Schaefer to farm actually bought 
back his great-grandfather’s homestead when he was graduating 
from grade 12. Mr. Speaker, I know this family and they are 
passionate about the farming industry. 
 
Scott Carson, as the fourth generation on the farm near 
Maidstone, has seen a role reversal: whereas he used to help his 
dad bring in the harvest, now he brings in the harvest. The 
Carsons are friends of mine and I know their passion for 
farming runs deep. 
 
Mr. Speaker, farming is in our blood and the Schaefers and 
Carsons are two examples of types of modern innovation farms 
that are helping to keep Saskatchewan strong. I would ask all 
members to join me in thanking the Schaefers and Carsons for 
their hard work, to thank Dekalb for featuring two farms from 
my constituency in the engineered canola advertising campaign 
this fall. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 



November 22, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1431 

Pioneering Artisan Cheese Producer in Moose Jaw 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Coteau Hills 
Creamery is an exciting new business operating out of Moose 
Jaw. The creamery is Saskatchewan’s only artisan cow’s milk 
cheese producer. Mr. Speaker, Kirby and Crystal Froese moved 
home to Moose Jaw to be closer to their family after working 
for years in the wine-making business in British Columbia and 
abroad. With a wealth of experience in the food and beverage 
industry, Kirby decided he wanted to return to food production. 
Earlier this year, Coteau Hills released its first cheese to market 
— a Balkan feta-style cheese that is creamier than Greek feta. 
They currently also produce bloomy rind and washed rind 
cheese, and they’re looking at making a Saskatoon berry-rubbed 
Tomme cheese in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the creamery sources its milk from Saskatchewan 
producers including Caroncrest Farms, owned and operated by 
the Blaine McLeod family at Caronport. The McLeods are also 
principals in this company. 
 
Coteau Hills plans to expand its production to other 
small-batch, handmade cheeses which contain no preservatives 
or additives. Several local businesses have already begun 
selling Coteau Hills Creamery cheeses in Moose Jaw and 
Regina, and the creamery is looking to expand to Saskatoon and 
Swift Current in the future. 
 
I ask all members to join me in wishing Coteau Hills success as 
they continue to pioneer the artisan cheese industry in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 

Saskatoon Sports Hall of Fame Inductees 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this 
month I had the opportunity to attend and present plaques to the 
Saskatoon Sports Hall of Fame 31st annual induction ceremony 
and banquet at TCU Place in Saskatoon. Although, Mr. 
Speaker, I must admit that I was a little out of my element as 
the only sports award I’ve won was a blue ribbon in high jump 
in grade 7. 
 
The first Saskatoon Sports Hall of Fame induction ceremony 
was held in 1987, and today the Hall continues to be a focal 
point in the celebration of Saskatoon athletes, builders, and 
teams. This year’s inductees included four builders, which were 
Don Bates, Bob Fawcett, Percy Hoff, and Raymond Wight. 
 
There were five inductees in the athlete category: Jaime 
Cruickshank, Duane Dmytryshyn, Kelsie Hendry, Randy Smith, 
and Joey Stabner. 
 
Two teams and one sports organization were inducted as well. 
They were Stephanie Hart and Casey Napper, U of S Huskies 
’86-87 Men’s Track and Field team, and the Marian 
Gymnastics Club. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was great to see such a wide range of sport 
representation including hockey, soccer, cycling, football, 
gymnastics, track and field, and more. These inductees are an 

inspiration to all Saskatchewan athletes and our province is very 
proud of their achievements. I ask all members to join me in 
congratulating these inductees. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

State of the Provincial Economy and Details of Land 
Transactions 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, more proof today that the 
Sask Party simply can’t balance the books. We are seeing the 
consequences of their mismanagement scandal and waste piling 
up for Saskatchewan people. And it’s crystal clear that they’re 
unwilling to come clean to Saskatchewan people on front after 
front. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a place for them to start coming clean would be 
the tens of millions of dollars that they’ve mismanaged and 
wasted through their GTH [Global Transportation Hub] land 
scandal . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Guffaw and laugh at this 
government’s running a financial mess and making cuts for 
Saskatchewan people all they want, but Saskatchewan people 
deserve answers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I know the Premier probably has a lot on his mind here 
today, so I’ll put to him a question that he’s failed to answer 
day after day in this Assembly. When did the Premier learn that 
the numbered company that first owned the land was owned by 
a Sask Party-supporting Alberta land baron who also rented 
land to the minister, the very minister that was pushing this 
deal? When did he learn this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Well I 
do think it’s important to comment on the mid-term report 
that’s been presented by the minister, and the Leader of the 
Opposition referenced it in his preamble to the question. Mr. 
Speaker, there have been some significant challenges now for 
over two years in terms of great pressure on commodity prices. 
And we’ve seen revenues soften even this year in respect of 
income tax, in respect of PST [provincial sales tax] and potash 
royalties, PST revenue and potash royalties. 
 
That notwithstanding though, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to report 
to the people of the province through this forum of the 
Legislative Assembly that Saskatchewan maintains the 
second-lowest debt-to-GDP [gross domestic product] ratio in all 
of the Dominion of Canada, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to report to 
members of the House that we’ve taken the decisions, we’ll 
continue to take the decisions to meet the fiscal challenge, the 
kind of approach that has earned us a AAA rating, Mr. Speaker, 
the first time ever Saskatchewan received a AAA rating. We’ll 
continue to make progress after having balanced the budget on 
the operating debt that we’ve inherited from previous 
governments, on top of the 32 per cent reduction in operating 
debt we provided, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As to the GTH question that the member asked again, Mr. 
Speaker, this was all the subject of the Provincial Auditor’s 
investigation. Everything available for the Provincial . . . Well 



1432 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2016 

he’s saying no. Of course the Provincial Auditor had full 
purview to look at all of these matters, Mr. Speaker. Her 
conclusion is on . . . Her recommendations we accept. Her 
conclusion’s on the record, Mr. Speaker, and we support the 
work of the Provincial Auditor. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, more ridiculous by the 
day. And the fact that this Premier will try to sell as good news 
the financial mess that he’s created speaks to where this 
Premier’s at these days: $3.5 billion of debt added in two years, 
and a Premier who won’t come clean with Saskatchewan people 
with a very simple, straightforward question around his GTH 
land scandal that wasted millions of dollars. 
 
We know this first went to cabinet, and at that point the 
Minister of Justice flagged it that there was a concealed 
identity. Of course we’ve also learned that that concealed 
identity was the landlord of the minister who was pushing the 
very deal, the minister of the GTH. My question to the Premier, 
it’s a pretty simple, straightforward one that he should come 
clean to Saskatchewan on: when did he learn this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, never have so 
many questions been asked about a transaction that never 
happened, that actually that was never followed through. This is 
the first transaction . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition wants to yell from his 
seat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I completely reject the premise of the question. 
The premise of the question is that the government has not been 
forthcoming in answers. 
 
More than that, Mr. Speaker, the government asked the 
Provincial Auditor to look at the entire matter. Let’s review for 
those who are guests here who might not know, the Provincial 
Auditor doesn’t work for this side of the House. The Provincial 
Auditor doesn’t work for that side of the House. The Provincial 
Auditor is an independent officer of this Legislative Assembly. 
She has her own team. She took her team . . . And the Leader of 
the Opposition’s shaking his head. Maybe he doesn’t think 
she’s independent. We on this side of the House do think she’s 
independent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, moreover she took her entire team, she took her 
entire team and looked at the GTH transaction, Mr. Speaker. On 
that team was an accountant that had a speciality in forensic 
audits in the case they found anything that would require a 
further forensic audit, Mr. Speaker. She went through all of the 
transaction. Cabinet made documents available to her upon 
request, Mr. Speaker. There were no limits — they keep 
heckling because they don’t like the answer to the question — 
and she provided recommendations to this side of the House 
that we’re acting on. 
 
But she also said in her press release that accompanied the audit 
that, the press release said, Mr. Speaker, that the audit found no 
evidence of conflict of interest, of wrongdoing, or fraud, Mr. 
Speaker, on the part of the board of directors, which includes 

the minister. Why won’t the opposition accept the work of the 
Provincial Auditor? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

State of the Provincial Economy 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — That non-answer is weak and pathetic 
from the Premier of Saskatchewan. The concealed identity 
made $6 million, the one with the relationship to that minister, 
and that Premier needs to come clean. 
 
But it’s that kind of answer that explains the mess that we’re in 
on the finances, the financial mismanagement of this 
government. Their deficit for this year is already over $1 
billion. In just two years, they’re adding $3.5 billion of debt, 
and that’s on top of the $1 billion a year that they’ve already 
added year after year after year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they couldn’t get the job done during the best 
years. Now times are tough, and they’ve left Saskatchewan 
people vulnerable. And they’re looking pretty desperate. 
They’ve already blown through the surplus, drained the rainy 
day fund, and they claim that revenues are down. But those 
were the Sask Party’s projections, the ones that we called into 
question from day one, Mr. Speaker. The first step to finding a 
solution is admitting that you have a problem. All this 
information, all this information was available to the Premier 
months ago, Mr. Speaker.  
 
To the Premier: why did the Premier hide the true state of our 
province’s finances and the Sask Party’s financial 
mismanagement? Why didn’t he come clean? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, once again I reject the premise 
of the question. The premise of his question is completely false, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would also point out that we are now, well now beyond two 
years of low commodity prices. Oil prices started to fall in the 
fall of 2014 and have stayed lower longer than any analyst or 
expert predicted at the outset. This has been complicated by the 
fact that potash prices have also been low. And so therefore 
there’s been a drag on PST. There’s been a drag on corporate 
income tax revenue. There’s been a drag on income tax revenue 
in response to this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The government has acted with restraint, I would point out. 
That’s referenced in the mid-term report. Mr. Speaker, the 
government has also laid out a plan to manage further and 
responsibly into the future, working towards a balanced budget 
next year. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, consider what’s happened on either side of 
us, where in Manitoba they’re dealing with a much larger 
deficit inherited from an NDP government, even though they 
get 1.4 billion in equalization dollars. And over to the west of 
us, Mr. Speaker, in the province of Alberta where there is also 
an NDP government, Mr. Speaker, they have an $11 billion 



November 22, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1433 

deficit, Mr. Speaker, when their province is roughly four times 
the size of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Here in our province, we have a manageable situation. We’re 
going to get to balance. Here in our province, we have a AAA 
credit rating, Mr. Speaker. Here in our province, we’ve reduced 
the operating debt inherited from members opposite and other 
governments by 32 per cent, lowering interest costs, Mr. 
Speaker. Here in our province, we’ve reduced taxes by $6 
billion in nine years. Here in our province, we’ve increased 
infrastructure investment by $9 billion, creating over the last 
number of years the second-best job creation record in the 
Dominion of Canada. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this Premier has no 
credibility on this file. It’s simply not believable that the 
Premier, who was pretending that he had a couple hundred 
million dollars of a deficit, now is running billion dollar deficit 
after billion dollar deficit. And it’s no surprise, I guess, that he’s 
trying to put on a brave face, but we’d expect something 
different from him. 
 
What we’re dealing with is $3.5 billion of new debt in just two 
years. We have a $1 billion deficit already here this year and 
growing, with no sign that things are turning around. They have 
no plan, and they’re desperate, desperately grasping at straws to 
try to sell this as good news here today, which is a complete 
disrespect to Saskatchewan people, desperately cutting the 
things that help give us strength for the future. Next we know 
they’ll be trying to sell off anything that’s not nailed down, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It seems their only plan is damaging and callous cuts that cost 
us far more, far more in the long run, making things worse. 
Instead of accepting responsibility and working on a plan, 
they’re hiding the reality. They’re making Saskatchewan people 
pay the price with disgraceful cuts and desperate sell-offs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: why didn’t he come clean to 
Saskatchewan people about the financial mess that they 
created? Why does he think it’s right for Saskatchewan people 
to pay the price for Sask Party mismanagement, scandal, and 
waste? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is this 
side of the House, the government has paid off 32 per cent of 
the operating debt of Saskatchewan. We have financed 
infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. Do you know who else supported 
financing, borrowing for infrastructure in the provincial election 
just a few months ago? Do you know who else called for the 
financing and the borrowing to support infrastructure in the 
election on April the 4th? He’s nodding his head again because 
he knows what’s coming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s a letter that the NDP furnished with their 
own campaign platform, wherein they laid out borrowing for 
infrastructure. They got Andrew Jackson, who’s an adjunct . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Oh, they don’t like this, Mr. 
Speaker. They don’t like this at all. Now here’s a letter from the 

professor of the Broadbent Institute at Carleton University that 
they asked to review their plan, their plan to borrow 
infrastructure, and here’s what he says about the NDP: 
 

You are also taking advantage of historically low 
borrowing costs and a federal commitment to support 
growth oriented public infrastructure investment by the 
provinces. A recent study . . . [by] the Broadbent Institute 
by the Centre for Spatial Economics showed that such 
investments boost employment, growth and provincial 
government revenues in the short term and expand the 
long-term revenue . . . 

 
The quote goes on, Mr. Speaker. This was all part of their 
platform which forecasted — what? — a deficit budget, Mr. 
Speaker, and missed, by the way, in their forecast, $1 billion 
worth of NDP promises. The member opposite will forgive the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan if they’re not interested 
in any budgeting lessons from the NDP. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, those responses are as 
weak and pathetic as the display we see day in, day out on the 
GTH land scandal. This is a government that couldn’t get the 
job done during the best days, drained the rainy day fund when 
the revenues were flowing, didn’t save a dime, and piled on 
debt, leaving us vulnerable during this period of time, and a 
Premier who knew the full picture which was before him 
months ago when he was saying something very, very different 
to Saskatchewan people. 
 
How can that Premier, how can that Premier defend not getting 
the job done during the best years, leaving Saskatchewan 
people now to pay the price? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — I think this is an interesting debate here 
in the Chamber here today, Mr. Speaker. What we’ve seen from 
the opposition NDP over the last number of days, and I’ve 
listened very, very carefully as they come into this Chamber, 
Mr. Speaker, day after day after day — whether it’s their 
petitions that they present here in the Chamber or whether it’s 
questions asked by the opposition critics of the various 
ministers in the government, Mr. Speaker — every single day, 
that opposition comes into this Chamber and says the 
government should be spending more money, Mr. Speaker, in 
virtually every area of the government. 
 
So we have said, Mr. Speaker, given the fact that resource 
revenues are down $1.2 billion over the last two years, tax 
revenues are down $400 million in this year, Mr. Speaker, and 
that opposition comes into this Chamber every single day and 
says the government ought to spend more money. Mr. Speaker, 
we are going to deal with the challenges, faced with the 
uncertainties in our economy right now, Mr. Speaker, 
particularly in the oil and gas sector and the commodities 
sector. 
 
When the opposition critic was asked today what she would do 
differently, pressed pretty hard by the media to say what would 
you do, here is her quote, Mr. Speaker: Well they’ll have to 



1434 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2016 

look at either increasing revenues or management of our 
expenses. Well why didn’t we think of that, Mr. Speaker? 
That’s brilliant advice here in the Chamber. Mr. Speaker, we’re 
not going to take any further advice from that Finance critic. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We know 
the people of Saskatchewan deserve a government that takes the 
situation seriously, but even that answer has a deficit of its own. 
The only thing this government has proven is that they can’t be 
trusted. We know now why they didn’t want to reveal the 
numbers for the first-quarter update: they were embarrassed. 
And now, putting newspaper over their mess and pretending it 
wasn’t there has only made matters worse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister told us everything was fine. 
Well I’ve got news for him — it’s not. And we, along with the 
people of Saskatchewan, have been telling him that all along. 
The minister says he’s happy to use debt financing but, Mr. 
Speaker, what is the minister’s plan for dealing with interest 
rates if the province’s credit rating goes down? One of the 
problems identified in the spring was the Sask Party’s poor 
projections, which we see again here today. Well if they got 
their deficit projection off by about $600 million, so how does 
the Finance minister think it will affect the province’s credit 
rating? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, I think again it’s important 
to have this debate in the Chamber, Mr. Speaker, and I welcome 
it. I recall, when we wrapped up the budget debate here in the 
Chamber back in June, Mr. Speaker, when I gave my wrap-up 
speech to wrap up the budget debate, I implored members of the 
opposition to provide us some solutions. I implored members of 
the opposition to send over some of their ideas, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we have done is embarked upon transformational change 
across the entire spectrum of government. Do you know who’s 
participating in this, Mr. Speaker? The Saskatchewan Chamber 
of Commerce is participating in this. Public servants are 
participating in this. Citizens across the province are 
participating in this, understanding full well that when you lose 
$1.2 billion in resource revenues in the course of two years, Mr. 
Speaker, you can shut down hospitals. You can lay off teachers. 
You can lay off nurses, Mr. Speaker. What we’ve asked the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan is to engage with the 
government to say, look, we need to get back to delivering the 
core services that the people of this province want and deserve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve not had one idea come from the other side 
except spend more money. 
 
The Speaker: — I caution members to please listen to the 
question and response from government. I recognize the 
minister from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. When is 
the Finance minister just going to admit that he had it all 
wrong? 
 

Now I can admit that I had the time-stamp wrong about his 
Facebook fight last week. I made a mistake. I’ll admit it. I’ll 
even apologize — I’m sorry. His diatribe Thursday clearly 
ended before midnight. See, Mr. Speaker? That was easy. 
 
So now I’d like to remind the Finance minister of some of his 
mistakes: 11,000 people, more people looking for work today 
than a year ago; $3.5 billion more in debt in two years; a $1 
billion deficit this year alone. Mr. Speaker, his plan is to cut 
deeper? His plan is to borrow more? Is it to raise taxes? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the flailing around and hiding from Saskatchewan 
people is what got the Sask Party in the position they’re 
dragging us all into now. So will the Finance minister admit he 
made some terrible mistakes, admit that his projections could 
not have been more wrong if he had thrown darts at a chart of 
random numbers? Will he come clean and commit to working 
with us to get the finances back in order and put Saskatchewan 
people back to work? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for 
acknowledging her mistake from yesterday, and I appreciate her 
apology. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s just take a look at the picture in the province 
of Saskatchewan today. Their own platform document, their 
own platform document advocating borrowing money to invest 
in infrastructure . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well see I don’t 
think they’ve read their own platform document, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s right there. I can send a copy over to you. I can send a copy 
over to all of you, all 10 of you over there if you’ve not read 
your platform document. It’s advocating borrowing money to 
invest in infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member opposite, the member opposite made reference to 
the fact there’s 10,000 less people employed in the province 
today than there was last year, Mr. Speaker. I acknowledge that. 
That’s as a result of the downturn in the commodity sector in 
our province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if we had not been building 18 new schools 
in the province, if we were not building a new mental health 
facility in North Battleford, Mr. Speaker, if we were not 
building a new children’s hospital in Saskatoon, if we were not 
building a new bypass around the capital city of Regina, Mr. 
Speaker, can you imagine what the employment figures would 
be in this province today? We’re not going to take the advice 
from that member today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, all he has to do is admit that he’s 
making all the same mistakes over again. If he works with us, 
we can get things back on track before things get as bad as they 
were when the last government he worked for got thrown out.  
 
Mr. Speaker, going into debt to create jobs can be a good 
strategy, but you actually have to create jobs. This Sask Party 
can’t create Saskatchewan jobs when they build highways. 
They can’t create Saskatchewan jobs with abandoned and 



November 22, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1435 

orphan well cleanup. And they certainly can’t create 
Saskatchewan jobs efficiently with their $1.5 billion job-killing 
carbon capture tax. They didn’t even protect the technology for 
Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. Precious investment in this 
province should be in job creating projects that actually create 
jobs here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will this minister admit that his party 
couldn’t even build pipelines when times were good? And they 
certainly can’t be trusted to create jobs and infrastructure now 
that times are tough. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, do you know what’s going 
to kill jobs in this province and other provinces across this 
country is a nationally imposed carbon tax. We asked one 
simple little thing. We asked the Leader of the Opposition to 
sign a letter in conjunction with the Premier to send to the 
Prime Minister to say, do not impose a national carbon tax; 
certainly do not impose a carbon tax in the province of 
Saskatchewan. That Leader of the Opposition refused to do that, 
Mr. Speaker, because of politics. 
 
Then we have this Finance critic, who also happens to be the 
Agriculture critic, who ironically also happens to be the 
Environment critic, Mr. Speaker. What’s her solution to the job 
situation in the province of Saskatchewan? A carbon tax. She 
wants to start up a tech fund and have emitters in the province 
today put money into a tech fund, Mr. Speaker, for the green 
economy. It’s a carbon tax, Mr. Speaker.  
 
This is the same Finance critic, do you know what her plan is, 
Mr. Speaker? She won’t stand up and defend it. She went off to 
Edmonton earlier this year and stood on the floor at the NDP 
national convention and voted in favour of the Leap Manifesto, 
Mr. Speaker. Have a look at the Leap Manifesto. It would 
destroy the economy in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s 
her plan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, you think he’d save some of that 
anger for himself and his colleagues and their $1 billion deficit 
that they didn’t have the guts to tell the people of Saskatchewan 
about before the election. They don’t get it, Mr. Speaker. They 
don’t get it. 
 
There are 11,000 more Saskatchewan people looking for work 
today than there were a year ago. In Saskatchewan we’ve lost 
jobs in the resource sector, in construction, in real estate, and 
throughout the private sector. And, Mr. Speaker, we know that 
the Sask Party can’t stop cutting jobs in the public sector. From 
front-line health staff to people who work in our kids’ 
classrooms, they just keep handing out pink slips. To make 
matters worse, Mr. Speaker, they’re also cutting job creation 
and training programs, and we see that here today from the 
Ministry of the Economy to Advanced Education. Every 
program to help Saskatchewan people back to work is under 
attack from this Sask Party government. 
 

Mr. Speaker, they may be hoping that this helps them out in the 
short term, but who is going to help turn this economy around 
when the Sask Party cuts mean more and more Saskatchewan 
people are out of work? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Let’s review the facts on job creation, 
Mr. Speaker. From 2007 to today, this province has the 
second-best job creation record in the entire country. In the last 
nine years of the NDP government, do you know what position 
Saskatchewan ranked then? Dead last. The worst in Canada was 
their record. That’s their record, Mr. Speaker, the worst in 
Canada. 
 
And what is their solution offered? What is it? A carbon tax — 
that’s what they come up with. The Leader of the Opposition, 
I’ll actually quote him, the Leader of the Opposition says, 
“Well I think you need to make sure that you’re protecting the 
interests of the province and families and farms, but the concept 
of a carbon price is something we support.” So their solution is 
a carbon tax. And we know the Finance critic, the Finance critic 
votes . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — The Finance critic goes to Edmonton to 
the national convention of the NDP, and she votes for the Leap 
Manifesto, a document that’s a virtual declaration of war on the 
economy of this province. And they have the temerity, with the 
worst job creation record in the history . . . well in the entirety 
of Canada during their term, and have the temerity to speak 
about creating jobs when we have the second-best record in this 
country. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, day after day the Education minister 
tells school divisions to work harder at finding efficiencies in 
their schools. And we all know what that’s code for, Mr. 
Speaker: cuts to our children’s classrooms. 
 
According to the minister, school divisions just aren’t cutting 
enough. Two years ago school boards were asked to find $5 
million in savings. School divisions have dug deep and 
managed to cut 15 million, three times the amount of savings 
they were told to find. Nearly half of those savings that 
divisions found were through staff reductions. That means 
fewer teachers, fewer educational assistants, and fewer support 
staff for our children’s classrooms. 
 
But that’s still not enough for this minister. Mr. Speaker, the 
fact is these school divisions have had to cut more than they 
were originally asked. School divisions have been forced to dip 
into their emergency funds just to cover day-to-day operations. 
Will the minister admit that his government’s scandal, waste, 
and mismanagement are out of control, and will he leave our 



1436 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2016 

kids’ classrooms alone? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite talks 
about leaving classrooms alone. That’s what they did and that’s 
why the people went to Alberta. Mr. Speaker, we will provide 
resources and we will provide supports to the classroom 
because we want to have good, good results for our students, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
In 2013, 65 per cent of our kids were reading at grade level; 
2014 was up to 70 per cent; 2015, 73 per cent; 2016, 74 per 
cent. Mr. Speaker, that’s what we’re doing inside our 
classrooms. We’re not leaving it alone; we’re working with the 
teachers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our goal was to have 85 per cent of our students 
graduating on time: 2013, it was 74.7; 2014, 75.2; 2015, 75.6. 
More work to do, Mr. Speaker, but definitely making progress 
— better than closing schools, better than sending kids to 
Calgary. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Ms. Young: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 2, 
The Miscellaneous Statutes (Crown Corporations’ Fiscal Year 
End Standardization) Amendment Act, 2016 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 
read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 2, the 
miscellaneous status (Crown Corporations’ fiscal year 
standardization) amendment act, 2016 and the bill now be read 
a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. I recognize the Minister of Crown Investments. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Crown 
Corporations’ Fiscal Year End Standardization) 

Amendment Act, 2016 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I move that the bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 

The Speaker: — It is moved by the minister that Bill No. 2, the 
miscellaneous status amendment Act, 2016 be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — On division. Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Ms. Young: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 
37, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2016 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 
read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration of Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 37, The 
Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2016 and that the bill be now 
read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. I recognize the Minister of Crown Investments. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 37 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2016 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I move that the bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 37, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2016 be now read 
the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready 
for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 



November 22, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1437 

motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Ms. Young: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 
32, The Automobile Accident Insurance (Benefits) Amendment 
Act, 2016 with amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Minister of 
Crown Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill and its 
amendments be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 32, The 
Automobile Accident Insurance (Benefits) Amendment Act, 
2016 and the bill be amended, be now read the third time. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. When shall the amendments be read 
a first time? I recognize the Minister of Crown Investments. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Automobile Accident Insurance 
(Benefits) Amendment Act, 2016 

 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I move that the amendments be now 
read a first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the 
amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — First and second reading of the 
amendments. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. 
 
I recognize the Minister of Crown Investments. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Automobile Accident Insurance 
(Benefits) Amendment Act, 2016 

 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I move that the bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 32, 
The Automobile Accident Insurance (Benefits) Amendment Act, 
2016 be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 12, 
The Public Health (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2016 
without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 
read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 12, The 
Public Health (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2016 and that 
the bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 12 — The Public Health (Miscellaneous) 
Amendment Act, 2016 

 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I move that the bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 12, The Public Health (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 
2016 be now read a third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 



1438 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2016 

The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 26, 
The Patient Choice Medical Imaging Act without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Minister of 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 
read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 26, The 
Patient Choice Medical Imaging Act and that the bill be now 
read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 26 — The Patient Choice Medical Imaging Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I move that the bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 26, The Patient Choice Medical Imaging Act, be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 14:42 until 14:47.] 
 

The Speaker: — All those in favour of the motion please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 48] 
 
Wall Moe Stewart 
Wyant Reiter Morgan 
Harpauer Doherty Duncan 
Beaudry-Mellor Hargrave D’Autremont 
Heppner Boyd Cheveldayoff 
Marit Tell Eyre 
Merriman Harrison Ottenbreit 
Ross Weekes Brkich 
Hart Kirsch Steinley 
Makowsky Phillips Lawrence 
Wilson Campeau Docherty 
Michelson Doke Cox 
Olauson Steele Young 
Fiaz Dennis Bonk 
Carr Nerlien Lambert 
Buckingham Kaeding McMorris 
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed please rise. 
 

[Nays — 10] 
 
Wotherspoon Chartier Belanger 
Sproule Forbes Rancourt 
Beck McCall Sarauer 
Vermette   
 
Principal Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 
48; those opposed, 10. 
 
The Speaker: — Motion passes. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Human Services to report Bill No. 13, 
The Cancer Agency Amendment Act, 2016 with amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I request leave to waive consideration in 
Committee of the Whole on this bill, and that the bill and its 
amendments be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in the Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 13, 
The Cancer Agency Amendment Act, 2016 and the bill and its 
amendments be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. When shall the amendments be read 



November 22, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1439 

a first time? I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 

Bill No. 13 — The Cancer Agency Amendment Act, 2016 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I move that the amendments be now read 
a first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the 
amendments be now read a first and second time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk — First and second reading of the 
amendments. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister may proceed to move third 
reading. I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 13 — The Cancer Agency Amendment Act, 2016 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — I move that the bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 13, The Cancer Agency Amendment Act, 2016 be now read 
the third time and passed under its title. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Ms. Young: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 1, 
The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 
2016 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in the 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I request leave to waive consideration 
in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that the bill be now 
read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole for Bill No. 1, The 

Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 2016 
and the bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Leave is not granted. When shall this bill be 
considered in Committee of the Whole? I recognize the 
Minister of Crown Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Later this day. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 

TABLING OF SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
before orders of the day, it is my pleasure to submit 
supplementary estimates accompanied by a message from Her 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
The Speaker: — Would you please rise for the message from 
the Lieutenant Governor. The message is as follows: 
 

The Lieutenant Governor transmits supplementary 
estimates — November, of certain sums required for the 
service of the province for the 12 months ending March 
31st, 2017, and recommends the same to the Legislative 
Assembly. Hon. Vaughn Solomon Schofield, Lieutenant 
Governor, province of Saskatchewan. 

 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 

 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answer to question 195. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has only tabled the 
responses to question 195. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answer to question 196. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered the 
response to question 196. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 197 through 214. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 197 to 214. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
Principal Clerk: — Committee of the Whole on Bills. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair. 
 
[15:00] 



1440 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2016 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ON BILLS 
 

Bill No. 1 — The Crown Corporations Public Ownership 
Amendment Act, 2016 

 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — Members, I’ll call the Committee of the Whole 
to order. The item before the committee this afternoon is Bill 
No. 1, An Act to amend The Crown Corporations Public 
Ownership Act. I’ll ask the minister responsible for . . . that’s 
presenting this bill, I’ll ask him to introduce any officials that 
he may have, and if he wishes, to make a very short opening 
comments if he so wishes. 
 
But before I recognize him, there’s a couple of housekeeping 
things that I should do. First of all, this is a little bit different 
than what we usually do, so I’ll just review a couple of things: 
Rule 90, or part of rule 90 that applies to Committee of the 
Whole on third reading. Rule 90 is as follows, and I’ll just state 
a couple of parts of it. First: 
 

Two hours will be allotted to Private Members for 
questions and comments. 
 
Private Members may be recognized more than once but 
must yield the floor after 20 minutes; should the list of 
speakers be exhausted before the two hours are up, 
Members who have already spoken may be permitted to 
speak again. 

 
So what is going to happen here, the clock will be set at two 
hours. And when private members are making comments and 
asking questions, the clock will run. But when the member is 
done making their comments and asking questions, it’ll stop. 
The time does not include comments by the minister or 
comments by the Chair. So those are the standing orders that 
we’re operating under. So now I will recognize the minister and 
ask him to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Today I 
only have one official. It’s Barry Lacey, to my right here. He’s 
the president and CEO [chief executive officer] of SLGA 
[Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority]. And I have no 
additional comments. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member from Regina Lakeview. 
Please stand when you speak. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. Lacey, for 
attending this meeting today. I do sincerely appreciate that. And 
thank you to Minister Hargrave. Mr. Chair, just for the 
information of the members here today, we’re here today 
because as an opposition we have some serious and significant 
concerns about how this bill, although a CIC [Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] bill, the 
consequences it will have for SLGA in particular. 
 
Last night at committee, the Minister for Crown Investments 
Corporations was unable to answer many of the questions that I 
had about the impact that this bill will have on the people of our 
province. And when I asked to have the Minister for SLGA 
appear before the committee by way of motion, that motion was 

voted down. 
 
The minister responsible is stating that at that point, it was not 
indicated that it was not possible to have the Minister for SLGA 
to attend, Mr. Speaker, so that motion was voted down. Those 
questions remain, and I think that they are questions that should 
be answered, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why we find ourselves in 
this Assembly today in this Committee of the Whole. And as I 
noted at the beginning of my statements, I understand this has 
probably been a change in your day, and I do sincerely 
appreciate you being here. 
 
My first question is this, and maybe a little by way of preamble: 
when this bill was read for the first time, it triggered the policy 
committee. So we had submissions as is prescribed in the 
Crown protection Act, the opportunity to sit as a committee and 
have a number of presentations from members of the public. 
There was some information that came forth in that committee 
as well as comments in introduction of second reading of this 
bill by the then minister that I have some specific questions 
about. 
 
And the first question is this: what is the current state of the 
RFP [request for proposal] process that this bill allows the 
government to enter into with regards to the 40 liquor stores 
that are about to be privatized? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. It is too bad 
that . . . The opposition did know about the committee and did 
know about the bill well in advance to last night that we could 
have arranged to have the officials from — all of the officials 
instead of just one — from SLGA present and to answer 
questions last night. And it would have made this afternoon not 
necessary and would have made last night go a little easier for 
us, right? And so but that’s fine. Anyway we’ll deal with it 
today, and that’s what we’re here for. 
 
The current state of the RFP is . . . It’s very imminent. We 
expect that the successful proponents should be announced 
very, very shortly. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member from Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. My understanding is that 
the RFP process was to have been completed in September, and 
I’m just wondering what the reason is for the delays. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you very much again, Mr. 
Chairman. Many elements of the RFP were completed but not 
all of them. We had an extremely high response rate to the RFP, 
a very high response rate, and so officials, together with 
KPMG. . . It was a lengthy process because of the sheer number 
of applicants, of respondents. It was quite the long process to go 
through it. And it’s just finalizing now, and we do expect that to 
be completed and announced very shortly. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beck: — To clarify, Mr. Chair, to the minister: have there 



November 22, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1441 

been any decisions finalized with regard to sale of those stores? 
Have the successful bidders been notified or the unsuccessful 
bidders been notified of the results of that RFP? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Minister of CIC. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the question 
from the member opposite, decisions have been finalized in 
response to the RFP and the respondents are in the process . . . 
We are in the process of contacting and notifying all of the 
respondents. Again as I say, there was a number of respondents. 
There was a large number of respondents, and that process is 
under way at this time. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member from Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you. Could you tell us how many 
respondents there were to that RFP? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As I said, 
it’s a very high number, and that number was over 274. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Were there RFPs 
forwarded for each of the 40 stores? I would suspect that the 
number over 200 might be concentrated in certain areas. Did 
you receive RFPs for each of the 40 stores? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Mr. Chairman, yes. The answer is all 
40 did receive RFP proposals. All 50 received RFP proposals. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I wonder if the minister 
can tell me if there were any proposals put forward by former 
SLGA employees. There was indication that there would be 
some preference given to employee group bids to the RFP 
process. 
 
[15:15] 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Mr. Chairman, in regards to the 
question regarding former, or SLGA employees, yes, there were 
some SLGA employees that did put forward RFP. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member from Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I understand from 
the minister’s previous responses that we can expect that these 
decisions will be finalized. I wonder if there is a specific time 
frame that we can be looking at for public disclosure of the 
successful bids to the RFP process? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Mr. Chairman, that will be 

imminently, so that’s very, very soon. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I wonder if the minister 
can tell me what the total anticipated revenue will be from the 
sale of these 40, the 40 privatized stores? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As part of 
the process, these stores were not sold. There was no revenue to 
be gained from these stores. These proponents won the RFP, 
and we just vacate the area. There’s no new permits issued. Just 
the same . . . the one permit for that store. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m wondering then what 
the total net impact was on revenues for going through the RFP 
process, the tendering, and subsequent successful bid of both 
the 40 stores and the additional private stores. Was there any 
impact on revenues for SLGA or costs? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — This process was . . . This process was 
revenue neutral. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. One of the things that was 
brought up frequently in committee as a concern and a question 
that we had with regard to the neutrality, the revenue neutrality 
of this transaction was the lack of transparency about that 
revenue neutrality. Will there be a breakdown provided to the 
public, to members of this Assembly, breaking down exactly 
how the sale, the privatization of these 40 stores, the addition of 
these 10 new stores as well as the decrease in the markup on 
wholesale alcohol, how that will break out to be revenue 
neutral? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The 
process of course was very complex. And well, you know, one 
of the things was simplified — the mark-up process of the 
liquor — and we’re very confident that that will be revenue 
neutral. Where the money is made with SLGA is on the 
wholesale end not on the retail end. And that’s sort of been . . . 
And that’s historical, and that’s the way it will obviously 
remain. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I appreciate the answer. 
The question was whether or not that neutrality will be 
presented in some transparent and coherent way to members of 
this Assembly and members of the public. And I recall from 
committee that there were some concerns that, given the fact 
that now SLGA will be a smaller piece of the wholesale 
purchasing process, that those revenues with regard to 
wholesale alcohol sales might be reduced. 



1442 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2016 

So to clarify, the question is, when can we expect or will we 
expect to see those costs and the net impact presented in a 
public way? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Mr. Chairman, the figures that you’re 
requesting, well they will show in the annual financial reports 
that are produced by SLGA — you have to go in to the 
summary financials of the government — and are reported on 
regularly. So that’s where those . . . So there will be 
transparency. They will be right in there. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. My question is this: have 
there been any studies or reports on the impact, particularly on 
rural economies? We heard in committee a number of concerns. 
I think particularly of the town of Gravelbourg, their chamber 
of commerce presenting concerns that this decision to remove 
SLGA entirely from the Crown protection Act will have 
particular impacts on rural communities. So my question, to 
clarify: have there been any studies or reports, and do you 
anticipate tracking what that impact will be on those rural 
communities, the impact of this legislation and the privatization 
and addition of additional private stores? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. There will 
continue to be in all these locations, all the 40 locations that are 
being redone, there will continue to be service. There will still 
be alcohol provided to those communities through the service 
providers that were successful in obtaining the RFP. So there 
should be very little impact to the communities as far as 
obtaining alcohol because it still will be there. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I thank the minister 
for that answer. Some of the concerns that were outlined 
specifically, if I can recall, in the instance where there is no 
longer an SLGA store in a town and perhaps you have two or 
three small grocery stores vying for the right to have the liquor 
licence in that town, the concern was that you might see a 
negative impact on the two stores that don’t receive the liquor 
licence. So it was along those lines, Mr. Chair. It was also along 
the lines of the number of jobs that might be lost, and 
particularly good-paying jobs, good unionized jobs in these 
small communities. 
 
So I guess I’ll move on to this question. How many jobs have 
been lost as a result, SLGA jobs have been lost as a result of 
this RFP process? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I’m taking that as two questions. And 
business owners, I know as being a business owner for many 
years, are not afraid of competition. We look forward to it. And 
all the business owners in the community did have a chance to 
bid through the RFP process. So as a business owner, I’m never 
afraid of competition. I welcome competition. And so there 

should be nominal impact and the business owners in there that 
did not win the RFP should be happy they got an opportunity. 
And they had their chance, so there should be nominal impact 
on them. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister I guess or 
through the Chair, the second part of my question was, how 
many SLGA jobs have been lost as a part of this process? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I believe the number . . . We’re just 
actually getting a firm number right now, so we should have 
that answer very shortly. I believe it was just over 100 FTE 
[full-time equivalent], but we’ll get the right answer and then 
we’ll provide it to you as soon as we get it. It should be in just a 
few minutes. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. This is a question I want 
to revisit, and that is the fundamental question to this whole 
piece of legislation, and it’s this: why was the decision made to 
have SLGA totally removed from the protection of this Act? 
Certainly as has been conceded both in this Assembly and in 
committee, the government, the Sask Party did campaign on the 
privatization of 40 stores, but not on removing SLGA entirely 
from the protection of the Crown protection Act, and certainly 
that wasn’t widely circulated during the campaign. So 
specifically, why the decision to remove SLGA entirely from 
the Act? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Two answers. The first one was from 
the last question: 116 FTE, 1-1-6. 
 
In relation to the latest question, I’ll answer that, Mr. Chairman. 
As I pointed out last night, it was in our platform that we were 
campaigning on, and we did campaign through the entire 
election about the removal of the stores and the conversion of 
the stores, in our campaign. It’s being amended accordingly to 
ensure that there is no legal uncertainty about the legality of 
converting of the stores. That’s why the Act had to be changed. 
 
[15:30] 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member from Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Would it have been 
possible to privatize the 40 stores, as you campaigned on, and 
add additional stores without removing SLGA entirely from the 
protection of the Crown protection Act? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — No, it was our opinion that to remove 
any doubt that there was and to . . . there was legal certainty that 
we could proceed and convert the stores, that they all had to be 
removed, that the whole SLGA had to be removed and not just 
those 40 stores. 



November 22, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1443 

The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beck: — This is just a question that has just occurred to me 
now, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chair, rather. So there’s no other way 
that partial privatization could have happened without removing 
SLGA from the Act, perhaps a change of definition about 
privatization? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. It may have 
been possible to remove just the 40 stores, but to ensure legal 
certainty and to avoid any challenges we felt it necessary to 
amend the Act as presented. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Removal of SLGA from 
the protection of this Act, will that make it easier to privatize 
additional stores? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — The government has no plans to 
privatize additional stores. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I am pleased to hear that. 
So just to clarify, there are no plans now or in the future to 
privatize additional stores? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I will clarify the remarks. There are no 
current plans to privatize any additional stores. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. One of the questions that I 
have about further privatization, as was mentioned earlier, that a 
lot of the assumptions about revenue neutrality come from 
revenue from wholesale liquor, and if we were to see further 
privatization within SLGA, would that impact . . . upset the 
balance of the model of revenue neutrality? Would the SLGA 
have less power to garner good wholesale prices for their 
product? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The 
government has no current plans to further privatize, further 
convert any of the liquor stores. We’re comfortable that there 
will be revenue neutrality and that should continue. So we’re 
quite comfortable with that. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Can the minister confirm 
that $32 million in net profit was realized by those 40 stores in 
the year prior . . . in the past year? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 

Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. These, the 
40 stores that were converted, upon review, they were the 
lowest performing 40 stores that we had and we’re extremely 
comfortable that, going forward, that there will be that revenue 
neutrality in, within that. So we’ll pass . . . [inaudible]. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I thank the minister for 
that answer. The question was the net income in 2014, 
cumulative income of those 40 stores. Can he confirm that it 
was approximately $32 million? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would request 
leave to allow the president and CEO of SLGA to answer that 
question. 
 
The Chair: — I think it’s been a long-standing practice of this 
House and according to the rules and procedures that we have, 
that in Committee of the Whole and the Committee of Finance, 
only members of the House are allowed to ask questions and 
give answers. I would encourage the minister to find another 
way of giving the information, perhaps making a commitment 
to providing it later or sending it across the floor in written 
form. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for your 
remarks. Then we’d like to undertake to provide leave to . . . or 
not leave, but to have the . . . a response prepared, and just a 
little bit of time, more time, to respond to the question. And 
we’ll advance that response at a later time just before we’re 
done. Okay? 
 
The Chair: — The minister has made a commitment to provide 
the information. I recognize . . . The member from Regina 
Lakeview would like to ask some more questions. She currently 
has the floor. I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister Hargrave noted 
that these were the least profitable stores in the province. 
Melfort appears to have had a net income of over $2 million in 
2014. So just to confirm, the remaining 35 stores all had a net 
profitability of below that amount of that Melfort store? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — As I’ve mentioned, it was actually the 
lowest performing, the least profitable. Profitability was 
definitely included in our consideration, as was potential future 
capital expenditures. There were a number of factors considered 
to come up with what we considered to be the lowest 
performing stores. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. So regardless . . . I think I 
can move ahead with this question regardless of the amount, if 
it’s 32 million or another amount. Was there money being 
transferred onto the GRF [General Revenue Fund] as income 



1444 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2016 

from these SLGA stores? And if so, what was that amount? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Mr. Chairman, that does fall into the 
other question that we were asking for an undertaking to 
provide the answer later because it falls under that same 
category as two questions ago. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. My understanding is that, 
of the 40 stores that have had requests for proposals that have 
been privatized, 28 of them were owned by SLGA, by the 
province. And my question is, what was the value of those 28 
assets? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Again 
because of the short notice for my officials, he doesn’t have 
everything at his fingertips here. So we had asked for an 
undertaking to provide that as well, and we are trying to get that 
value. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Perhaps in an effort to 
understand the RFP process a little bit better, the minister 
indicated the proposals were undertaken and decisions have 
been made to grant — I’m not sure; I’m struggling with the 
right word — licence to the new private owners of these stores. 
Can the minister or the officials run us through the details of 
how that RFP process — not the particulars of any individual 
RFP, but in general — how that process was undertaken and 
how the successful bidders were selected and what the process 
is to transfer, I suppose, title of these buildings to the new 
private owners? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Assets are 
not going with the proposals. They’re a separate thing. A 
request for a proposal process was used to select the operators. 
Proposals were evaluated on criteria like financial capacity, 
experience and qualifications, proposed site, time limits, and 
whether there was any ownership involvement by an SLGA 
employee directly affected by conversion of the existing liquor 
stores. These RFPs were evaluated by senior officials at SLGA 
and KMPG without any political involvement whatsoever. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member from Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. So just so I’m clear, there 
was part of the — and I thank the minister for the answer — 
there was part of that answer that I wasn’t quite clear about, not 
being familiar with this process. I believe he noted that the 
assets are not going with the proposals and they’re a separate 
thing. I’m wondering if the minister can clarify what was meant 
by that. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 

Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The RFP 
process was to apply only for the permit, so none of the assets 
would convert over to the new people. The buildings would not 
convert over. None of the assets in there, the shelves, nothing. 
Nothing like that would transfer over. All they were applying 
for was the retail permit for that locale. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beck: — I thank the minister for that answer. So just so 
I’m clear and just to clarify, so then SLGA will retain 
ownership of those 28 buildings. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The RFP 
process did not include the sale of any SLGA assets. SLGA 
store properties will be disposed of following the government 
process, which includes ensuring no other government agencies 
will make use of the buildings, and then proceed to disposal. 
 
Disposal may take place through a bid process on SaskTenders 
or through a commercial realtor. If successful proponents 
indicate they are interested in the existing stores, SLGA will be 
working with them to make sure they understand the disposal 
process. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. So I just want to make 
sure that I have this clear. The RFPs are for operating the outlet, 
for lack of a better term. What will come subsequent to that will 
be the sale of those 28 buildings. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Yes. The RFP was for the permit and 
not the assets. And following the normal government processes, 
the assets will be disposed of. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. So you have . . . I believe 
I’m waiting for the answer on the combined value of those 28 
buildings. Okay. I would add to that what you would expect to 
receive with regard to how much you would expect to sell those 
28 assets for. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The net 
book value of all the combined properties is just under $2.5 
million. The market will dictate actually what we get for those 
properties, but the net book value is just under 2.5 million. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Back when committee 
met, with regard, back in June, at that time it was indicated that 
the RFP would go out in communities of less than 2,000 people 
for submissions of new private retailers where they would be 
allowed to sell liquor from existing businesses. At some point it 
seems subsequent to that, that threshold has been moved up to 



November 22, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1445 

communities under 5,000, and I’m just wondering when that 
decision was made and why that decision was made. 
 
[16:00] 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The 
member’s right. That number did move from 2,000 to 5,000. 
SLGA officials, under their review when they were reviewing 
it, and current practices that they reviewed, that they had the 
opportunity to re-review before the final RFPs went out, 
indicated that that number should be 5,000 and . . . 5,000 people 
and under. And so that’s why it was suggested. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I guess I’m hoping for a 
bit of an expansion on that answer. Originally there was a target 
or a threshold arrived at, presumably for . . . There were some 
reasons that went into that 2,000 population threshold. I’m just 
wondering, was there new information that was received, or 
what went into the initial decision to arrive at 2,000? And what 
changed and caused SLGA to move that number up to 5,000? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Mr. Chairman, once it was reviewed 
prior to, and the step back and re-reviewed, it was strongly felt 
that 5,000 better reflected the business as it was prior to, and 
that this would be a better option and for the RFPs rather than 
the 2,000. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m going to go back to 
one of the previous answers, and that was regarding how many 
jobs had been lost as a result of this process. And I believe the 
number was 116 FTEs. I’m just wondering if there have been 
any programs or any transitioning, bumping . . . What has 
happened to those employees who . . . 116 or more, if there 
were part-time workers included in that, what is the plan? When 
did they finish their work and what provisions have been made 
for them, if any, to transition from their employment to, I guess, 
unemployment or other employment? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. Sorry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — That’s okay. Everybody’s busy. Thank 
you, Mr. Chairman. SLGA and SGEU [Saskatchewan 
Government and General Employees’ Union] negotiated a plan 
regarding affected employees, and all employees have elected 
severance or bumping. The SGEU and SLGA worked together 
to communicate this information and assisted these employees 
through the process. 
 
The Chair: — Oh, I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. It’s my pleasure to 
enter in and ask a few questions to the minister. I’m going to 
move back to a line of questioning that my colleague was 
asking earlier with respect to the sale of the assets. And when 

I’m talking about the assets, I’m talking about the physical 
structures . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, the buildings. 
What’s the projected timeline for the sale of those assets? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Each store 
will be a little bit different. Once the proponents have decided 
and are finalizing the transition, the stores will be put into the 
process. However if a proponent is interested in purchasing that 
building, we’ll be acting on that, obviously at that time, as soon 
as a proponent indicates that they are interested in that building, 
that we’ll be looking at. Otherwise all of them will be varied. 
There’s no one specific date for that. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you. Have any proponents expressed 
interest in purchasing the buildings? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — All of the proponents are still actually 
being advised so there’s . . . A number of them have no idea yet 
if they’ve actually won the RFP. So once they’re all advised . . . 
We’re in the process of advising those that won and those that 
lost. So we don’t know yet if . . . until they’re decided, then 
they can ask about the assets. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you. So just to clarify your answer, 
there was no proponent that had built into their RFP the offer to 
purchase the building? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yes, the 
location was part of the RFP process as to where they wanted it. 
Some did identify that they would like to be in the existing 
SLGA facilities. However, that was . . . All those people are 
still being notified, and it would probably not be advisable to 
say who they were and when they were because not all the 
people have been notified. And it might lead to a little 
complications and quite frankly, it would be a breach of 
confidentiality, my personal belief is anyway. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — I thank you for the answer. So you’ve 
indicated in your answer that there were some individuals 
who’ve expressed interest in purchasing the assets. Can you 
provide a number? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As I 
mentioned, there were a number in the RFP process. That 
number should remain confidential until after these people have 
been announced. I mean, in theory it could be all of them, and 
so . . . Or it could be none of them. So we strongly feel that 
that’s information that should not be made public at this time. 



1446 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2016 

The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you for the answer. You’ve indicated 
that there were approximately 295 individuals, 274 who have 
entered into the RFP process or who have made a bid. I’m 
wondering what the difference is between providing me that 
number and providing me the number of how many of those 
274 indicated that they were willing to purchase the assets. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. At this 
time we don’t feel . . . or we cannot get into the details of the 
proposals. That wouldn’t be fair with the announcements to be 
made. And the announcements are imminent so we don’t feel 
it’s the right thing to do at this time 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, and thank you for the answer. I’m 
happy to hear that the announcement will be imminent. We’ve 
moved from soon to very soon to imminent, so that’s very 
exciting to me. We are getting closer and closer in time I guess, 
as the clock ticks. So I do have one question. Was preference 
given to individuals who bid, who entered the RFP process, 
who expressed interest in purchasing the assets? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Whether or not they had the building 
as part of their RFP proposal did not give them any additional 
advantage in the RFP proposals. The main advantage was if 
they were employees. That gave them a distinct advantage. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you. And I understand that the sale of 
these assets will be dependent on when these RFPs are 
completed, essentially, and the new buildings, or the new 
operations I guess is the best way to describe them, begin 
operating. So that sort of will affect when these assets will be 
sold. 
 
I’m just curious to know if there is any work being done in 
terms of the projection of these sales. You’re going to have to 
work that into your budgeting for the future. So what work is 
being done in those terms? Is there any ballpark estimate for 
when you expect to realize some of the gains from selling these 
assets? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Mr. Chairman, all these markets vary 
on their current market conditions. And so we’re not sure if 
they will sell this month, next month, the month after, six 
months from now. That depends, just like selling your house. 
So when the sale takes place, that’s when the numbers will be 
booked by the SLGA, be it this year or be it next year. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — I’m curious to know how many SLGA 

properties are currently vacant. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — The only vacant SLGA property at the 
current time is the old warehouse. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you. Can the minister update members 
on what is currently the status of the old SLGA store that was in 
Ituna? 
 
[16:15] 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — The specific store in Ituna, we have no 
idea what the current use of it is. We don’t own that store 
anymore. That store is not part of the SLGA assets. It’s been 
sold. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you. Who was that property sold to, 
that asset sold to? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I’ll have my official check. I think I 
know who it is only because my wife is from Ituna, and so I 
travel to Ituna regularly. So I have a little inside information. 
However we’ll check just to make sure we know who the first 
owner was after us. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you. I would also like to know the 
dollar amount of that sale and exactly when it was sold. So 
that’s my question to the minister. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I’ll undertake to find that out at the 
same time. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you. What about the SLGA asset that 
was in Kerrobert? Can the minister advise of the status of that? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — The Kerrobert buildings have been 
sold as well. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you. I was hoping the minister would 
anticipate my next question: can you please advise how much 
the sale was and when it was sold? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 



November 22, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1447 

Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — We’ll undertake to provide that, and 
I’ll get you on the next one. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you. What about the property in 
Langenburg? Has that also been sold? And if it has, can the 
minister please provide the amount of sale and the date of sale 
and to who it was sold? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — We’ll undertake to provide all the 
answers to the three questions, yes. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you. A similar line of questioning 
about the property that was in Ponteix, if the minister can 
advise if that property has been sold and, if it is, to whom, 
when, and how much? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I’m advised by my official that of the 
four stores we’ve just been chatting about, three were owned 
and one was leased. He’s just checking to get that information, 
if it was Ponteix that was leased or which one it was. But I will 
undertake to get that back to you as soon as I can. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you. Before I started my line of 
questioning about those stores, the minister had advised that the 
warehouse is currently vacant. Can you please elaborate on 
that? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Officials advised me that we’ve just 
recently finished, completed the move to the new warehouse 
and they’re fixing up or preparing the other, the old warehouse 
for sale. And it should be up for commercial sale here very 
shortly — not imminently, but very shortly. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, and thank you for the answers to 
those questions. I want to move on. You had mentioned when 
you were speaking with my colleague . . . And I had the 
opportunity to speak with the former minister about this during 
estimates, but I wasn’t able to get a clear set of answers as to 
what exactly revenue neutral is going to mean with respect to 
these sales. So could the minister elaborate a little bit more on 
revenue neutral with respect to this process? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I assume that the question was not 
about the buildings. It was about the other process, and on this 
it’s a very complicated, obviously it’s a very complicated 
matter. And a number of factors go into the calculations on 

whether or not that it will be neutral. SLGA officials are very, 
very confident that the entire process will be revenue neutral, 
and that’ll show up in the regular financial reports that are 
provided. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you for the answer. I’m curious to 
know what factors will go into the calculation to show that it is 
revenue neutral. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Okay. I’m not sure if the minister heard my 
last question, so I’ll repeat it. I was curious to know what 
factors go into the calculation to show that it is revenue neutral. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — As I mentioned, it’s a complicated 
process. And just like the question asked by the member from 
Regina Lakeview . . . So what I’ll undertake to provide you is a 
list of the factors that go into determining the revenue 
neutrality. But needless to say, there’s a number of them. And 
we’ll undertake to provide that to you. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, and thank you for that 
undertaking. I’m curious to know if you can tell us at this time 
— I understand that you can’t tell us all of the factors right now 
but you will be telling us in the future — whether or not a 
projected increase in liquor sales is going into that, is one of the 
factors. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — We projected neutrality based on no 
increase in volume. No increase. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, and I thank you for the answer. I 
want to go back to a description you gave to my friend about 
the RFP process. I think we also talked about it, about what 
factors went into deciding on who would be successful in the 
RFP process. You had mentioned that of course, as had been 
mentioned in the past, that former SLGA employers would be 
given a preferential . . . or some weight would be given to RFPs 
that came from former employees. I understand that, and I’m 
looking at . . . I’m just curious to know if financial capacity or 
the ability to raise a large amount of money, large amounts of 
money, was also included in your weighting of who would be 
successful in the RFP process. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. As you 
may know, I ran many businesses successful, and some just 
marginally successful. However, financial capacity is always a 
factor and it has to be a factor when considering. Nobody wants 
any business to fail so it has to be a factor, and it was a factor. 



1448 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2016 

The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you. What was the actual percentage 
weight given to that factor? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — The RFP process was completely 
independent by SLGA officials and by KPMG. However, that 
would be part of the confidential information that can’t be 
released, would be how much weight was given to financial 
capacity and how much was not. And you know, I’m sure that 
when the winning proponents are announced that you’ll see that 
it was fair. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you. I’m wondering if at the time you 
will announce the successful bidder, will you also be providing 
us with exact details on the RFP process, including what factors 
were being weighted and to what percentage? 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — The weightings were in the RFP 
proposals and . . . Were in the RFP process, not proposals — 
were in the RFP process. None of the weightings are made 
public in any of the RFP issued by, not only these but any RFP 
issued by SLGA. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you. I’m curious to know why the 
details of the RFP proposals . . . or why the details of the RFP 
process can’t be made public. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Well the answer to that would be 
commercial confidentiality. We don’t disclose the weightings 
because it affects the confidentiality of the whole RFP process. 
The process was done thoroughly and without any . . . by 
KPMG and by our SLGA officials, and it was entirely . . . And 
no political involvement. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I’ve got a 
couple of statements I want to make as it relates to this 
particular bill. And first of all, I want to welcome the minister. 
He’s fairly new to the Assembly and certainly to cabinet, and 
it’s obviously a time for learning to see what’s going on and 
what nefarious activity occurred prior to you becoming the 
minister responsible for SLGA or for CIC. 
 
But one of the points I want to make on this whole process, it’s 
never too late to admit that a mistake is being made. From my 
perspective, I think this is a dry run on the Sask Party’s plan to 
privatize a heck of a lot more than a few liquor stores, Mr. 
Chair. And I say that because this is obviously something that 
we’ve been watching very careful, and it’s something that we 

should be concerned about. And the people of Saskatchewan 
are certainly being made aware of what the plan is overall. 
 
We know that there are plans being drawn up for SaskTel and 
SaskPower and SLGA and, I think as well, the land titles branch 
were probably dry runs initiated by the former member or the 
former deputy premier on how the Sask Party can privatize 
everything that’s not nailed down to the floor. 
 
That being said, Mr. Speaker, since the minister’s a new guy 
that obviously has a business background, a very impressive 
business background, you have to really assess this from the 
business perspective, from the people of Saskatchewan’s 
perspective because this is an asset we own. The liquor stores 
are assets we own. They generate revenues. They create jobs. 
They stimulate the economy in many rural parts of 
Saskatchewan, something that the Sask Party hasn’t been able 
to do in a number of years. And they also don’t go into debt. 
 
What they do is they generate revenues and they make money 
for the people of Saskatchewan. And when you make money for 
the people of Saskatchewan, guess what that means for all of us 
as taxpayers? Less taxation. It’s very, very simple, Mr. Chair. 
Less taxation. 
 
So on that point, when we look at some of the people that have 
waded into the debate . . . And we’re not talking about a 
far-left-wing NDP think tank, Mr. Speaker; we have gotten 
advice from a lot of organizations on what this means for 
Saskatchewan finances. And the Canadian Centre for Policy 
Alternatives, CCPA, Saskatchewan branch, this is what they 
have said about this particular bill. And I’m going to quote, I’m 
going to quote, Mr. Chair: 
 

The Saskatchewan Office [of the CCPA] has been 
particularly active on the issue of liquor privatization in the 
province, releasing four major studies in the past four 
years, including . . . commentary and opinion pieces. 

 
And their advice on Bill No. 1, The Crown Corporations Public 
Ownership Amendment Act, the bill we’re talking about today, 
right now: 
 

. . . should not go forward. This submission will focus on 
two inter-related issues — specifically the ability of the 
government to remain revenue-neutral under the current 
privatization proposal and the challenges a privatized 
liquor retailing environment will pose for the maintenance 
of government revenues in the future. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is all about revenue generation. And 
this ministry and this government pretends that the sale of 40 
profit-making stores is going to be revenue neutral for them. 
Why? Because we don’t have to operate buildings anymore.  
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, being that the minister is a businessman, 
still a very current, successful businessman, he would know 
what generates revenues and what doesn’t. And he would also 
know in his business practice that you’ve got to be very careful 
making some of the decisions because some of the costs of 
maintaining a business — and SLGA is one of them — is there 
are revenues generated. And that if you’re going to sell an asset, 
you better make sure you have those revenues maintained in the 



November 22, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1449 

future, forever. And even the word “revenue neutral,” Mr. 
Chair, doesn’t apply here because they’re going to end up 
having the people of Saskatchewan pay more and more taxes. 
That is the bottom line. The customers of his business, if you 
will, will end up paying more prices for the products that he is 
trying to sell. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is what’s really important, I think 
overall, is we within our own perspective look at how the sale 
of 40 stores really affects the ability for SLGA to give us some 
of the money we need to operate health care and education and 
so on and so forth. So when we sit here and look: the costs 
coming in, the revenues coming in, how are they going to 
replace it? So when they say, revenue neutral, it concerns me 
because before this we had profits from SLGA. We had profits 
that really lessened the stress on the taxpayers to come up with 
more taxation. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I can’t figure out, I can’t figure out how the 
Saskatchewan Party doesn’t get it. I would encourage the 
minister to really put on his business hat and look through this 
deal very carefully. And I think he will quickly assume that this 
is nothing but a chance for the Sask Party to privatize much 
more than our liquor stores in the province of Saskatchewan, 
SaskPower, SaskTel included. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is the argument that they make on this 
bill, which is really not worth the argument that they’re putting 
forward because we all know on this end they simply want to 
sell off these stores and have a wall-to-wall sale on all our 
Crowns, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they want to do. So no 
matter how much spin they put through this process, it’s going 
to cost the taxpayers money. Why? Because we’re losing 
revenue from the operation of these Crowns, owned for and by 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And the liquor stores that we’re talking about today do generate 
revenues. And I would submit to the minister — he probably 
doesn’t have them in his file because he’s new — but I want to 
forward to the minister a copy of the revenues that these various 
stores make. They do generate profits, sir. They generate a lot 
of profit for the people of Saskatchewan. They create jobs, Mr. 
Deputy Chair. They stimulate the economies in rural 
Saskatchewan. And they all do this, Mr. Speaker, under the 
whole pretence of — guess what? — creating profits for the 
Crowns and therefore creating profits for the people of 
Saskatchewan. It is that simple and straightforward. 
 
So what’s the other argument that the CCPA also argue, is the 
whole notion around the higher wholesale cost as a result of 
privatization. And these are guys that are thinkers, not driven by 
their political ideology, but by thinkers. And this is what they 
are saying, and I quote from page 5 of their report: 
 

Adding private retailers and removing public stores will 
create a more fragmented, complex, and in all likelihood 
costly distribution system. For instance, the SLGA will no 
longer be the sole agent responsible for deciding how most 
of the liquor shelves in the province should be stocked and 
then purchasing that liquor wholesale. Instead, the private 
retailers, such as major grocery chains, will have control 
over what does and does not get stocked on their shelves. 
Therefore, liquor producers and their agents will have to 

market their product to several different customers, rather 
than simply the SLGA. Moreover, the SLGA may find its 
purchasing power and ability to negotiate wholesale prices 
with the major liquor producers significantly limited as its 
economy of scale is diminished since it would be operating 
less than half of the full-line retail stores in the province. 

 
So it’s very simple. They’re explaining to you guys exactly 
what the end result would be, Mr. Speaker. So on this side of 
the House, you’re not going to fool anyone. We know that you 
have plans to do a lot more selling of every Crown corporation 
that you could sell. You started off with the Information 
Services Corp. You started off now with the liquor stores. 
What’s next is SaskTel, and maybe SaskPower, because you 
can’t manage your way out of a wet paper bag. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I say again that this exercise is a waste of time 
when you look at the committee process in terms of their 
answers. We have a minister that should know how business 
works. Do a good business analysis of what you’re trying to do 
here. Do not let the philosophy of your colleagues dictate 
whether this is a good investment for the people of 
Saskatchewan or not. 
 
Now one question I have for the minister, Mr. Speaker, is when 
people came forward, when people came forward and they had 
an opportunity under the RFP process, and they already selected 
who they wanted to — that’s my belief — they already selected 
who they wanted to have these profitable stores. That’s my 
belief, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what they’d done was they put a whole bunch of obstacles 
and different organizations, including the employees . . . They 
put a whole bunch of obstacles in front of them so they will 
never, or could never compete with those that they’ve already 
lined up to own these stores, Mr. Speaker. And one of the things 
they put in place is . . . Why would they expect auditor fees of 
$35,000 on any proposal for any store to be paid upfront or to 
be shown to be available upfront before they entertained offers 
from different groups and organizations that were looking to 
participate in these purchases? 
 
Plus, Mr. Chair, it’s also surprising that any other store that any 
particular group was looking, they had to find an additional 
$20,000. Which entity out there could afford to pay $35,000 for 
a project that they had no guarantees, and being fairly 
considered for that purchase of that asset, plus an additional 
20,000 if they had other assets in mind? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s one example of how they have 
manipulated the system to do what they’ve always wanted to 
do, is do a dry run on the Crowns so they can do the bigger 
Crowns later on, which include SaskPower, SaskTel. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s the one question I have for the minister. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I did recognize a few things in that 
preamble. One was I am new to the whole political process. I 
am, I have to admit that. I was only elected April 4th. But I’m 
not new to business and I actually am very good at business. 
And that’s probably why I’m in the position that I’m at right 
now. 



1450 Saskatchewan Hansard November 22, 2016 

You know, KPMG and SLGA officials acted properly. They did 
the proper step. I can be done with the question . . . [inaudible] 
. . . Oh no, I can answer, try to answer whatever question there 
was. There was maybe 30 or 40 in there. But it seems to me that 
converting of the franchises, converting of the liquor franchises 
is not new. The NDP did it. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Chair: — Order. The minister has the floor. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — So converting of franchises of the 
liquor stores is not new. I mean, other members on the other 
side know that for a fact. I mean that was what they did when 
they were in power. They converted a number of stores. So this 
is not something that is new to them. 
 
And I assure the member from Athabasca, when I last looked, 
the sky was not falling in, that he should maybe wait until they 
are announced before he’s decided who has gotten all these 
franchises. So he does seem to know that . . . I don’t know how 
he would know because I don’t know who’s got them all. But 
maybe he does know and that he has . . . That the sky is not 
falling, and that if he was to wait and see who’s got these, I’m 
sure that he’ll find that even he will admit that the process must 
have been fair and equal to all those that applied. So I’m not 
sure if that answers his question, but whatever, that’s my reply. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member from Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. When we initiated this 
process today, we had asked for one to two hours to ask 
questions of SLGA officials and the minister. 
 
[16:45] 
 
And I do want to express sincere appreciation for Mr. Lacey 
making time available today to come and answer questions. 
There were questions of course that I had last evening in 
committee that pertained . . . While this bill is specifically a 
CIC bill, of course it has very serious implications for SLGA in 
particular, by proposing to remove it completely from the 
Crown protection Act. So it does seem reasonable to have 
someone here from SLGA to answer those questions. And 
again, I just want to express my gratitude and my appreciation 
to Mr. Lacey and to all of those present who made it possible 
for us to ask these questions. 
 
I think that they are important questions, Mr. Chair. We 
certainly have concern for the 116 employees who have lost 
employment, 116 FTEs. We continue to have some concerns 
about the claims of revenue neutrality and how the 32 or 
approximately . . . I guess we’ll get the answers later, $32 
million in net revenue of these stores will be recouped and have 
fulfilled the claim of revenue neutrality. 
 
As well just to reiterate some of the concerns that were 
expressed in committee and were brought again today: the 
impacts on local businesses; some of the concerns that the 
MADD [Mothers Against Drunk Driving] chapter brought 
forward with regard to increasing access to alcohol; and what 
some of those social impacts, or impacts on drinking and 
driving rates, what that might be, Mr. Chair. And we will 

continue to be watching and expressing those concerns. 
 
We have particular interest, as has been noted, in the 
transparency and fairness of the RFP process, what the net 
result will be of the sale of assets and the net impact on SLGA. 
Of course the dividends that SLGA returns to government helps 
to pay for things that we all care about in this province — 
education, health care — and anything that would negatively 
impact that, particularly at a time of difficult financial time, we 
have great concerns about. 
 
And the impact of, of course, removing SLGA entirely from the 
protection of this Act, we have concerns what the future might 
hold with regard to future privatization of SLGA stores and 
what the impact would be on the people of this province, on 
those factors that I just mentioned here. I noted that the former 
minister, when introducing this in second reading, had noted 
that removing SLGA from the Act would expedite privatization, 
and so we certainly do have concerns there as well. But with 
that I will conclude my remarks. Thank you. 
 
The Chair: — I don’t see any other members wishing to enter 
the debate, so at this time I would invite the minister to make a 
few short closing remarks if he so wishes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to 
thank the members of the committee, and I’d like to thank my 
official, Barry, for his attendance here today — it’s on very 
short notice — and his assistance that he provided to me. And 
I’d like to thank you, Mr. Chair, and your associates for going 
through this process with us. Thank you very much. 
 
The Chair: — Seeing no other members, we will proceed to 
vote the bill. Clause 1, short title, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — On division. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. Carried on division, clause 1. 
 
[Clause 1 agreed to on division.] 
 
[Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to on division.] 
 
The Chair: — Her Majesty, by and with the advice and consent 
of the Legislative Assembly, enacts as follows: Bill No. 1, The 
Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
I recognize the Minister of Crown Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Mr. Chairman, I move that the bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. No, wrong 
one. 
 
The Chair: — I’d invite the minister to move that the 
committee reports the bill without amendment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I move that the committee report the 
bill without amendment. 
 
The Chair: — It has been moved by the minister that the 
committee report Bill No. 1, The Crown Corporations Public 



November 22, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1451 

Ownership Amendment Act, 2016 without amendment. Is that 
agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
move that the committee be now adjourned and report . . . or 
sorry, the committee rise and report, rise and report progress. 
How’s that, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
The Chair: — I heard the Government House Leader move 
that the committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit 
again. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Committee of 
the Whole on Bills, Bill No. . . . I’ll try this again, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s been a bit of a busy afternoon. Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed 
by the Committee of the Whole on Bills to report Bill No. 1, 
The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 
2016 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read the third time? I 
recognize the Minister of Crown Investments. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 1 — The Crown Corporations Public Ownership 
Amendment Act, 2016 

 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
the bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 1, The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment 
Act, 2016 be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — On division. 
 
The Speaker: — On division. Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 

recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. I recognize the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In order to 
facilitate the work of committees tonight, I move that this 
House be now adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly stands adjourned 
until 1:30 tomorrow. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 16:54.] 
 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1425 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1425 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1425 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1425 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1426 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1426 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1426 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1426 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1427 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1427 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1427 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1427 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1428 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1428 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1428 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1428 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1428 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1429 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1429 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 New Canadian Blood Services Office in Saskatoon 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1429 
 Revera and Reel Youth Film Project 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1429 
 Melfort Citizen Celebrates 109th Birthday 
  Phillips ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1430 
 Remembering Sheila Martin Roberts 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1430 
 Local Farm Families Featured in Advertising Campaign 
  Doke ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1430 
 Pioneering Artisan Cheese Producer in Moose Jaw 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1431 
 Saskatoon Sports Hall of Fame Inductees 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1431 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 State of the Provincial Economy and Details of Land Transactions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1431 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1431 
 State of the Provincial Economy 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1432 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1432 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1433 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1434 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1435 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1435 
 Funding for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1435 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1436 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Young ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1436, 1439 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1437 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 2 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Crown Corporations’ Fiscal Year End Standardization) Amendment Act, 2016 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1436 
 Bill No. 37 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2016 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1436 
 Bill No. 32 — The Automobile Accident Insurance (Benefits) Amendment Act, 2016 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1437 



 

 Bill No. 12 — The Public Health (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2016 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1437 
 Bill No. 26 — The Patient Choice Medical Imaging Act 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1438 
 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 1438 
 Bill No. 13 — The Cancer Agency Amendment Act, 2016 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1439 
 Bill No. 1 — The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 2016 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1451 
TABLING OF SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1439 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1439 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1439 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ON BILLS 
 Bill No. 1 — The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 2016 
  The Chair................................................................................................................................................................................. 1440 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1440 
  Beck ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1440, 1450 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1445 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1448 
FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF AMENDMENTS 
 Bill No. 32 — The Automobile Accident Insurance (Benefits) Amendment Act, 2016 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1437 
 Bill No. 13 — The Cancer Agency Amendment Act, 2016 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1439 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


