






















































Hansard: October 25, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 30B  TUESDAY, OCTOBER 25, 2016, 19:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (Ind.) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10; Independent (Ind.) — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 883 
 October 25, 2016 
 
[The Assembly resumed at 19:00.] 
 

EVENING SITTING 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 7 p.m., I call this House to order. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 13 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 13 — The Cancer 
Agency Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it is 
indeed my privilege to be able to rise in the House this evening 
and to start things off with continuing debate on Bill No. 13, 
The Cancer Agency Amendment Act. 
 
There’s some minor changes in this Act I think that are not 
hugely concerning in any way, but I think they are interesting 
and I do want to just point out a little bit about the changes that 
are being proposed. 
 
First of all, as the minister pointed out in his second reading 
speech back in May, he indicated that cancer care has expanded 
in the 85-year mandate of the Cancer Agency, and in fact the 
services provided by the Cancer Agency has gone quite a bit 
wider than it originally started out as. So one of the things that 
they’re wanting to do is to talk more about not just caring for 
people with cancer but also controlling cancer. 
 
He pointed out some alarming statistics. For example, new 
cancer cases in Saskatchewan are projected to increase 54 per 
cent by 2036. So that’s a pretty hefty increase, Mr. Speaker, and 
we all know the costs associated with diagnosis, with treatment, 
with care, and with palliative care as well that goes along with 
that. 
 
So one of the proposals that this bill deals with is changing the 
phrase “cancer care” to that of “cancer control.” And that comes 
in quite a few times in the bill itself. 
 
The other piece I guess that is also added is some of the 
reporting requirements when ministries of Health become aware 
of a reportable cancer through, for example, a billing from an 
out-of-province treatment. This information isn’t currently 
available to the Cancer Society, so they’re going to want to be able 
to get that information out to the Cancer Society. 
 
So there’s an amendment in section . . . I have to look at it here. 
Section 16 as amended. Section 9 of the Act goes on to give some 
provisions for how the minister or the ministry will now provide 
this information to the Cancer Agency, of course taking great care 
to ensure that people’s privacy is protected. So this wouldn’t be 

disclosable by the ministry, for example, if they came upon that 
information through conversation with an individual that was 
speaking to the ministry. This is only where the ministry itself is 
providing some funding or comes into that information in a certain 
prescribed way. 
 
So in terms of the definitions themselves, one of the things I found 
interesting as I went through this is that I believe there’s an error 
in section 5(3) because it says in there that you’re going to amend 
subsection 9(3) by striking out “care” (a) wherever it appears in 
clause (a). 
 
So if you look at section 9(3)(a), there is a reference to cancer care 
but there’s also a reference to health care. So the word “care” 
shows up twice in that clause and I believe, and I have brought 
it to the Minister of Health’s attention that there is an error in 
this particular clause and that they didn’t mean to turn health 
care into health control because that simply wouldn’t make any 
sense. 
 
So I think that’s something that needs to be fixed. I’m not sure 
the best way, and it certainly would be up to the minister in 
terms of how he wanted to fix that. But health control doesn’t 
make any sense at all in the context of that clause, and so I have 
brought that to the minister’s attention. 
 
Another interesting change is in section 9(2)(a)(ii), and in this 
case the services that the agency is responsible for is being 
extended to include palliation services. And we know that that’s 
an area that requires a considerable amount of attention in this 
province. Palliative care is probably in crisis as much as it ever 
has been. And the services required, I think my friend from 
Saskatoon Riversdale has been very eloquent on this topic and 
the fact that palliative care is in need of much attention. So 
perhaps adding this part of the responsibility for cancer 
palliation to the agency itself may indeed deal with some of the 
needs that we’re seeing in palliative care. 
 
Some other minor changes: in section 13 of the Act, and this is 
one that’s of interest to me, 13(1)(c) currently reads, 
“information respecting individuals who receive treatment by 
the agency.” This is in relation to the collection of information. 
They’re changing that to read, “information respecting 
individuals who receive services from the agency.” So why 
“treatment by” is being changed to “services from” is a bit of an 
interesting proposal. And in terms of the explanatory notes for 
that particular clause — let me find it — the idea is that 
treatment is not broad enough. So “services from,” they’re 
intending to expand that meaning from just treatment to 
including all services provided by the agency. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, other than the particular error that seems to be 
made to clause 9(3)(a), I think this is fairly non-substantive 
changes, ones that reflect the true nature of the Cancer Agency 
and I’m sure others of my colleagues would be interested to 
step into the debate on this topic as well. 
 
At this point, I will adjourn debate on Bill No. 13, An Act to 
amend the Cancer Agency Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 13, The Cancer Agency 



884 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2016 

Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 14 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 14 — The Horned 
Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — Recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the opportunity to 
speak on Bill No. 14, The Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 
2016 and I thank the Minister of Agriculture for his briefing 
notes on this bill. 
 
I did some reading prior to getting up tonight speaking on this 
bill and learned a little bit about the Act. In 1939, came into 
force. I understand that the intent of this Act initially was to 
discourage the sale of horned cattle from coming to market. 
Initially the price per head was pegged at $1 per head of cattle 
heading to market, which was upped for the last time in 1949 — 
which was certainly some years ago, Mr. Speaker, before my 
time — to $2. 
 
I understand that the reason for enacting this legislation back in 
1939 was to discourage horned cattle from coming to market. 
Of course, methods of transport for cattle at that point were 
much different than they are today. At that point, many cattle 
were taken by rail and certainly we have other methods of 
transport at this time. 
 
Of course, as is reasonable, there are concerns when handling 
horned cattle for risk, certainly to those handling the cattle but 
also to other animals and sometimes to the animal itself, were 
they to get their horns caught in chutes or prevent them from 
feeding and things like that. So certainly those were some of the 
things that were on the minds of those who initially put this 
legislation forward back in the last century, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Of course, some things have changed since then. We have 
genetic improvements with the cattle and fewer . . . I understand 
at one point it was up to about 19 per cent of cattle that were 
brought to market were horned. It’s considerably less at this 
point, Mr. Speaker, and I think anyone who’s been around the 
barns at Agribition can tell you that while there are still some 
cattle there with horns, it’s more of a rare sight than it once was. 
 
I guess this . . . getting up tonight to speak on this legislation 
has provided an opportunity to do a little bit of a trip down 
memory lane, back out to the farm and thinking of some of the 
methods that we used to use to deal with horns, first in the 
young, in the calves, when you remember a caustic paste that 
we were warned not to touch because it does work, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I also remember a long, almost like a piece of floss, although 
metal, that was used to saw off horns, which I don’t remember 

as being particularly fun for either the cow or for the person 
trying to saw off that horn. And I don’t remember using that a 
whole lot. 
 
Other methods that were used in the past, Mr. Speaker, as we’re 
strolling down the lane, I believe there were some big 
shear-type devices that were used to get those horns off and I 
think later development was an electric device to cauterize, Mr. 
Speaker. So certainly, you know, those are some of the methods 
that have been employed. And I can’t attest to being up-to-date 
on the methods that are being used today but I do understand, 
Mr. Speaker, from the minister’s remarks, that there is some 
ask, some willingness, and some desire on the part of cattle 
producers in the province to repeal this Act as being in part 
outdated, that the penalty doesn’t cover the administration costs 
of enforcing that $2 per head penalty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when reading the minister’s comments though, I 
did notice that the Cattlemen’s Association were in agreement 
with the repeal of this bill, but there were some concerns noted 
with that . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Docherty): — Why is the member 
on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, with leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Docherty): — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Docherty): — Carried. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
thank you to my colleagues for providing leave to introduce 
guests. Mr. Speaker, in the west gallery we have a number of 
guests that are with us who were part of the reception for MLAs 
[Member of the Legislative Assembly] this evening. These are 
members of the Saskatchewan Land Surveyors Association. Mr. 
Speaker, this is an organization that has been in operation in our 
province since 1910, although certainly the history of surveyors 
goes back even further to that, to predate the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Land Surveyors Association is the organization that has 
been entrusted with the stewardship and standards of the legal 
survey profession, Mr. Speaker. They really are foundational to 
everything that happens in our province, every land tenureship,  
really almost every single development in the province, a land 
surveyor is a part of that. So they really are foundational to 
everything that makes up what is Saskatchewan today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are a fairly small group in terms of the 
numbers in the province. But I can say you can ask any one of 
them about the history. They certainly are proud of the history 
that the land surveyors have played in this province. 
 
Joining us this evening are a number of guests. I’ll ask them to 
maybe just wave when I introduce them. And I apologize for 
any mispronunciations of names: Carlo Monette, Darren 



October 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 885 

Patkau, Calvin Bourassa, Travis Wolfe, Jamie Lehmkuhl, 
Ernest Muller. And, Mr. Speaker, two guests that I’ve known 
for some time, commission number 243, Pat Maloney, and 
commission 295, Ryan Maloney. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to not only welcome these 
guests to their Legislative Assembly, but please join with me in 
thanking the Saskatchewan Land Surveyors Association for 
everything that they do, each and every day in our province. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Docherty): — Why is the member 
on her feet? 
 
Ms. Sproule: — I, too, would like to ask permission to do an 
introduction, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Docherty): — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Docherty): — I recognize the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you, and I would like to join with the minister opposite to 
welcome these gentlemen to the Assembly tonight. 
Unfortunately, we weren’t invited to the reception; otherwise 
we would’ve tried to get there, so very much appreciate you 
coming here tonight and sharing in some partakings here in the 
Assembly. 
 
I have to say that in a former career I did a lot of work with 
Saskatchewan Land Surveyors and Canada Lands Surveyors. 
And one of the things that I had to do was go back to the 
original township surveys and examine the notes for the 
surveyors. And these guys actually were the most meticulous, 
organized, and hard-working gentlemen that I think the history 
of our province has experienced. 
 
And in fact, I understand they saved the RCMP [Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police] or the redcoats on a few occasions 
when they were coming across Western Canada and they ran 
out of supplies. But the land surveyors always had the supplies 
ready, so they saved the redcoats’ bacon a few times. But I 
highly regard the work of these individuals, and whenever I was 
examining land survey plans or township plans in the course of 
my work, I always knew that I could count on the work that was 
done by Saskatchewan Land Surveyors. 
 
So I really appreciate the work that you do. Continue the good 
work, and welcome you all to your Legislative Assembly. 
Thank you. 
 
[19:15] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Docherty): — I recognize the 
member from Regina Lakeview. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
 

Bill No. 14 — The Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 2016 
(continued) 

 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And with that, 
we’ll resume my comments on Bill No. 14, The Horned Cattle 
Purchases Repeal Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was nearly wrapping up my comments on this 
legislation, but I was drawing attention to one of the comments 
made by the minister that there was some concerns with this 
repeal, but that most agreed that the existing legislation is 
outdated and that a new approach should be considered. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would welcome more information on those 
concerns and also some of the marketplace solutions, 
producer-led solutions, that have been discussed as the minister 
noted. 
 
I would also make note that Saskatchewan is not alone in this 
discussion and that there has been a move to repeal horned 
cattle legislation in Alberta and Manitoba. And I understand 
from the minister’s comments that British Columbia is the only 
other province at this time with similar legislation. 
 
So, as I noted, I’m sure that my colleagues will have more 
comments and perhaps more questions as we move along here, 
but with that I would move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 14, 
The Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 2016. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Docherty): — Thank you. The 
member from Regina Lakeview has moved to adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 14, The Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 2016. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Docherty): — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 15 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 15 — The 
Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Docherty): — I recognize the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to rise to enter the debate on this bill to amend The 
Provincial Court Act. A little bit of a mixed bag of changes that 
are being proposed in this particular bill, none of them of which 
are particularly controversial, as far as I can tell. 
 
The first change is to take out the requirement for Lieutenant 
Governor in Council or the cabinet to have a list of people 
eligible as temporary judges. And what is happening is that is 
being moved into the purview of the minister. So that’s under 
section 18, and it’s just a matter of changing it from Lieutenant 
Governor in Council to minister and also allowing the minister 
to publish that list in the Gazette rather than doing an order in 
council. 
 



886 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2016 

And if I understand correctly, Mr. Speaker, the orders in council 
are a fair bit of work that have to go through a number of levels, 
but this is devolving the responsibility for that to the Minister of 
Justice who will be then responsible for maintaining the list of 
temporary judges. So that was what the minister indicated in his 
comments. It’s just going to give more flexibility for the 
minister. 
 
The other thing it will do is give the judicial council greater 
flexibility in the conduct of their reviews. So the judicial 
council is responsible for conduct reviews and investigations 
into allegations against a member of the bench. What these 
additional clauses do, under changes to section 55, will allow 
the council itself to ask the chairperson to conduct the review, 
or allow the chairperson to find someone else to conduct the 
review, and then that’s deemed to be the finding of the council. 
So again I think it’s just devolving some of the responsibility, in 
this case, from the council as a whole to their chairperson or 
one of their, someone designated by the chairpersons. 
 
The other thing that that bill is doing is changing the notice 
requirements for the appointment of court-appointed legal 
counsel. And I think this is consistent with changes that are 
already being proposed to The Queen’s Bench Act and The 
Constitutional Questions Act. And I think I spoke to that bill the 
other day. 
 
I’m afraid I’ve bored our gallery guests, Mr. Speaker, and 
they’re hightailing it out of here now. So The Queen’s Bench 
Act changes or The Provincial Court Act changes are probably 
not of a huge entertainment value, that’s for sure. 
 
There’s another clause. The final change in this bill is to set out 
to establish fees through the regulations in order to allow for the 
introduction of further cost recovery. And I believe that is in 
clause 65 which is being amended. It’s clause 6 of this bill, but 
amending clause 65, allowing — and that is the usual catch-all 
regulatory clause that you find at the end of most Acts — and 
this is actually repealing 65(i). 
 
Now 65(i) reads currently, the amount of fees for documents 
and copies, and this is broadening out. This used to be just 
relating to copies and photocopying and such for the members 
of the public. This is actually extending to any fees and charges 
with any action required to be taken pursuant to the Act. So it’s 
broadening out that authority for the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council to make regulations in relation to that. So I think that’s 
pretty much the grab bag for this bill. 
 
Yes, and I didn’t speak too much about the notice of 
requirements that are being changed for appointing an 
individual. I will share with you what the minister is saying 
there, is that these “. . . are being proposed to improve 
consistency in the application of rules for the appointment of 
court-appointed lawyers.” I know when I was speaking to the 
changes to The Queen’s Bench Act there are some concerns 
about the way this list of court-appointed lawyers is going to be 
used and some concern about the independence about that. 
 
And so I think my comments from that particular bill will stand 
on this bill as well, The Provincial Court Act amendments, and 
that we have to be very vigilant in terms of how court-appointed 
counsels are being used and we can never, ever inhibit the 

independence of the judiciary. And my colleague from Regina 
Douglas Park has indicated that there are considerable concerns 
about the way these provisions are being changed and that it 
may in fact inhibit the independence of the judiciary. So I 
would say those concerns exist here as well, and certainly my 
colleagues in committee are going to ask some hard questions 
about that itself. 
 
So at this point that’s the extent of my comments on this bill, 
and I would move that we adjourn debate on An Act to amend 
The Provincial Court Act, 1998. That’s Bill No. 15. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Docherty): — The member from 
Saskatoon Nutana has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 15, 
The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Docherty): — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 16 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 16 — The 
Adoption Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Docherty): — I recognize the 
member from Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise today to 
speak on Bill No. 16, The Adoption Amendment Act, 2016. Mr. 
Speaker, this bill of course is of great importance to those who 
are involved with adoptions in Saskatchewan, of course those 
who as children find themselves involved in an adoption, and of 
course both the birth parents and those adopting children in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I understand the first part of this bill contemplates some 
definition changes, Mr. Speaker. The removal of the term 
“simple adoption” is contemplated in this bill, Mr. Speaker, and 
it’s my understanding that the reason for that removal has to do 
with the Hague Convention and Canada being signatory to that 
convention. This is the reason for that update. Of course those 
who know that the Hague Convention is an international 
convention that aims to safeguard the rights of children and 
birth parents and is intended to reduce incidents of child 
trafficking or unlawful financial gain, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is very important legislation of course. When we live in a 
world that is, you know, is global and we do see international 
adoptions, Mr. Speaker, it is very important that we ensure that 
the rights of the child, the rights of the birth parents, and the 
rights of the adoptive parents are all taken strongly into 
consideration within those international adoptions. So I 
understand that the term “simple adoption” simply does not 
adequately contemplate the stipulations in the Hague 
Convention and that is the reason for that update. 
 
I will note there is a change to the determination of the child’s 
best interests, and one of the changes that wasn’t noted in the 
minister’s comments was the removal where “. . . pursuant to 
this Act, a person or the court is required to determine the best 



October 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 887 

interests of the child . . .” Sometimes when contemplating an 
adoption, there is a report prepared that does contemplate that 
child’s best interest and sometimes the children themselves are 
called as witnesses to that. The determination looks at the 
child’s physical, cultural, mental, emotional, and spiritual 
needs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The updated legislation, I understand, removes the term 
“psychological” interests. And I’m just curious and perhaps my 
colleagues will have time to ask more questions about why that 
term was removed from those interests. I think that’s very 
important. 
 
Another major change that’s contemplated with this bill is 
increasing the number of days post adoption that a parent, the 
birth parent, can revoke their consent, moving from 14 days 
now, as anticipated with this bill, up to 21 days. I understand 
that that is in line with majority of other jurisdictions, although 
there is a fairly significant amount of variance across the 
country on that. 
 
That’s, you know, that’s an important time of course for both 
birth parents and for prospective adoptive parents, and I think 
it’s really important to pay a lot attention to that and be sure that 
we get that right. As you can imagine, the decision to give up a 
child for adoption is a very significant decision that has 
implications for many people and also a time that, a period 
where that adoption can be revoked is wrought with a lot of 
anxiety for adoptive parents as well. So I think it’s really 
important that we pay some attention to that. And I understand 
that there was some consultation to arrive at that number of 21 
days, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another note in this proposed legislation is allowing the 
minister to enter into payment agreements directly with youth 
between the ages of 18 to 21 if the youth is engaged in 
educational or vocational plan, Mr. Speaker. This agreement 
also recognizes the youth’s independence from the family unit 
and allows the minister to continue with a support plan if the 
adoptive parents pass away after the youth turns 18. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that many in this province 
understand that that period of transition for youth is very 
important and isn’t something that we have always gotten right. 
So it’s really important to ensure that those supports are in place 
for those children and young adults to ensure a smooth 
transition and a transition that allows them to go on to be 
productive and engaged and supported young adults. 
 
I understand that previously when we were talking about 
hearings into the best interests of the child that there were no 
defined parameters for age when calling children as witnesses. 
This bill proposes that the age of seven, seven and up, be 
implemented as the age at which children would be called. I 
would be interested to hear more about how the age of seven 
was arrived at. I think that that is important. I do, again, 
understand that there was some consultation, but it’s important 
that we know the reasons for that age seven, which I suppose 
. . . You know, there’s a lot of variability in seven-year-olds. So 
I would be interested in looking at those reasons, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[19:30] 
 

This bill also proposes a new section allowing for a court order 
against people who are not complying with provisions of the 
Act and regulations. I guess some enforcement, Mr. Speaker. 
And it also contemplates removing family services boards. I 
understand that The Child and Family Services Act had 
anticipated those boards, but they were never established in the 
adoption process, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Again I am sure that my colleagues will have more questions 
and more observations, more consultation with those who are 
most impacted by these proposed changes, and perhaps more to 
ask in committee. But I think I will conclude my remarks there, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and with that I will move to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 16, The Adoption Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Docherty): — The member from 
Regina Lakeview has moved adjourn debate on Bill No. 16, The 
Adoption Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Docherty): — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 17 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Boyd that Bill No. 17 — The Power 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Docherty): — I recognize the 
Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Just barely. No, thanks very much there, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I’m really warming to the job you’re doing 
there. I don’t want to, you know, engage in debate from the 
Chair or anything, but you know, all just higher and higher. 
 
Anyway, Bill No. 17 is one of those bills where it’s sort of like 
a bit of a treasure hunt, Mr. Speaker, in terms of, you know, you 
go through it and it’s clause after clause of amendments that 
say, you know, by adding “or her” after “his” or “his” after “or 
her,” you know, reflecting the housekeeping nature. Most of the 
amendments contained herein, which are about moving to 
gender-neutral language, which is, you know, fine and good. 
You know, it’s the 21st century and welcome to it. There are a 
number of changes that have to do with, you know, moving to 
singular language from plural language, you know. Also you 
know, fine enough. That kind of precision certainly would have 
gone over well in my grade 10 English class with Mrs. Hynd, 
and I’m sure she’d appreciate the effort. 
 
But you know, you get further down the path. And you know, 
it’s a three-page bill, Mr. Speaker. First page, a lot of 
housekeeping; the second page, still more housekeeping. It’s 
the third page where you to get to section 43, which is amended 
by striking out $8 billion and replacing it with $10 billion. 
 
And you know, it’s kind of a discovery, Mr. Speaker. You get 
through the bill and you’re like, well I’ll be darned; they’re 
going to increase the borrowing limit of SaskPower by $2 
billion to $10 billion. And you know, you know, it’s interesting. 



888 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2016 

You listen to the minister’s second reading speech and the 
different reasons that he gave out for why that needed to be so, 
raising the borrowing limit from $8 billion at SaskPower to $10 
billion. And the minister had some fine things to say about how 
this is moving around within the acceptable, you know, 
debt-to-equity ratio and how, you know, the infrastructure 
needs have never been greater. 
 
And I guess what went unmentioned, Mr. Speaker, is the fact 
that this is a corporation. You know, you wonder how is it that 
you can spend 1.5, $1.6 billion for about 100 megawatts of 
power on a 4500-megawatt grid. And well here’s how, Mr. 
Speaker. You raise the borrowing limit from $8 billion for 
SaskPower to $10 billion. You underwrite that kind of 
behaviour by just racking up the credit card. 
 
How do you afford smart meters, Mr. Speaker? How do you 
afford the whole debacle that was entailed in that exercise? 
Well you jack up the borrowing limit for SaskPower. And then 
you also look over at the overall debt load of the province of 
Saskatchewan and the fact that we’ve got consolidated books 
now and the fact that, you know, what happens on the Crown 
side is very much incorporated in what’s the overall debt load 
of the province. 
 
You know, despite the mighty efforts of the Premier to 
convince folks otherwise, it is debt that winds up being carried 
by the people of Saskatchewan one way or the other. 
 
And what we see here in Bill No. 17 is an effort to increase the 
capacity of that government to borrow another $2 billion on the 
credit card of SaskPower. You look at, you know, how is it that 
you can afford the kind of piggy bank treatment that SaskPower 
came in for in the Global Transportation Hub land square 
dance? You know, how was that underwritten, the I believe $25 
million that suddenly popped up for the minister to purchase 
some land that sits fallow? And you know, the plans are 
uncertain. 
 
Well here’s how, Mr. Speaker. In Bill No. 17 they’re raising the 
debt limit from $8 billion to $10 billion. So it’s a heck of a, 
heck of an operation, Mr. Speaker, where you know, you 
wonder how they’re able to underwrite all these different 
activities. Well here’s how: they’re racking up the credit card, 
and when they hit the debt limit they bring forward Bill No. 17 
to increase the debt limit yet again. 
 
The problem is, it’s not just SaskPower that’s on the hook. It’s 
not just that cabinet that’s on the hook, Mr. Speaker. It’s the 
people of Saskatchewan that will pay and pay and pay for the 
way that this government has underwritten incompetence and 
questionable behaviour time and time again. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got a lot of questions about Bill No. 17. 
We’ve got a lot of questions about the impact on the Crown 
sector, on the province’s fiscal situation. And we’ve got a lot of 
questions about how it is that, you know, this government hits 
the debt wall and they just move it further back. And that’s the 
solution. 
 
And we’ve heard a lot from the . . . I think of the smart meter 
fiasco. What happened there is that this was going to be 
somehow absorbed by the corporation. Well it wasn’t absorbed 

by the corporation, Mr. Speaker. It was underwritten by two 
rate increases in the last year alone. And when that’s not 
enough, here we go with the debt limit being increased. 
 
So this, Mr. Speaker, is the kind of thing that shows up in a first 
quarter report that this government didn’t have the guts to table, 
despite, you know, other jurisdictions managing to figure that 
out. But you know, this is a telltale sign of what’s only worse to 
come in terms of what the finances of the province are going to 
be going through, and the way that the people of Saskatchewan 
are going to be on the hook for this government’s incompetence 
and dubious choices. 
 
So Bill No. 17, An Act to amend The Power Corporation Act, 
really packs a wallop, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And with that I’d 
move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 17. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Docherty):  The member from 
Regina Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 17, The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Docherty):  Carried. 
 

Bill No. 19 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 19 — The Film 
and Video Classification Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Docherty):  I recognize the 
member from Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise today to 
speak on Bill No. 19, The Film and Video Classification Act. I 
have to admit when I saw the title of this proposed bill I was a 
little bit excited that maybe we were going to address the 
decimation of the film industry in this province, but alas, I 
didn’t find that in the proposed legislation. 
 
I bring that up, Mr. Speaker, just . . . It’s something that I heard 
a lot on the doorstep, was the impacts of the decision to cut the 
film tax credit in this province and the impacts of families in 
my community. And I think it would be remiss if I didn’t take 
the opportunity to note that that has had very real and — 
although we don’t hear perhaps as much of about it these days 
— lasting impacts on the community. 
 
But as I noted, Mr. Speaker, this legislation repeals The Film 
and Video Classification Act and proposes this new legislation. 
Mr. Speaker, in his notes the minister stated that the intent of 
this legislation is to allow the administration of the industry to 
be performed by an official, one person, and rather than as is 
currently done by the board of classification, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I understand that there must be some reason behind that. I know 
that the minister spoke in his comments that currently much of 
the classification work is done in British Columbia, and Film 
Classification Office classifies many of the films that are shown 
in our province and has that as by way of reason for making the 
move from the current board to a director. 



October 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 889 

Of course, Mr. Speaker, the classification of films and videos 
for anyone who works with children or has children is 
important. I know that my kids learned very, very early which 
films they could and couldn’t see, sometimes catching it when I 
didn’t. 
 
So you know, certainly having those classifications are 
important. It provides some guidelines for, you know, be it 
showing materials in schools, when purchasing video games for 
example, or going out to the movie. I recently had the 
opportunity to take my kids to a movie that was shot in the 
Cathedral area of Regina, in my constituency, and unfortunately 
that’s all too rare of an occurrence these days, Mr. Speaker, but 
we certainly did look at the classification on that movie before 
we headed out. 
 
I think that there are . . . My colleague, when she was speaking 
previously to this bill, the member for Riversdale noted that she 
had some questions about exactly who was consulted and the 
content of the feedback that was provided by those who were 
consulted around this legislation. So I’m certain that the critic 
will have some more questions and perhaps my other colleagues 
will have some questions or comments that they want to make 
around this bill. But for now I think that I will wrap up my 
comments, and with that I move to adjourn Bill No. 19, The 
Film and Video Classification Act. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 19, The Film and Video 
Classification Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 26 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 26 — The Patient 
Choice Medical Imaging Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you. Thank you. Thank you very much, 
Mr. Speaker. This is an interesting bill, and it’s hard to really 
know where to begin and where to end with this bill. It’s 
obviously part of a long story that has been taking place in 
health care here in Saskatchewan particularly and across 
Canada for many, many decades now. But it’s about 
universality, Mr. Speaker, and how people access health care 
services, diagnostic services in particular, in our province and 
of course how that impacts across Canada. 
 
Now you’ll recall, Mr. Speaker, that back . . . I believe this was 
assented to a year ago in November. There was a bill on the 
floor called The MRI Facilities Licensing Act and that was one 
that got through before the election. And what this did is it took 
this out of The Health Facilities Licensing Act. What they did is 
they took out MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] services out 
of The Health Facilities Licensing Act, and they created a new 
Act for that and it’s simply called The MRI Facilities Licensing 

Act. This is a bill now referred to as An Act respecting the 
Licensing and Operation of certain Facilities providing 
Magnetic Resonance Imaging Services and making 
consequential amendments to other Acts. 
 
[19:45] 
 
So that was, I forget the number of that bill, but it was assented 
to, became law very quickly in November of last year. Now 
we’re back again at it and the government is proposing an 
entirely new bill. They’re repealing that bill that was passed 
only a year ago, and they’ve decided to add a whole lot more to 
the bill. And in particular, and it’s very clear one of things 
they’re doing is they’re removing what they call computerized 
axial tomography services, which commonly are referred to as 
CT [computerized tomography] scans. So these computerized 
axial tomography or CAT [computerized axial tomography] 
scans, I guess, CAT scans, these are now being removed from 
the ordinary delivery of health care through the universal 
system into a user-pay model in a new bill. 
 
And I think the thing that I find most, I have the most difficulty 
with at this point, Mr. Speaker, is the name of this new bill 
because it’s not called the MRI CAT scan bill; it’s called The 
Patient Choice Medical Imaging Act. And as far as I can tell, 
there’s as little involved of choice in this particular Act as it is 
about people who can afford to pay as opposed to those who 
can’t afford to pay. And that really isn’t anything to do with 
choice, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it suggests to me that the government is actually trying to be 
fairly political with this name. And it’s almost too cute, Mr. 
Speaker, to suggest that patients have the choice, in terms of 
whether or not they can afford to pay for medical imaging, 
thereby jumping to the front of the queue which puts them in a 
better situation with respect to all the medical treatments and 
services that they are entitled to following that queue jump. 
 
And it really is about, I think it should be called the lack of 
patient choice medical imaging Act. That might be more 
appropriate and indeed more accurate, because I really take 
offence to the way this bill is titled. And I think much should be 
said and much ado should be made about that because it’s 
misleading, and I think it’s insulting to the people of 
Saskatchewan who, for whatever reason, can’t afford $900 for 
an MRI or a CAT scan. 
 
And I know my colleague spoke quite eloquently to this issue 
last fall when we were talking about this in the context of, when 
we were talking in the context of MRIs alone. But to add to this, 
we are now talking about CT scans. 
 
And another thing that I think is very concerning in this bill, 
and this is all simply hidden in the . . . or not hidden, in plain 
sight in section 2 of the bill, which is always the definitions 
section. So we see there’s a new definition here defining 
medical imaging services, and this is where the rub is. First of 
all, we’re including magnetic resonance imaging services, 
which was taken out of the health facilities licensing bill last 
year. We’re also now taking out computerized tomography 
services. The word “axial” is missing so I’m assuming that 
CAT scans and CT scans are one and the same diagnostic. And 
here’s the catch — they’re also adding any other prescribed 



890 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2016 

medical imaging services. So now we’re giving the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council the ability to add anything they want to the 
definition of medical imaging services. 
 
So this goes much broader than what was promised in the 
platform for the Sask Party in the election this spring which 
talked about CT scans, but it did not talk about broadening this 
out and opening it, blowing it wide open to add pretty much any 
other kind of imaging services that may come along or that may 
exist already. And you can imagine, Mr. Speaker, of the number 
of diagnostic services that are currently available through the 
universal health care system for all kinds of imaging services. 
 
And one wonders why they’re going so far beyond at least what 
they promised. Now this is, I hate to say it, but this is one thing 
they did promise in the election that it seems that they’re intent 
on proceeding with. But why blow it out even wider to include 
other prescribed medical imaging services? 
 
You try and find out what’s going on in the explanatory notes 
but a little problem there, Mr. Speaker: there are no explanatory 
notes for this bill. And one of the reasons that’s given is in fact 
it’s treated as if it is a brand new bill, as if it’s brand new and it 
isn’t simply amendments to The MRI Facilities Licensing Act. 
But if you go through it, Mr. Speaker, you can see. Even if you 
look at the table of contents for the new bill, the brand new bill 
as opposed to The MRI Facilities Licensing Act, it’s the exact 
same table of contents with a few minor changes. 
 
Obviously the definition of MRI is gone and we now have this 
expanded, blown-up definition of medical imaging facilities and 
services. The Cancer Agency is now being brought into this bill 
as well. It wasn’t in the MRI bill and I assume that’s because of 
changes being made to The Cancer Agency Act as well, that I 
just spoke to, but also that some of these diagnostic services 
that are currently managed by the Cancer Agency will now also 
fall under this jump-the-queue bill. So that’s a big change. 
 
Throughout though, I mean other than the addition of the 
Cancer Agency and the change to what a medical imaging 
facility is, it’s almost identically the same bill so . . . oh and of 
course the name of it, which is I think an insult to most people 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
There is a few other changes. For example in the former section 
7 of the bill, there was a . . . It’s the decision to issue or refuse 
licence. There’s a new clause in there where . . . And I think we 
need to take a really close look at that. It’s the new bill, section 
7(2)(d). And I just want to make sure I have a reference to the 
old one just to make sure. Originally this is when the minister 
can decide to issue a licence for the services: if it’s an efficient 
and effective use of public resources. In this case, they’ve added 
there’s also a need for the medical imaging facility and the 
medical imaging services are to be provided at the medical 
imaging facility. 
 
So there’s a whole new question here that’s being introduced, 
and that is of need. Well I think what you have to look at in 
terms of our universal health care system is that needs are to be 
provided by the universal health care system. This isn’t 
something that we want to slip in to this private diagnostic 
fee-for-service type of health services. And I think we need to 
take a very close look that. It’s still early days in this, in the life 

of this bill, and I know other people are going to want to have a 
look at it. But this is something that for me is a huge red flag, is 
whether or not there’s a need for this medical imaging facility. 
 
That’s how they can get a licence over and above whether it’s 
an effective and efficient use of public resources, and I know 
there’s all sorts of debate even on that clause itself, Mr. 
Speaker, in terms of whether this is in fact an effective and 
efficient use of public resources. And I’m afraid that’s been 
turned into political debate rather than an empirical debate. And 
indeed our critic for Health, the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale, challenged the minister in the last go-round on this 
bill to prove, provide the empirical evidence that shows that in 
fact this is an efficient use of resources of public dollars. And 
now we have to add to that and ask whether there’s empirical 
evidence that we should be providing these facilities licences to 
meet a need in our public health care system. It seems to me if 
we have needs in our public health care system, that’s 
something our public health care system should be allowed to 
provide. So that’s concerning as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I go through the rest of the Act though, it’s almost word for 
word for word for word exactly the same as the previous bill. 
So I really question the intent of the minister, in this sense, to 
introduce a brand new bill with a name that really doesn’t speak 
at all to the content of the bill. If you read this title, The Patient 
Choice Medical Imaging Act, you’re thinking, well what does 
this mean? Does it mean the patient gets to just decide which 
image it wants or what sort of diagnostics? And I mean, that’s 
clearly not the intent of this bill. And as I said earlier, there are 
thousands and thousands of people in Saskatchewan, including 
those folks that can’t even get into the doors of the Lighthouse, 
that don’t have any choice in the kind of imaging that they’re 
going to be able to access. The patients that are able to choose 
are the patients that have money, and that is a direct and I think 
flagrant contravention, if maybe that’s something the courts 
have to decide, but it definitely is a thumbing your nose at the 
universality clauses in the Canada Health Act. 
 
So I think these decisions and these types of services are going 
to be definitely challenged in the courts to see whether or not 
they actually do, in fact, meet the provisions of the Canada 
Health Act. And there’s a lot of consequences that will come 
down upon the Government of Saskatchewan and other 
provinces who choose to contravene The Public Health Act and 
those consequences are going to have direct impacts on patients 
and people living in the province. Because one of the things the 
Canada Health Act does, or is proposed to do, is to reduce the 
amount of money that we get. And what the government alleges 
they’re saving, that will be directly taken off of what we get 
under the Canada Health Act for Canada transfers or health 
transfers. 
 
So I’m not sure if there’s any gain even in the long run on this 
type of bill, despite the short-term gains that the government is 
claiming, without, of course, as I suggested earlier, any sort of 
empirical evidence or studies that suggest this isn’t the case. 
And in fact my colleague from Riversdale referred to, in her 
comments last year, where there’s actually . . . where there are 
situations like this. For example in Alberta the waiting list for 
MRIs is actually longer instead of shorter. So I don’t know 
where the empirical evidence is, what it is that’s driving this 
government to take this kind of change, but I would wonder 



October 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 891 

with the naming of the bill as a patient choice bill, I would think 
there are some politics at play here, Mr. Speaker, and ones that 
are going to have pretty concerning consequences for the people 
of our province. 
 
Not too long ago, we had done an information access request 
for any of the reports and analysis that was done by this 
government in relation to this transition to user-pay CT scans or 
MRIs in Saskatchewan. So we did this just recently, and what 
we got back from the government was rather interesting. I 
wouldn’t say it’s informative, Mr. Speaker, because most of the 
relevant and substantive portions of the request were redacted. 
 
But here’s something we were interested in looking at, and this 
is right from page 6 of the government report that we did get. 
And here’s the introduction. It says: 
 

Ministry officials contacted their counterparts in British 
Columbia, Alberta, and Ontario to gather information 
regarding the different frameworks and outcomes of 
private payment for diagnostic imaging services, example 
MRIs and CT scans in each province. 

 
And we go in there and there’s a whole bunch of questions, and 
guess what? They are almost entirely redacted, pages upon 
pages of redactions. 
 
Questions like, “Have you experienced movement of 
radiologists out of the public system to these clinics? If so, to 
what extent? What about technologists?” Redacted. “In your 
experience, did patients who were able to pay privately for MRI 
and CT have a shorter care pathway?” Guess what, Mr. 
Speaker. Redacted, entirely. Next question: “Is your jurisdiction 
already or is it considering disallowing user-pay services? If so, 
what precipitated the decision?” Once again redacted, except 
for Ontario where we do have a note that was allowed to be 
provided, and it says Sask follow-up research found in Ontario 
it was allowed in 2002 to 2007 and disallowed in 2007. So we 
don’t know why Ontario disallowed user-pay services, but we 
do know it was disallowed in 2007. And there’s question after 
question after question regarding practices in Alberta, British 
Columbia, and Ontario that we are not able to access the 
information to. 
 
So once again they’re using, we call it the FOIP [The Freedom 
of Information and Protection of Privacy Act], freedom of 
information protection Act, barriers to obtaining information 
that I think the public should probably have access to, but for 
some reason it’s a cabinet confidence. I’m not sure what it is 
that allows them to make the claim, but that is what’s being 
claimed by the government. 
 
All kinds of things that they were asking, impact on the public 
system, that’s all redacted. “Has your jurisdiction experienced 
any legal actions from beneficiaries seeking cost coverage?” 
Again that’s redacted, and so on and so forth. 
 
And then we get to a very interesting page and it’s quite 
colourful actually, Mr. Speaker, but we asked for a policy 
analysis. And there was an extensive policy analysis that was 
done on things like legislation, legal actions, appropriateness, 
financial implications, human resources, all these really 
important things that inform policy decisions that would lead 

into this kind of quite radical change from the current public 
health care system. And we see that this is again entirely 
redacted, so we’re not able to look at any of that information. 
 
There was also some legal analysis that was done, and relevant 
legislation. They even redacted some commentary on the 
relevant legislation. So I’m a curious person and I would love to 
know what’s being held back, but unfortunately because of 
barriers in the access to information laws, we’re not able to see 
that. 
 
[20:00] 
 
We were allowed to see some information about the Canada 
Health Act. And there’s some comments about third party 
delivery of insured health services, which is permitted as long 
as the services are publicly funded and administered. So I don’t 
know how that relates to where patients can pay outside of the 
public funding of it. 
 
There’s also The Medical Care Insurance Beneficiary and 
Administration Regulations which state that, they talk in there 
about diagnostic X-ray procedures and whether or not that’s an 
insured service. So I guess the question this leads to is, are we 
also going to be talking about X-rays next? Is that the next step 
in terms of the privatization and user-pay service for diagnostic 
imaging? So I think X-rays could very well be next up on the 
line for people to be able to user pay; those who have money, 
pay. And again the lack of patient choice, instead of patient 
choice, which is the unfortunate name of this current bill. 
 
So diagnostic X-ray procedures, they go in and say, well what 
are they? Where are they insured services? Well it’s outside a 
hospital where it is provided by: 
 

a specialist in radiology 
 
a physician who is serving as a locum tenens for a 
specialist in radiology . . . 
 
a person employed by a specialist in radiology . . . 

 
So there’s very careful attention being paid to X-ray services 
here, so I’m just flagging that. I know that we don’t have a lot 
of the analysis and implications because again, Mr. Speaker, the 
entire analysis of the relevant legislation is completely redacted. 
So although the government is saying they’ve done their 
homework, we don’t know exactly what that is. 
 
Under appendix A, legislative framework, you would think 
where we’re talking in an appendix that there wouldn’t be any 
redactions. But there are actually are redactions under the 
Canada Health Act. So there’s a few clauses, and I referred to 
them earlier, when they were mentioned about third party 
delivery of insured health services. 
 
And then again this whole business about uninsured services or 
exceptions under The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance 
Act. And they’re saying there’s some services for diagnosis and 
treatment of cancer. Some services are, I believe this says, 
uninsured. And this is really the first time I’ve had a chance to 
look at that. So I’m just sharing it with the Assembly without 
really being certain as to the intent. 



892 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2016 

Laboratory services provided by under the supervision of 
specialists in pathology other than services that are prescribed 
in the regulations for the purpose of this clause. And I know 
pathology shows up in a couple of other spots. So, Mr. Speaker, 
then again, what about diagnostic imaging services that are 
provided by pathologists? What about X-ray services? Are 
these next? And I think this incremental change in the bill that’s 
being facilitated by just adding that one clause, kind of 
whatever shows up in the regulations is going to be considered 
medical diagnostic imaging. We are going to see some radical 
changes in the way our imaging services are not only provided 
but how they’re paid for. And again, I think the idea that 
patients have choice is extending this almost to — what’s the 
word? — it’s surreal. It’s almost surreal to suggest that this is 
actually giving patients choice. 
 
I do have a number of comments regarding queue jumping that 
have been actually studied by other organizations. And there’s a 
number of concerns raised by CUPE [Canadian Union of Public 
Employees] with Bill No. 179, which was last year’s version of 
this bill. And their analysis, they came to the conclusion that the 
bill would, and that applies to this bill: 
 

Permit queue-jumping, increase existing inequities in the 
current system, poach workers from the public sector, 
[increase public] wait times, and increase public health 
costs. 

 
And I think this is based on a study of what’s happening in 
other jurisdictions when this happens. 
 
The other problem, of course, is the Canada Health Act. And 
that was passed into law in 1984, and we know it is the 
foundation of our Canada health system. It came through the 
whole medicare process. As we know, it all started here in 
Saskatchewan under the wise eye of Tommy Douglas and his 
people that he put together. Despite, I think, considerable 
resistance at the time, it’s now regarded as the jewel of our 
entire health care and also of Canadian health care. As you 
know, Mr. Speaker, it was extended to Canada a few years later. 
 
Anyways the Canada Health Act says that there’s five key 
principles that provinces must meet in order to receive their full 
share of the federal funds through the Canada Health Transfer. 
Health care services must be comprehensive, universally 
available, portable, accessible, and publicly administered. And I 
think it’s the universally available concern that we are raising 
now and have considerable concerns about because if you are 
allowed to jump the queue in order to get your MRI, then you 
are able to access other services much more quickly.  
 
And I think that’s the biggest concern in terms of people’s 
viability and people’s medical conditions is, you know, whether 
or not I can afford to get in that queue. I don’t know if I can, 
and I know I certainly have a good salary and a good income. 
And I just know many, many, many more people won’t ever be 
able to do that. So this may have to play out in the courts 
ultimately, Mr. Speaker, but I think it’s raising a lot of very 
concerning questions in relation to what is universality and 
whether or not this is a violation of the Canada Health Act, 
 
The big concern is, if it is a violation to the Canada Health Act, 
then Saskatchewan is going to be deducted that money. So 

we’re no further ahead even if this does prove to save money, 
which most studies say it won’t. This study from CUPE says on 
page 5, and I’ll quote: 
 

Private user pay clinics will create a two-tier system 
because they allow people to get faster access to health 
service in two ways: first, they gain faster access to the test 
itself; and second, once they have a diagnosis they are able 
to get into the public queue faster for surgery or treatment. 

 
And they go on to say: 
 

Allowing queue jumping through private-pay MRIs [and 
now CT scans] violates the “accessibility” principle of the 
Act. When some residents can jump the queue by paying 
for services privately, it means that not all residents are 
receiving publicly-insured services on uniform terms and 
conditions. 

 
It goes on to say: 
 

The Romanow Commission found it problematic that 
diagnostic testing performed in a hospital is considered 
medically necessary in terms of the Canada Health Act but 
the same test in a private clinic is not. 

 
And all of these determinations, and it’s complex, Mr. Speaker, 
but all of those determinations are really critical to how we 
continue with the medicare system and whether or not we meet 
those provisions of the Canada Health Act under universality, 
and of course as just raised, under accessibility. 
 
I just do want to share a couple comments from Mr. Romanow 
on page 64 of the Commission on Future of Health Care in 
Canada from 2001. Here is what he said: 
 

If medicare is to thrive, it must adapt to the changing 
nature of health care. Diagnostic services are a case in 
point. Many, perhaps most, diagnostic tests can now be 
performed safely and efficiently outside hospitals. Blood 
tests and X-rays have been performed in this manner for 
many years. More recently, a growing number of MRIs 
and CT scanning tests have been performed in specialized, 
free-standing clinics. Diagnostic services are the essential 
“front end” of medical care that precedes critical 
interventions, including, for example, surgery and 
chemotherapy in cancer treatment. 

 
He goes on to say that if . . . This is in relation to people who 
jump the queue or buy access to MRIs. He says: 
 

But, if the test results reveal a serious condition requiring 
immediate treatment, the patient who has privately 
purchased an MRI can queue-jump ahead of others waiting 
for diagnosis and potential treatment. This raises a 
problem. Access to cancer treatment, for example, is on the 
basis of urgency of need. But this cannot be determined 
without proper diagnosis through one or more tests. If 
these could be purchased privately, that initial access is 
being determined by ability to pay rather than need. 

 
It is true that all medically necessary diagnostic services 
are within the principles and conditions of the Canada 



October 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 893 

Health Act in two ways. First, if they are provided within a 
hospital, they are automatically considered to be “insured 
health services.” Second, if they are provided or ordered 
by a physician as a “medically required service,” then they 
are also insured under the Act. But the difficulty lies with 
the phrase “medically necessary.” 

 
So I’m not going to go into it in more detail than that, Mr. 
Speaker, but I think Mr. Romanow’s comments from 2001 have 
as much relevance today as they did then. 
 
There’s a whole host of other issues that he identified that I 
won’t talk about today, but I know my colleague did raise a lot 
of these when she spoke to the previous bill on October 21st of 
2015. So if people who are reading this in the future want to 
have access to her comments, it’s on basically page 2421 of the 
Hansard in Saskatchewan on October 21st, 2015. And she had 
a lot of good quotes about, again about empirical evidence, 
about poaching of staff, and this is a very serious concern that 
has been highlighted by other provinces as well. And so that 
was the comments made by her. 
 
And again I brought a page with the five main principles in the 
Canada Health Act — universality being one and accessibility 
being another. Of course portability, comprehensiveness, and 
public administration on a non-profit basis. 
 
So it’s clear to me that this type of bill is putting us in jeopardy 
on those two principles in particular, universality and 
accessibility. It’s not a good thing for the government to put us 
in this position. And as I say, whether or not this will withstand 
a challenge in the courts remains to be seen. Obviously 
someone who cannot pay for medical imaging is unlikely to be 
able to pay for a court case to the Supreme Court of Canada to 
challenge this bill. So I’m not sure where someone will be able 
to do that kind of challenge. 
 
But as I said earlier, this bill is almost identical to the one that 
was passed last year, so it’s a real curiosity to me why they 
chose to redact or rescind that bill that we just passed and pass 
another bill that’s very similar. 
 
I take particular issue with the title of this bill, The Patient 
Choice Medical Imaging Act, when clearly so many people in 
our province do not have a choice. So I think that’s really a slap 
in the face to some people who won’t be able to purchase these 
medical images and will be in fear for their life in terms of their 
medical condition. So it’s just, it’s causing a lot of pain and 
distress I think for a lot of people in our province, rather than 
treating everybody fairly, universally, and ensuring that 
everyone has the accessibility as they want. 
 
Again I’m concerned about clause 7(2)(d)(i), which is a new 
addition to the previous bill, talking about need for these 
medical imaging facilities. If this government sees a need for 
medical imaging facility, it should be provided. That’s the 
whole basis for our health care system, and why the 
Saskatchewan Cancer Agency is being brought in, although I 
know that they provide a lot . . . Their clients in particular need 
a lot of this diagnostic imaging. And we all know, that the first 
thing your doctor is going to do when there is a suspicion of a 
lump or something concerning in terms of your general 
well-being and it doesn’t really seem to be anything apparent, 

you’re going to want that diagnostic image and those tests be 
made available. That’s modern medical science. And to throw it 
away like this for people who can’t afford to pay is something I 
think that we’re going to pay for in the long run, and it’s very 
concerning. 
 
So I know other colleagues . . . I’m one of the first to be able to 
have comment on this new version of the medical or the MRI 
Act but again, once again, I just am really concerned about the 
title of this bill. I think it’s insulting and demeaning, and I 
would urge the government to change the name at least. But I 
would also urge them to really reconsider what’s happening 
here and the impacts it’s going to have on our health care 
system as we go forward. 
 
So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate 
on Bill No. 26, An Act respecting the Licensing and Operation 
of certain Facilities providing Medical Imaging Services, 
repealing a certain Act and making consequential amendments 
to certain Acts. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 26, The Patient Choice 
Medical Imaging Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 28 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 28 — The 
Extension of Compassionate Care Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
[20:15] 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to 
join debate tonight on Bill No. 28, The Extension of 
Compassionate Care Act, 2016. And of course this is an 
amendment to The Saskatchewan Employment Act. And you 
know, it’s . . . Why they didn’t call it an Act to amend The 
Saskatchewan Employment Act, I can only guess has to do with 
not wanting to freak people out because generally when this 
government approaches labour legislation, all sorts of exciting 
things happen. You know, we get a Saskatchewan trip to the 
Supreme Court. You know, there’s all sorts of exciting 
outcomes when this government gets into the labour legislation 
move. 
 
But this particular piece of legislation is . . . The main sort of 
event in this legislation is something that is very much a good 
thing, Mr. Speaker, and that is of course the extension of the 
compassionate care provision. This is following changes that 
were made at the start of 2016 by, of all people, Mr. Speaker, 
the Justin Trudeau federal Liberal government, and making sure 
that the compassionate care provisions in Saskatchewan keep 
up with the changes that the feds had made under the 
Employment Insurance Act. So changing to provide for up to 28 



894 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2016 

weeks of leave, 26 weeks of benefits after observing a 
two-week cooling-off period. And again, Mr. Speaker, this is a 
good thing. And certainly for those that have had to rely upon 
these kind of benefits, it’s not something that’s entered into 
lightly. And certainly this can make all the difference for 
families in some very tough times, so we’re glad to see this 
particular measure being brought forward. 
 
There are other components in the bill, however, beyond the 
extension of compassionate care benefits, and those are 
technical amendments giving a number of powers to the 
registrar of the Labour Relations Board, such as the ability to 
select the adjudicator for wage assessment, the responsibility to 
set a date and time of hearings before the Labour Relations 
Board, and to serve papers upon the interested parties. Mr. 
Speaker, we presume that these are about expediting process 
and speeding up matters. Again we’ll do our own due diligence 
on that to ensure that that is in fact the impact. 
 
But also where the bill requires the adjudicator to follow the 
regulations regarding the procedures by which the hearing will 
proceed, this particular measure falls upon regulations which 
have yet to be released. So again the thrust is good, but we 
await the regulations. 
 
And then finally, the allowance of cabinet to make 
wide-reaching regulations regarding the duties of adjudicators, 
the rules for appealing decisions of the board, or any other rules 
related to hearings and appeals. Again, Mr. Speaker, that would 
speak to a certain consolidation of power within Executive 
Council, moving that from the legislation into the fiat of an 
order in council that could be passed by this cabinet. So if that 
meets the express intent of rendering the legislation more 
effective and providing better service for folks that find 
themselves before different of the boards covered by the 
employment Act, we’ll see. 
 
But again, Mr. Speaker, as is often said in this Chamber, the 
best indicator of future behaviour is past behaviour. And when 
it comes to labour legislation, we’ve seen this government go 
some pretty interesting places, labour whispering of the current 
minister notwithstanding. But with that, Mr. Speaker, I move to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 28. 
 
The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 28, The Extension of Compassionate 
Care Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 29 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 29 — The Justices 
of the Peace Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 
sur les juges de paix be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I rise this evening to speak to Bill 
No. 28 as noted, The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act. Mr. 
Speaker, in reviewing this proposed legislation, I note that 
substantively these changes, the amendments to this Act are 
aimed at specifically some of the duties that are currently 
performed in the traffic safety court of Saskatchewan, 
specifically taking the duties and powers now formerly 
accorded to the traffic justices and replacing those traffic 
justices with justices of the peace, specifically senior justices of 
the peace. And there is a proposal to add another classification, 
the assistant justices of the peace. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand that there was a request by the 
Saskatchewan Justice of the Peace Association for the ministry 
and the minister to request these amendments. As stated, the 
aim of these amendments are around improving and clarifying 
those roles. Another main part of this bill, once contemplating 
the new roles and the new position of the assistant Justice of the 
Peace, is around the regulation and having a commission to 
establish compensation for these roles, presumably I suppose 
given the new duties and the new position, and also establishing 
some parameters around discipline and measures that would 
deal with the performance and the behaviour of people in those 
positions. I note a couple of times during the minister’s 
comments that he noted that there was some agreement with the 
Justice of the Peace Association. 
 
A question that I have that isn’t referred to specifically in here 
is the opinions of certainly the traffic justices within this 
proposed legislation but also others involved in that court. 
Some of the powers, for those who don’t know, that are 
currently afforded to traffic justices include requiring 
attendance at driving improvement programs and some related 
duties around that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I note that I’m not the first of my colleagues to speak to this 
bill. There are some questions that have previously been raised 
and I think are worth raising again, specifically around the work 
of the proposed commission on compensation. Just talking 
about pay ranges, are there any parameters for that pay that 
have been contemplated? The selection of the senior Justice of 
the Peace, the new position of assistant Justice of the Peace, I 
think that’s worth looking at and how those will be appointed 
and just how they will be distributed around the province. I 
think those are valid questions for sure. 
 
I think given those, some of the other duties as noted that would 
be undertaken by the senior justices of the peace who would 
take over the duties of the traffic justices would be imposing, in 
addition to being able to order drivers to take driver training 
courses, but also be the ability to impose fines. 
 
So I think that with that I will leave some room for my 
colleagues to ask additional questions at a later time, but I will 
move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 29, The Justices of the 
Peace Amendment Act. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview has 
moved adjourn debate on Bill No. 29, The Justices of the Peace 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



October 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 895 

The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 30 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 30 — The 
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy 
Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I am 
rising to speak to Bill No. 30, An Act to amend The Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Act. Based on the 
comments from the minister when he introduced this bill back 
in June of this year, he indicated that the Information and 
Privacy Commissioner had prepared a report, and in his annual 
report issued last summer, he gave a number of amendments for 
priority consideration. 
 
The minister indicates that this bill deals with some of them. It 
certainly doesn’t deal with all of them, and he has promised 
with his comments that they are continuing to look at the other 
items which may be dealt with through policy or further 
consultation is needed for some of these other priority changes. 
 
So hopefully that will take place eventually but at this point in 
time we’re seeing things, a number of changes: duty to assist 
applicants for information, a duty to protect personal 
information, extension of LAFOIP [The Local Authority 
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act] to 
police services, creation of a new offence for snooping. And 
I’m not exactly sure how that clause is looking. I haven’t got to 
that part of the bill yet, but I think it’s really interesting to have 
a snooping clause. And I just wonder about creeping on 
Facebook, but I guess that’s public information so I don’t think 
that’s what the intention of this clause will be. And one of the 
things that I think is most interesting, and it’s one of the things 
that this government was found in violation of by the 
commissioner awhile ago, and that’s what happens when 
personal information is released by MLAs or cabinet ministers. 
 
And we know what happened when actually the Premier’s 
office itself released some personal information to the media 
when someone spoke out about the poor quality of seniors’ care 
in Saskatoon. So that is what is leading to these changes and the 
recommendations that the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The member 
opposite is talking about the budget, and I’m afraid I’m not 
making the connection, so he’ll have to explain to me 
afterwards what the reference is. But we were talking about 
release of personal information by the Premier’s office, is what 
we were talking about. So that’s something I think was quite 
egregious and certainly commented on by the Information and 
Privacy Commissioner. 
 
And I think there was an effort made to ensure that the release 
forms . . . For example, in the course of our work with clients 
and constituents and our casework, we often need to consult 
with ministers’ offices about that particular case, and we now 
have a form that’s been provided. I just found out the other day 
that some government agencies won’t accept that form and are 

insisting that we use their form, which is what I think the 
Privacy Commissioner was trying to avoid and get around. So 
there’s still obviously some work to be done in that area. 
 
But some of the recommendations we have: the new offence for 
snooping and, as I just mentioned, the rules for our MLA 
offices and cabinet ministers’ offices, and of course that would 
extend to the Premier’s office in terms of releasing personal 
information. So some of those changes are coming through in 
this bill. 
 
Some of the things that aren’t included, and I think is worth 
noting here, Mr. Speaker, is that the commissioner asked for a 
change in the maximum time for a response from 30 days to 20 
days. He sees a timely response as part of the integrity of the 
Act. Sadly I think we quite often see it go the other direction 
where requests for extensions are made and granted. And this is 
really a very slow, pedantic way to get information. 
 
I do know it is a lot of work for public servants when freedom 
of information requests come in, having been a public servant at 
the receiving end of those. So I understand how much work this 
is for public servants, and I assure them that certainly when we 
make those kinds of requests, we’re fully aware of the kind of 
extra work that they are required to do and we appreciate all 
that work. 
 
[20:30] 
 
The other thing that hasn’t been included is that the 
commissioner recommended that the Act include a requirement 
that it be updated every five years to respond to modern 
technology. That has not been included at this time. There’s no 
explanation by the minister why that is the case although he 
does promise to further look into it and make sure that . . . He 
says he’s committed to protecting personal information while 
providing access to information. 
 
So in terms of this bill, Mr. Speaker, those seem to be the main 
clauses that are being changed, and this is going to require all 
offices of the members of the Assembly or members of the 
Executive Council. Well the Executive Council was in there 
previously but this now extends to our offices as members of 
the Assembly. So this affects all of us, and I think it is a good 
move in order to protect people and make sure that their 
personal information is protected to the extent that it needs to be 
and at the same time with the balance of allowing access to 
information for the public to know what government is doing. 
 
So at that point, I think I will move to adjourn the debate on Bill 
No. 30, An Act to amend The Freedom of Information and 
Protection of Privacy Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 
moved adjourn debate on Bill No. 30, The Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 



896 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2016 

Bill No. 31 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 31 — The Local 
Authority Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy 
Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government . . . or Opposition 
House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Well someday, someday, Mr. Speaker. Would 
dare to dream, dare to dream. 
 
But again good to join debate tonight on Bill No. 31 and falling 
on the heels of my learned colleague. And I mean that sincerely, 
not in a snarky sort of lawyer-to-lawyer kind of way. But it’s 
with The Local Authority Freedom of Information and 
Protection of Privacy Amendment Act. It’s a lot like FOIP [The 
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act] in the 
changes that are proposed and have just been discussed by my 
colleague but of course for local authorities. 
 
And again in terms of following on several of the 
recommendations coming from the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner, although not entirely, Mr. Speaker, but in terms 
of the duty to assist applicants for information, the duty to 
protect personal information, the extension of the definition of 
the local authority to include police services, and the creation of 
a new offence for snooping. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, in this particular respect, the inclusion of 
the police under the legislation is a new step and one not 
without its controversy. Certainly in past, various of the police 
authorities have spoken up against that. In terms of the 
questions that that begs around how those . . . the concerns that 
have been raised will be dealt with, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When it comes to the execution of The Local Authority 
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act, that will 
make for some interesting discussion in committee, I am sure. 
But it does, you know . . . Certainly the police are no strangers 
to accountability and certainly transparency on other fronts, and 
it would make a certain amount of sense for this step to be 
taken. 
 
So it’s also referencing the minister’s second reading speech 
wherein he states that “. . . Saskatchewan will be one of the last 
provinces to take this step,” in reference to the fact that we’re 
one of the last provinces to include the police under the local 
authority freedom of information and protection of privacy 
legislation or its equivalent in other jurisdictions. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of technical matters 
that will certainly, I’m sure, make for lively discussion come 
the consideration of this bill in committee. And I’m also certain 
that other of my colleagues will have their own unique 
perspectives to bring to bear on this piece of legislation. 
 
So for the time being, Mr. Speaker, and in aid of further due 
diligence on this legislation, I’d move to adjourn consideration 
of debate or move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 31, An Act to 
amend The Local Authority Freedom of Information and 
Protection of Privacy Act. 

The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has moved 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 31, The Local Authority Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 1 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 1 — The 
Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 2016 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m really pleased to 
rise to enter the debate again on, in this case, on Bill No. 1, An 
Act to amend The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act, 
one of the first Acts of this government upon the results of the 
election back in April when we first convened in May. In fact 
this was introduced, I believe, in June. I guess second reading 
was June 14th, so it would’ve been introduced some time then 
after the budget debate. 
 
This is one that has received a lot of attention throughout the 
election period and I guess in years prior to that. And it will 
continue to receive attention, and that is the removal of the 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority from The Crown 
Corporation’s Public Ownership Act. As you know, Mr. 
Speaker, the Act was intended to, as it says, protect public 
ownership of Crown corporations, and there’s a list of 
corporations that were specifically listed here. 
 
We know that the first thing the government did early in its 
jurisdiction here was to remove and privatize Information 
Services Corporation, which was not included on this list. So 
that was easy pickings. Now they’re going after these 
corporations, one at a time, and we see the first up is the Liquor 
and Gaming Authority. 
 
So the bill itself is half a page, less than half a page. There’s 
only one clause and what that clause does is it takes, removes 
the Liquor and Gaming Authority from the list of Crown 
corporations to be found in The Crown Corporations Public 
Ownership Act. 
 
My colleague from Regina Lakeview made a number of really 
relevant comments in regarding to this in committee on June 
13th of 2016. And first of all, she identified that because the 
promise on the election campaign was only in relation to 40 
particular liquor stores through the entire removal of the SLGA 
[Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority], and the bill now 
opens the door for further privatization without consultation and 
without, as she said, the oversight and opportunity for input. So 
that’s one of the changes that this bill is doing that. It actually 
goes beyond what was one of the campaign promises. 
 
The other thing is we really need to keep an eye on is whether 
or not, as the previous minister described, this as a . . . not come 



October 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 897 

at a net loss to the General Revenue Fund. And it still escapes 
me how that can possibly happen. So as my colleague indicated, 
we need to pay special attention to the net income to the GRF 
[General Revenue Fund] as a result of the change. And that is 
something that I will be undertaking to do in my capacity as 
critic for Finance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What is happening to the existing or the remaining SLGA 
stores? There’s some concerns that they will not be treated with 
the attention and care that they need. They won’t be upgraded 
as they needed to be. And certainly the biggest loss, I think for 
many people, is the loss of good, mortgage-paying jobs, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’re proud of our Crowns. We’re prouder of the fact that 
people get those good, mortgage-paying jobs, and I don’t know 
why people take offence to that. It’s beyond me. But that is 
something that is happening right now through the closure or 
the sale of the 40 stores that have been identified to date. 
 
So there’s a number of serious concerns. One clause in one bill, 
Bill No. 1, is affecting so many people and also I think really 
putting in jeopardy our revenues, for one, but also just the 
impact this is going to have on . . . I’ve had many people come 
with theories about how this is going to change access to liquor 
and the impacts that may have on families and our abilities to 
ensure that the public is protected as well. So there’s also I 
think a lot of confusion and competition between individual 
licence holders. Who gets the licence? Who doesn’t? 
Particularly in small communities where I know this has already 
raised a lot of concerns and consternation in terms of who gets 
it and who doesn’t, what the process is. 
 
So there’s a lot of moving parts to this, Mr. Speaker, and we 
will continue to observe and pay attention to what’s being said. 
All my colleagues, I’m sure, are going to want to have 
considerable input on this as well. And of course we will have a 
lot of questions on this once it moves into committee just to get 
some of those things in place and ask some of those questions. 
 
So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I think much has been said on this 
already and much of this will continue to be reviewed. We 
know the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
has looked at this as well and provided a report. And I know my 
colleague from Lakeview was on that committee and is very 
able to also comment on the impact of this particular one little 
clause bill that, as I say, has a huge impact on many people and 
on the revenues that we rely on to provide services such as 
addictions counselling and matters like that. 
 
I have nothing further to add at this point and I move that we 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 1, An Act to amend The Crown 
Corporations Public Ownership Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 
moved adjourn debate on Bill No. 1, The Crown Corporations 
Public Ownership Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 32 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 32 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance (Benefits) Amendment Act, 
2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you very much, Mr. Speaker. Good to join debate on Bill 32, 
The Automobile Accident Insurance Act. I guess I divide my 
remarks in this regard on the bill into sort of two sections: one 
is to the actual contents of the bill itself and in another lesser 
extent to sort of the context in which we’re having this debate 
here in the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But as to the bill itself, this falls on the heels of a few different 
rounds of consultation. Certainly one of the means of 
consultation was the Traffic Safety Committee, all-party 
committee of this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, chaired by then 
member from P.A. [Prince Albert] Carlton, Darryl Hickie. I’m 
free to say that now that he’s no longer a member of this 
Assembly. And deputy chair of that was of course the member 
from Saskatoon Riversdale. And there was certainly a lot of 
participation from other members and a lot of good 
recommendations put forward that informed a lot of the work 
that you see realized in this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And certainly the work to increase the amount of weekly 
benefits for employed injured persons equivalent to 40 hours at 
minimum wage for a fully disabled people and 20 hours a week 
at minimum wage for partially disabled persons or those 
confined to a hospital bed or wheelchair; the prohibition of SGI 
[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] from paying benefits to 
a person who is in prison; the prohibition of SGI from paying 
benefits to a driver who is more than 50 per cent responsible for 
the collision, convicted of or charged with causing death or 
bodily harm via street racing, being negligent, or fleeing a peace 
officer; or has been found guilty in the last five years of causing 
death or bodily harm by street racing, being negligent, or 
fleeing a peace officer — those are the guts of the legislation, 
Mr. Speaker. And certainly there are related elements to be 
considered coming shortly in the consideration of The Traffic 
Safety Act. 
 
[20:45] 
 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, you wonder if these items of 
legislation, both Bill 32 and Bill No. 37, The Traffic Safety 
Amendment Act, whether or not there will be more legislation 
coming very shortly, Mr. Speaker. Because the 
recommendations of that Traffic Safety Committee that I’d 
referenced were not taken up in full, and we’ve seen in some 
very high-profile ways the way that dangerous driving — and, 
you know, in this particular case, drunk driving, Mr. Speaker — 
poses a danger to public safety, and that this is not a response, 
it’s not something that exists outside of this place but it’s 
something that has an impact right here in this Chamber. 
 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, for the items in the legislation, for 
what’s contained in Bill 32, you know, the adequacy of the 
measures contained therein, we’ll be interested to see how that 



898 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2016 

stands up in committee where greater questioning and more 
complex discussion is possible with officials. 
 
But like I say, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be looking to see what further 
legislation is coming in the days and weeks remaining to us in 
this fall session because, like I say, the work of the Traffic 
Safety Committee was not taken up in full by this government, 
and there’s a hope that some sad events of the not-too-distant 
past, Mr. Speaker, can be learned from and that hopefully some 
good, some willingness for further change, for further action on 
the whole front of dangerous driving can be taken. And we 
await those measures with great interest, Mr. Speaker. But with 
that, I would move to adjourn debate on Bill 32, The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has moved 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 32, the automotive accident 
insurance amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 33 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 33 — The Child 
and Family Services Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of course I rise to speak 
to this bill, The Child and Family Services Amendment Act. I 
note that this is a fairly significant piece of proposed legislation 
here, Mr. Speaker, and has some very, very real impacts 
potentially on the way that The Child and Family Services Act 
is implemented in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The first part of many of the changes in the bill deal with, you 
know, simple housekeeping issues, replacing the term 
department with ministry as is reasonable and replacing The 
Children’s Law Act with The Children’s Law Act, 1997, 
certainly again. Also some updating, some modernizing of 
language around what was previously referred to as people of 
Indian ancestry rather, Mr. Speaker, to the term Aboriginal 
people. 
 
Some of the parts though that I want to pay particular attention 
to, Mr. Speaker, are regarding the agreements and proposed 
changes to agreements, specifically with First Nations Child 
and Family Service agencies. Mr. Speaker, it’s an interesting 
time for this legislation to come forward. Certainly we recently 
had a report from the Children’s Advocate regarding some 
concerns that he had with a specific service provider. 
 
Also providing context, Mr. Speaker, are the Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission of Canada’s Calls to Action. Mr. 
Speaker, many will know that the Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission conducted for several years hearings and meetings 
around this country with the aim of first of all looking at the 

truths that exist, truths that we haven’t always been upfront 
with, Mr. Speaker, in this country. And at the conclusion of that 
commission there were several calls to action that were put 
forward. 
 
Under the heading of legacy in the Calls to Action, in the very 
first section, Mr. Speaker, because of, I think, the importance 
and because of the history regarding child welfare regarding the 
treatment of indigenous children in this province and in this 
country — right up there the first recommendations are around 
child welfare. The first call is: 
 

We call upon the federal, provincial, territorial, and 
Aboriginal governments to commit to reducing the number 
of . . . children in care . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, that is certainly something that has needed to be 
dealt with for a long time in this province. That isn’t necessarily 
what this legislation stated or otherwise that the goals are 
present in this legislation. But one thing that really did catch my 
attention is no. 4 on the Calls to Action: 
 

We call upon the federal government to enact Aboriginal 
child-welfare legislation that establishes national standards 
for Aboriginal child apprehension and custody cases and 
includes [the following] principles that [and I draw 
attention to the first under that]: 

 
Affirm the right of Aboriginal governments to establish 
and maintain their own child-welfare agencies. 

 
I note that, Mr. Speaker, because one of the provisions in this 
proposed bill is around giving powers to the minister to 
terminate with 90 days’ notice agreements with First Nations 
and Family Service agencies and other prescribed agencies that 
don’t include a fixed term when the minister believes that it’s in 
the public’s interest to do so. And the agreements, it states, 
must “be terminated . . . in accordance with the procedures and 
on the terms prescribed in the regulations.” It’s worth noting 
that at last check those regulations haven’t been brought 
forward, so we’re left to wonder what is in those regulations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, certainly it’s understandable that the minister 
needs to take steps, and sometimes in legislation and enact 
legislation when current agreements aren’t working. But I think, 
you know, legislation is part of that but certainly also is 
relationship and respect and communication. And I think that 
that, particularly given the context in this province and in this 
country, particularly with regard to children, indigenous 
children in the province, and with regard to The Child and 
Family Services Act and the history of apprehension and 
children in care and the disproportionate numbers of indigenous 
children in care, that that relationship . . . We should lead with 
that relationship, Mr. Speaker. I suppose legislation if 
necessary, but really, you know, drawing attention to the need 
to develop, maintain those respectful relationships. 
 
I note that in many of the other bills that I’ve spoken to tonight, 
the ministers speaking, when speaking to the bill, have noted 
the amount of consultation. We heard that with the horned cattle 
Act. We heard it with the justices of the peace. And I note it’s 
noticeable in its absence, Mr. Speaker, is the references to 
consultation with those First Nations Child and Family Services 



October 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 899 

agencies in the minister’s comments. So I draw special attention 
to that, Mr. Speaker, and special attention to the fact that the 
regulations that are mentioned several times throughout the bill 
simply haven’t been released yet. So it’s really hard to have a 
full and transparent discussion without having laid eyes on 
those regulations. 
 
And again just one more call to, you know . . . This bill is 
proposed in the context, the current context, and at a time when 
we’re seeking reconciliation and really should be paying 
attention to the calls to action that have been put forth by the 
TRC [Truth and Reconciliation Commission]. 
 
I know that there will be a number of my colleagues who will 
have other points to make on this proposed bill and certainly 
have a number of questions. And I think it really is important to 
get the opinions of those who are most impacted by this 
proposed bill. And with that, I think I will conclude my 
comments for this evening and move that we adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 33, The Child and Family Services Amendment Act. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 33, The Child and Family 
Services Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 34 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 34 — The 
Provincial Lands Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to join the debate tonight on Bill No. 34, The 
Provincial Lands Act, 2016. This one is a . . . It’s as big as the 
province itself, Mr. Speaker, in terms of its sweep, the issues 
that it encompasses, and just the span of the thing in terms of 
the . . . As the minister referenced in his remarks, Saskatchewan 
is spanning 161 million acres. And the fact that more than 100 
million of those acres are Crown land, it’s, you know . . . If you 
go someplace like just in around the turnoff to Montreal Lake 
First Nation on the road to La Ronge, Mr. Speaker, where you 
hit the centre of the province, you realize just how vast 
Saskatchewan really is. 
 
And in this piece of legislation, you come into a number of 
issues that it will be interesting to see, to verify certain of the 
undertakings that have been made by the minister in his second 
reading speech. 
 
Certainly First Nations in the province of Saskatchewan have a 
keen interest in this piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker. And 
where the minister talks about, and again this is in his second 
reading speech, June 15th, 2016, where the minister says: 
 

While the government is focused on protecting the land, 

we also recognize its importance to the many people of 
Saskatchewan and, in particular, our First Nations and 
Métis communities. Revisions to the Act will not impact 
those communities and their ability to exercise treaty or 
Aboriginal rights or carry out traditional uses. The duty to 
consult was triggered in relation to these proposed 
amendments, and the province met its legal duty to consult 
and accommodate. The Treaty Land Entitlement 
Agreement remains unchanged. Amendments to the Act 
will not affect that agreement or have any effect on its 
process. The government will continue to meet obligations 
and commitments under the Treaty Land Entitlement 
Agreement. 

 
So I’d again draw your attention back to the statement that “The 
duty to consult was triggered in relation to these proposed 
amendments, and the province met its legal duty to consult and 
accommodate.” And again, Mr. Speaker, it will be interesting to 
see how that is verified because this is a contentious piece of 
legislation in a number of respects. The kind of division that 
this legislation reveals between agricultural producers and 
leaseholders, Mr. Speaker, those kind of issues alone, it will be 
interesting to see the minister respond to those squarely. 
 
[21:00] 
 
But it will also be interesting to see if the statements are 
accurate that the duty to consult was in fact, the duty to consult 
and accommodate was met. It will be interesting to see if that 
assertion holds water with the folks who’ve had their treaty 
rights impacted by this legislation. And you know, Mr. Speaker, 
we see in places in Saskatchewan but certainly across North 
America where, when you get that wrong, it’s bad for everyone. 
So we’ll be looking to get that verification that that is in fact the 
case that the duty to consult and accommodate has been met, 
and we’ll be watching with great interest on that front. 
 
I also look forward to the intervention to come from my 
colleague from Saskatoon Nutana who is, you know, an expert 
on these kinds of issues in a number of respects, not the least 
having worked on lands issues with the federal government for 
near to two decades. So we’ll be looking to see what she has to 
say about this as we’ll certainly be looking to verify the 
statements around the consultation that has taken place to date, 
Mr. Speaker. In terms of various of the objectives under the 
legislation, you know, fair enough. But the real proof will be in 
the pudding of whether or not the contentions in the minister’s 
speech are borne out with the folks affected, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again I know I’ve got colleagues that have got a lot of 
wisdom to offer up on these questions. I’ll certainly be looking 
forward to their interventions on these matters, and I’ll also be 
looking forward to the more complex and direct discussion that 
this kind of legislation will afford at the committee hearing 
stage. And with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d move to adjourn debate 
on Bill No. 34, The Provincial Lands Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has adjourned 
debate on Bill No. 34, The Provincial Lands Act, 2016. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



900 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2016 

The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 35 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 35 — The Small 
Claims Act, 2016/Loi de 2016 sur les petites créances be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This is a 
bill that is actually repealing the existing small claims Act and 
creating a brand new one. So the minister explained in his 
comments on June 15th that it is attempting to do quite a 
number of things that are apparently part of his justice 
innovation agenda. So he has undertaken to make justice 
services much more accessible for Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
I actually went through a small claims process last year. It was 
quite interesting. It took a while to get it all resolved, but I have 
to say the services that the court provided were very helpful. 
And this is a case where an out-of-province vehicle backed into 
my car, and SGI couldn’t provide me with the deductible under 
my plates. It had to come from the other plate holder. And of 
course, SGI couldn’t go after this person for some reason, so I 
had to. 
 
My only concern, and I don’t see it here in the amendments to 
the way that the Act is now being proposed, was that I had to 
actually travel to Prince Albert to file my claim in person 
because the accident took place north of Prince Albert. And the 
defendant was from Manitoba, so there was absolutely no 
advantage for either one of us to be able to . . . for me to have to 
drive up to Prince Albert and do the claim there. Also I had no 
ability within the Act to claim for my time and the expenses 
that it cost me to have to do that, and also the time and expenses 
it took for me to put together the appeal or the claim and all of 
that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, and ultimately the defendant never even 
showed up for the trial. So I got my judgment, which was good, 
and managed to see justice I guess. But it certainly was an 
inconvenience on my part, and although I, you know, am 
complaining about the process, I am actually very thankful that 
it was there and available to me. I wasn’t able to reclaim my 
costs, but I certainly was able to get what I needed in terms of 
the deductible for the repairs that were required. 
 
The minister identified basically five or six main changes. The 
first is that the small claims monetary limit is being increased 
from 20 to $30,000. I think that will help a lot of people who 
are in contract disputes for buildings, construction, or those 
types of things where often disputes arise and often the money 
gets up there pretty fast. So this is going to be helpful for people 
who don’t want to go through the whole process of hiring a 
lawyer to file it in the civil courts. 
 
The second change is that the court can award costs to be paid 
from one party to another, especially when people are trying to 
delay the proceedings. And I think that would be responding to 
real-life situations where that was occurring. 

Thirdly, they’re going to grant the authority to award general 
costs of the collusion of a matter based on factors such as the 
behaviour of the party. This is something that may have helped 
me out, Mr. Speaker, because of the delays that that party 
caused in terms of the finalization of the claim. And I would say 
that person was fairly uncooperative, so these changes would 
have helped me in my situation. So I look forward to those. 
 
They’re also going to require defendants to file their reply to a 
claim. Again that would have been somewhat helpful in my 
circumstance, and I can imagine in many circumstances where 
you have no idea what the defence is. In any other court’s 
action you are required to . . . you are entitled to see the 
defence, so this will be helpful for plaintiffs for sure, or 
claimants. 
 
And then the fifth thing is, if the defendant fails to reply or 
participate in any part of the proceedings, a default judgment 
can be awarded even at the earliest stage without having to go 
to the trial. So that may have helped me out as well. 
 
And then, finally, there’s an opportunity to cite individuals for 
contempt, and again I think this may be situations arising that 
are real-life situations. And I would think these types of 
changes are going to make the system fairer and, as the ministry 
indicated, would provide citizens better access to the service of 
small claims court. 
 
So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I think these changes appear to be 
in order and I think that’s all I have to say. I’m sure other of my 
colleagues are going to want to weigh in on this bill, so for now 
I would move that we adjourn the debate on Bill No. 35, An Act 
respecting Small Claims and making a consequential 
amendment to another Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 
adjourned debate on Bill No. 35, The Small Claims Act, 2016. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 36 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 36 — The Small 
Claims Consequential Amendments Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise 
and in this case to speak to Bill 36, a very minor bill which, all 
it does is it changes the name of The Small Claims Act in a 
number of other bills to what this previous bill I just spoke to, 
The Small Claims Act, 2016. 
 
So the bills that are impacted by this are The Direct Sellers Act, 
The Legal Profession Act, and other Acts include The 
Automobile Accident Insurance Act, The Builders’ Lien Act, 
The Condominium Property Act, The Consumer Protection and 



October 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 901 

Business Practices Act, The Fee Waiver Act, and The 
Saskatchewan Insurance Act. So for some reason I think the 
minister decided it was better to do these separately, and I think 
part of that is because some of those bills are non-bilingual 
bills. And I believe The Small Claims Act itself is a bilingual 
bill. That’s correct. 
 
So it’s kind of the reverse of the situation we often see. In this 
case, we’re using the new bilingual legislation and The Small 
Claims Act is affecting a number of unilingual Acts. So there’s 
no, really, cause for any further comment on that. And at this 
point I will move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 36, An Act to 
make consequential amendments resulting from the enactment 
of The Small Claims Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 36, The Small Claims 
Consequential Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 37 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 37 — The 
Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to speak to 
Bill 37, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2016. Mr. Speaker, I 
note that when the former deputy premier rose to speak to this 
legislation in June his comments were fairly brief, and I 
certainly intend to keep my comments fairly brief and just 
outline some of what is contemplated with these proposed 
amendments, one of the . . . really broken down into three main 
parts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The first is around providing provisions for SGI to cancel 
licences or registrations, registration renewal for someone who 
has large amounts of unpaid debt with SGI. It’s important to 
note, not only unpaid debt, but also not having a plan to pay that 
debt off, Mr. Speaker. I think it is important that people be 
afforded the opportunity to make a plan to pay off that debt so 
that they aren’t, you know, without licence or registration and 
perhaps the ability to get to work and to continue to pay off that 
debt. 
 
Also one of the questions I have when looking at this, Mr. 
Speaker, is the means by which those who’ve had their licence 
and registration revoked, how they would be notified. I think 
that’s important protection so that we don’t have folks driving 
around without insurance and not knowing about it. So that’s 
my main point on that part, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The second amendment that’s proposed focuses on vehicle 
impoundment, Mr. Speaker. Currently when there’s an 
unregistered vehicle that’s abandoned, it sometimes is difficult 

to determine who should be paying that impoundment fee if it’s 
abandoned. Mr. Speaker, certainly this legislation seeks to make 
clear that it should be the person who’s operating the vehicle at 
the time that the vehicle is impounded who should be 
responsible for that fee, so that the person caught driving the 
vehicle will be penalized rather than the known owner of the 
vehicle. I think some mention was made in the cases when that 
vehicle belongs to the driver’s employer. That has caused 
problems in the past, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The third key amendment deals with the three-wheeled 
vehicles. It’s proposed that the transportation of children under 
seven on three-wheeled vehicles be prohibited. And certainly 
we have from time to time had very awful tragedies as a result 
of young ones falling off the back of those vehicles or being 
harmed otherwise. I’m not sure about the reason that seven was 
chosen as a threshold, but certainly it is important to provide 
some direction and protection for those who might be harmed 
by those vehicles. And I think little ones often are more 
susceptible to that. 
 
[21:15] 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, this bill proposes some changes that 
clarify rules for passengers on motorcycles. I know that there 
has been some comment about this. Specifically the new rules 
would state that a passenger on a motorcycle must wear a 
helmet, have eye protection, have their own footrests, and 
cannot sit in front of the driver which, Mr. Speaker, seems like 
a very good idea. I don’t ride a motorcycle, but that does seem 
to be reasonable that the passenger wouldn’t sit in front of the 
driver on a motorcycle. 
 
There may be motorcycle riders and people with questions and 
comments amongst my colleagues, but certainly I think I’m at 
the end of my comments, and with that would move to adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 37, The Traffic Safety Amendment Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 37, The Traffic Safety 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this House be now adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that the Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 21:17.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

EVENING SITTING 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 13 — The Cancer Agency Amendment Act, 2016 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 883 
 Bill No. 14 — The Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 2016 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 884 
 Bill No. 15 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2016 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 885 
 Bill No. 16 — The Adoption Amendment Act, 2016 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 886 
 Bill No. 17 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2016 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 887 
 Bill No. 19 — The Film and Video Classification Act, 2016 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 888 
 Bill No. 26 — The Patient Choice Medical Imaging Act 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 889 
 Bill No. 28 — The Extension of Compassionate Care Act, 2016 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 893 
 Bill No. 29 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur les juges de paix 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 894 
 Bill No. 30 — The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 895 
 Bill No. 31 — The Local Authority Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 896 
 Bill No. 1 — The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 2016 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 896 
 Bill No. 32 — The Automobile Accident Insurance (Benefits) Amendment Act, 2016 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 897 
 Bill No. 33 — The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2016 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 898 
 Bill No. 34 — The Provincial Lands Act, 2016 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 899 
 Bill No. 35 — The Small Claims Act, 2016/Loi de 2016 sur les petites créances 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 900 
 Bill No. 36 — The Small Claims Consequential Amendments Act, 2016 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 900 
 Bill No. 37 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2016 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 901 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 884 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 885 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


