






















































Hansard: May 18, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 2A  WEDNESDAY, MAY 18, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Hon. Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Hon. Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Merriman, Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 51; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Maurice Riou http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 9 
 May 18, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to 
report that on your first regular day in the chair there’s a school 
group here from the great city of Swift Current, Saskatchewan. 
There’s two grade 4 classes from O.M. Irwin Middle School in 
the west gallery. There’s 39 students altogether that have joined 
us today. They’re accompanied by their teachers, Karen 
Schommer and Mark Siemens. Also, educational assistant, I 
think, Jeanne Myers is here. She’s raised a couple of really 
good football players. I had the pleasure of coaching one of 
them. Maybe she’s wandering over to the Regina Thunder 
offices later. 
 
They’re also joined by a number of chaperones today, Mr. 
Speaker, and colleagues and they include Kyle McIntyre, 
Tammy Wilson, Michelle Button, Leah Tait, Carrie Shumaker, 
Kari Burnett, Treena Davis, Wade Carlson, and Darren 
Johnson. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to welcome, to have these students 
here from Swift Current. I look forward to meeting them a little 
bit later on, and I would ask all members of the Assembly to 
join me in welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly 
today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I seek leave to make an 
extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has asked for leave to make an 
extended introduction. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
colleagues. It is a great privilege and an honour to introduce to 
you and through you to all members of the Assembly today, 
someone who has shaped, in a very, very significant way, the 
very identity of the province and the people of Saskatchewan. 
And this individual is only now really receiving the 
acknowledgement and the recognition that is so richly deserved 
and long overdue, might I add, on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Anthony Drake is the designer of the beautiful 
provincial flag of Saskatchewan. He has joined us today in your 
gallery, all the way from England — Howden in East 
Yorkshire, to be precise. With Anthony are his wife, Joan — 
maybe they could give us a wave as they are introduced — and 
his son John. Also the Hapanowiczes, they’re a family from 

Hodgeville. Gail, Mirek, and Zabrina are here. Maybe they 
could also give us a wave. They are hosting the Drakes during 
their visit to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And accompanying them is no stranger to the Assembly, the 
former member for Wood River and currently a rancher at 
Glentworth, Saskatchewan, I expect. Lieutenant Colonel retired 
Yogi Huyghebaert has joined us as well. David Carter, the 
former Speaker of the House in Alberta, is a family friend of the 
Hapanowiczes as well. And George Tsougrianis is also here. 
He’s from Swift Current; he’s someone we know well in our 
community. And Craig Chaplin, they’re actually making a 
documentary about the Drakes’ return to the province of 
Saskatchewan, as well they might, Mr. Speaker, because this is 
a story that truly deserves to be told. 
 
It begins when a young, adventurous British couple took 
teaching jobs in southwest Saskatchewan. First they were in 
Ponteix. Later their teaching took them to Hodgeville. And 
that’s where the Drakes resided in 1968 when the government 
of the day announced a competition for a new provincial flag. 
People were encouraged, Mr. Speaker, to send in their designs, 
and Anthony took up the challenge with some enthusiasm. He 
sent in 13 designs, I think. It greatly increased his odds of being 
selected. I think it’s a pretty good strategy. And one of them 
was chosen from about 4,000 submissions for the flag of the 
province of Saskatchewan. That flag flies over the entrance to 
this Legislative Building today. 
 
Two years ago our flag was chosen number one, ironically 
enough in an Alberta website’s power ranking of provincial 
flags. Someone has a lot of time on their hands. Here’s the 
website’s assessment of our flag that I want to share with the 
Drakes: 
 

Half forest, half wheat fields, striking red flower, and a 
solid coat of arms near the staff side. Traditional and 
modern at the same time, creative use of colours, and like 
no other flag I can think of. 

 
That’s what the website had to say; I think sentiments that the 
member for Weyburn-Big Muddy would certainly agreed to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Drakes moved back to England in 1969. And 
until this month I think it’s true they had never really seen the 
flag actually flying in the province of Saskatchewan. That all 
changed because of Gail, whom I’ve already introduced. They 
own the Hodgeville Skool Inn, which I think was the school, 
formerly the school. It’s located in the very school building 
actually where Anthony and Joan used to teach. Gail did a little 
bit of research, and she thought it would be a great thing to 
invite the Drakes for a visit. She’s arranged for a three-week 
tour of southwest Saskatchewan, and we’re grateful that the 
tour included a visit to the Legislative Assembly today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, later this afternoon we’re going to convey in a 
more formal way our gratitude and recognition for the design 
by Mr. Drake. But let me say again on behalf of the people of 
Saskatchewan how pleased we are that they are back in 
Saskatchewan, how grateful we are to the family for hosting 
them. And I hope that they know that since 1969, when it first 
flew in the province of Saskatchewan, our flag still flies and 



10 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2016 

still stands for the hope and opportunity that was present, I’m 
sure, when they were here in the late 1960s. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to welcome them on behalf of all members of the 
Assembly to this Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and it’s an 
honour to join with the Premier to welcome this delegation and 
this group and to hear some of this story that’s being shared 
here today with Saskatchewan people, someone who’s 
contributed in a rich way to our province and has left a lasting 
and proud symbol all across the province that we all love. So 
it’s my pleasure to welcome Mr. Anthony Drake; his wife, 
Joan; his son John; the Hapanowiczes that are here today as 
well from Hodgeville; and certainly as well to welcome the hon. 
member who has served as minister and MLA [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly], Mr. Huyghebaert, here today. 
 
This contribution to our province is something, as I say, that’s 
lasting to this day, and the story behind it is a good one. 
 
I hope you enjoy your time here within the province. I wish you 
well with your travels and with your experiences as you move 
across the beautiful parts of south Saskatchewan. And I’m just 
so pleased that you’re here to see this lasting symbol in our 
modern province, something that you’ve contributed back in 
1968. Your many submissions are impressive, and it was 
chosen in fact, I believe, with over 4,000 submissions at that 
time. So it’s my honour to join with the Premier and welcome 
this very fine couple and other leaders within our community 
and our province here today. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of this Assembly, I would like to 
give a special welcome to a young lady who is part of the 
school group from Swift Current. Jorja Wilson joins us here 
today with her mom, Tammy. I am told Jorja is a remarkable 
young dancer, and she is also the niece of one of my senior 
ministry officials. Jorja, can you give us a wave? There we go. 
Please help me, all, in welcoming Jorja here to her Legislative 
Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce a fine group of students from Parkland College in 
Yorkton. With them is instructor Linda Banga — Linda, have a 
wave — and coordinator Linda Heshka. Students with them 
today are Brianna Brass, Vernon Musqua, Leslie Strongquill, 
Desiree Danyluk, Haley Makelki, Tearra Neudorf, Vanessa 
Cote, Brian Derbowka, John McLeod, and Jasmine Pachal. Mr. 
Speaker, I ask all members of the Assembly to help me 
welcome these fine students from Yorkton to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 

Speaker. It’s with great pleasure, through you and to all 
members, I’d like to welcome Ms. Nydia Pobran who is seated 
in the west gallery. Nydia, if you want to give us a wave. She’s 
a good friend and someone who encouraged me to take an 
interest in politics at an early age. She’s someone who has had 
an outstanding career in education in our province as a teacher, 
a principal, and an educational consultant. 
 
Nydia and her late husband, Orest, were known as community 
builders in the town of Hafford. They started the annual Hafford 
Polkafest many, many years ago that continues on to this day. 
She now makes her home in Peachland, British Columbia and is 
here to . . . She witnessed the Speech from the Throne yesterday 
and is here to see her daughter Shelly, and Mike and family. So 
I’d ask all members to help me introduce Nydia Pobran and 
welcome her to the Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to the House, the following 
people seated in the west gallery: Glen and Theresa Harrison — 
give a wave — Theresa’s mother, Mary Woloshyn; and 
Theresa’s sister, Donna Woloshyn. 
 
These are guests and long-time personal friends of our new 
Sergeant-at-Arms and his family, and I ask all members to join 
me in welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And to 
you and through you, I would also like to welcome one of our 
guests in the west gallery. And she was just introduced by the 
member opposite, but I’d like to say hello to my friend, Donna 
Woloshyn, who, the Assembly should know, had a very long 
and distinguished career in education, particularly in literacy. 
Her work has been I think recognized throughout the province. 
So just on behalf of everyone here, let’s welcome Donna to her 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to introduce 
one of my long-term friends living in Regina Pasqua. He’s a 
very good personality, very good volunteer, Murray Carswell. I 
would like to welcome him into his Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition to improve PTSD [post-traumatic 
stress disorder] coverage for all Saskatchewan workers. The 
petitioners point out that post-traumatic stress disorder can 
severely impact the lives of Saskatchewan workers. And they’re 
simply asking that all Saskatchewan workers, if they experience 
traumatic events on the job and receive a diagnosis after that of 
PTSD, that it be presumed that the traumatic events caused it 



May 18, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 11 

and that they be covered under Workers’ Comp. I would like to 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Saskatchewan government to 
make the necessary changes to ensure that if Saskatchewan 
workers are exposed to traumatic events on the job and are 
then diagnosed with PTSD, it is presumed to be caused by 
the worker’s employment, and the worker will 
subsequently be covered under Workers’ Compensation 
and receive the same benefits as others with work-related 
injuries. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens from Regina and 
Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition in support of funding heritage 
languages here in Saskatchewan. And we know and we’re 
disappointed that after 25 years the Government of 
Saskatchewan is discontinuing all support for heritage language 
learning in Saskatchewan. Since 1991 heritage language 
schools have depended on this modest funding from the 
Ministry of Education to help sustain their programs. But as a 
result of the announcement by the Ministry of Education, many 
of these non-profit heritage language schools will be faced with 
a difficult decision of whether they can continue to operate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to reconsider this decision and restore funding for the 
heritage language education in Saskatchewan heritage 
language schools. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition today come from 
the city of Saskatoon. I do so present. Thank you. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Keeping Saskatchewan Strong 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today to thank the people of Saskatchewan for the opportunity 
they gave to us on April the 4th. Each one of us elected to this 
House are here because our constituents entrusted us to lead, to 
serve, and to help this province grow and prosper. It is now our 

role to represent our constituents with integrity and humility. 
Both sides of the House have been given this great opportunity 
to serve the people of this great province, and we certainly do 
not take the task lightly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the past eight years, we have seen the 
expanded diversification of our economy and of our resources. 
Saskatchewan is no longer the place to be from; it is a place to 
be. No longer is luggage the go-to graduation present, and our 
goal is to keep it that way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can assure the people of this province that each 
member on this side of the House will stand up for 
Saskatchewan’s interests. We will create the space and freedom 
for growth, and we will continue to promote what 
Saskatchewan is doing all around the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thanks to the hard-working people of 
Saskatchewan who have grown this province, their government 
is now ready to get to work keeping Saskatchewan strong. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Role of the Official Opposition  
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, as we gather here on 
Treaty 4 territory to kick off this twenty-eighth Legislative 
Assembly, I want to welcome all members that have earned the 
trust to serve in this Assembly. It is an honour and a 
responsibility. 
 
And I want to share that our team in the official opposition is 
ready to get down to work. Our team is a strong and diverse 
team of MLAs that will serve with distinction and purpose, 
collectively building a small but mighty official opposition. We 
are ready to do all we can for Saskatchewan people in the 
province that we all love. 
 
Our caucus has also made some important history with the team 
that’s been elected — 50 per cent women. It’s so important to 
make sure that women’s voices are heard here in this Assembly, 
and I am proud to be part of the first caucus with gender parity 
in this province’s history. That’s something we can all 
celebrate. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, although the results from the election weren’t 
what we were hoping for, our team in the official opposition is 
committed to being a strong, effective opposition that works for 
and with all Saskatchewan people. We’ll not only oppose, but 
we’ll propose as well. And when government works in the best 
interests of the people of Saskatchewan, they’ll find a partner in 
us. When, however, they do not, our team will stand strong, 
hold the government to account, and stand up for what matters 
to Saskatchewan people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 

Fort McMurray Fire 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just two weeks ago, 
we all watched in shock as we saw portions of the city of Fort 
McMurray being consumed by flames. And as we see and hear 



12 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2016 

on the news each day, the battle for Fort McMurray continues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know well the effects of forest fires. It was 
only last summer when fires threatened some of our northern 
communities and our own citizens were faced with the 
impossible situation of having to leave everything to escape to 
safety. 
 
Fort McMurray is a city made up of people from all across our 
great country and they have shown great strength in the midst of 
immense challenges. The evacuation led to an outpouring of 
support from across Canada where finances and supplies poured 
in to assist those in need. Besides financial resources, our 
government offered wildfire specialists and has support 
responding as needed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also need to thank the emergency personnel, 
who in some cases literally watched their own homes burn as 
they worked to save their city and keep people safe. They are 
true heroes. 
 
My constituency office became a drop-off location for 
donations where many have opened their hearts, reached out 
and helped over 100 families who were forced to evacuate. 
Hotels have given rooms. Stores donated needed supplies. 
Businesses stepped up, and Lakeland College has offered free 
accommodation for families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Lloydminster and all of Saskatchewan stands with 
the people of Fort Mac, and I ask that all members would join 
me in offering our support as they start the complicated process 
of rebuilding. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Broadcaster Inducted Into Hall of Fame 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in the 
House to recognize Vic Dubois of Saskatoon, a good friend of 
many of us here in the House and a very familiar voice in 
Saskatoon, now being recognized through his remarkable 
contributions to broadcasting in Saskatoon. Earlier this month, 
Vic was inducted into the Saskatchewan Association of 
Broadcasters’ Hall of Fame. 
 
Vic has worked for many years as the general manager of 
Saskatoon Media Group limited, which runs 98 COOL FM, 
92.9 The Bull, and CJWW radio stations, along with the 
Saskatoonhomepage.ca news site. Every day, thousands of 
Saskatoon area residents tune into the radio network that he 
helped build from one small station into a large network of 
news, music, and information. 
 
But Vic’s contributions to Saskatoon aren’t limited to radio. 
He’s always taken the time to give back to his community. Vic 
currently is a director with the Saskatoon Rotary Club and 
president of CJWW Denny Carr Secret Santa Foundation. 
Recognizing his outstanding volunteerism, Vic has previously 
received the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal and the city of 
Saskatoon Distinguished Service Award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating Vic 

Dubois on this most recent and very well-deserved award, and 
in thanking him for his many years of leadership through 
business, volunteerism, and his continued presence on the 
airwaves of Saskatoon. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 

Unveiling of the Legislative Building Dome 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased to rise in the House today to speak about the unveiling 
of the legislature dome. On Monday, May 16, the public 
gathered outside the legislature to watch the unveiling of the 
newly restored dome. Since undergoing its restoration project in 
2013, the dome has been covered as repairs to its limestone, 
mortar, and copper roof took place. 
 
The iconic dome is Saskatchewan’s most recognizable 
landmark, and also one of its oldest. It is within the halls of this 
building that some of the most important historic events have 
occurred, including the introduction of legislation that has 
shaped the economic and social fabric of our province. Since its 
grand opening in 1912, the building has hosted kings and 
queens, heads of state, but most importantly it has welcomed 
thousands of Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for those reasons and many others, our 
government was proud to undertake a restoration project to 
bring the dome back into original shape. Mr. Speaker, I want to 
thank the many men and women who made this restoration a 
reality. Now the dome will continue to stand tall into the future 
and withstand those Prairie winters. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 
 

Adoption of the Saskatchewan Flag 
 
Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On September 22nd, 
1969, the Saskatchewan flag was officially dedicated during a 
ceremony in this Chamber. The flag was chosen over 4,000 
designs which were submitted in a contest. A committee 
worked to reduce this list from 4,000 down to 11 prizewinners. 
The committee made two further reductions before one flag 
received the majority of the committee votes. 
 
That flag is the one we see here today, proudly flown atop this 
building and in countless other buildings in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. Anthony Drake, who is seated in the gallery, designed 
our provincial flag as part of the competition, leaving his mark 
on our province in a historic way. The flag has four symbolic 
elements: the green, representing the northern forests; the 
yellow, representing the southern wheat fields; our province’s 
official flower, the western red lily; and our province’s shield of 
arms. This basic design has grown into a symbol of provincial 
pride. 
 
While debating the official adoption of the flag in 1969, the 
Hon. C.P. MacDonald said, and I quote: 
 

It is the kind of flag I think does represent Saskatchewan. 
And I think that it will be accepted over a period of time 
and in the years ahead to be a flag that all people of 



May 18, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 13 

Saskatchewan can well be proud of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are proud of our flag and the history of our 
province. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from P.A. Carlton. 
 

Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal Recipient 
 
Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
April 26 I had the pleasure of attending the annual presentation 
of the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medals presented by Her 
Honour the Honourable Vaughn Solomon Schofield, Lieutenant 
Governor of Saskatchewan. 
 
The volunteer medal is a provincial expression of gratitude and 
thanks to those that go above and beyond in our communities. I 
congratulate all of this year’s recipients and would like to offer 
a special congratulation to my constituent, Dale Ebert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dale is an active member in our community. If 
there is a board or committee to sit on, Dale has sat on it. Over 
the years Dale has been heavily involved with the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, acting as president, 
member, chairperson for many of the school division 
committees. And it doesn’t stop there, Mr. Speaker. Other 
organizations Dale has been involved in include the 
Saskatchewan Association for Community Living, victim 
services, the Lions Club, KIN Enterprises, the Wakaw curling 
club as an executive, and as an active member with the Knights 
of Columbus since 1961. Dale’s passion for volunteering is 
evident, as his lengthy service list spans local, provincial, and 
national levels. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all the members of the House to join me in 
congratulating Dale and the other recipients of this year’s 
Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Wildfire Management 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to start by 
congratulating the Premier and his government on re-election, 
and welcome them back to this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the last few weeks Saskatchewan people, 
along with all Canadians, have been watching recent events in 
Fort McMurray very closely. As always, Saskatchewan people 
have opened their hearts and their wallets for the Red Cross. I’d 
like to thank the Premier and the government for their donation 
to the Red Cross, as well as for their work and all they’ve done 
working with Premier Notley and fighting those fires on the 
Alberta side of the border. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the fire is near our border, putting our 
province at risk. Can the Premier update this House on what 
steps the government is taking to protect lives and property here 
in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 

Hon. Mr. Wall: — I want to thank the Leader of the 
Opposition for that question. And first, Mr. Speaker, if I may, I 
want to also congratulate him on his new role in this place as 
Leader of the Opposition. And through him if I may, Mr. 
Speaker, and through you to all the members opposite, 
congratulate them on their re-election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been obviously very engaged as a 
province, but certainly as a government, in terms of the terrible 
and horrific fires that have really devastated the Fort McMurray 
area. And, Mr. Speaker, our officials have been not only 
monitoring the situation as regards the Saskatchewan border 
and for a while, at least, the community of La Loche, which 
would have been nearest certainly to some of the original areas 
of the main fire, I would say. But, Mr. Speaker, we’ve also been 
reaching out to help, to assist, and the Leader of the Opposition 
has already acknowledged that. 
 
Our officials in wildfire management are preparing and are 
prepared for every possible contingency. I would suggest to 
you, Mr. Speaker, we are very well served — I know as the 
member would agree — by the amazing women and men in 
wildfire branch, but across the different ministries that are ready 
to respond to incidents like this. 
 
I can tell the Leader of the Opposition and the NDP [New 
Democratic Party] if I may as well, that we have, after the 
review from the fires in our own province last year, we’ve 
made, I think, a number of improvements in terms of fire 
fighting policy, in terms of more resources for training on our 
side of the border, and we’re going to continue to monitor the 
situation very carefully and be ready to respond as needed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you to the Premier for the update. 
It’s certainly a very important matter to Saskatchewan people. 
 
[14:00] 
 
I know that firefighters on the ground and in the air are doing 
their very best to protect communities all across Saskatchewan. 
Bringing those firefighters and aircraft back, bringing them 
back early was the right thing to do, but we need more than 
one-off solutions to forest fire management. 
 
One thing the government can do to help those firefighters and 
those on the front lines is to restore funding, funding that has 
been cut in five of the last six budgets by this government. 
 
With almost all of Saskatchewan already rated at either high or 
extreme risk of wildfire, will this government restore the $50 
million that’s been cut from wildfire management since 2009? 
Not just for this year, but so we can plan ahead and protect for 
next year and years to come. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the manner in which we 
budget for wildfire management in the province last year and 
referenced by the member opposite is very similar to what the 
previous NDP government did in Saskatchewan. And I hope the 
member would agree that though that same model was used 



14 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2016 

even last year, that the response from the province was certainly 
adequate to the task. Obviously there are always lessons to be 
learned, but I want to say that the resources, the women and 
men of the wildfire branch and all those who responded on 
behalf of the province and their agencies last year did an 
exemplary job. And I think the review post the fire indicated 
that there would be some consensus around that. 
 
However, the question is a good one. And I can tell the hon. 
member that, as a result of improvements we’ve made because 
of last year’s event and because of consultation with those who 
were fighting the fire, those who responded, and those 
municipal leaders, we are . . . Government Relations will 
expand the civil response, civil service response team — that’s 
the CSRT that was deployed. 
 
The Environment ministry has thinned and removed vegetation 
in 15 locations to reduce wildfire hazards. We have eliminated a 
20-kilometre buffer zone that has been requested by members 
opposite and community leaders, hired eight additional 
firefighting crews in northern communities, reviewed the 
process of evacuation roles between the province and local 
authorities, improved training capacity, purchased new 
equipment. We’re upgrading weather stations, Mr. Speaker. We 
want to be ready for any event, not just this year as the Leader 
of the Opposition has said, but for years to come. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Tabling of Budget 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, it’s just a couple days after 
the government shone a little bit of light on a portion of the 
dome. So it would be nice if the Premier and that government 
would shine just a little bit more light on their budget, a budget 
that’s been hidden from Saskatchewan people. 
 
While the Premier throws out words like transformational 
change, the people running our kids’ classrooms are desperately 
trying to get details and the supports they need to do their jobs. 
School boards are left in the dark. Saskatchewan teachers and 
educational assistants don’t know if they’ll have jobs next year, 
and parents don’t know just how much more those classrooms 
will grow for their kids. 
 
Does the Premier acknowledge the damage he’s causing by 
delaying this budget till into June? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s 
very important to correct for the record that the budget will not 
have to wait until the end of June. The budget will be tabled on 
the 1st of June. And in the meantime, Mr. Speaker, the money 
continues to flow as it has on occasions in the past history of the 
province where the budget has come after the actual fiscal 
year-end. 
 
We make sure that there are resources flowing and 
appropriately provided to third parties who are providing those 
resources, Mr. Speaker. We will be tabling the budget on the 1st 
of June and it’ll be consistent with what we committed to in the 
election campaign. It’ll be consistent with, in a general sense, 

certainly with the third-quarter report which was released just 
prior to the provincial election, and it’ll be consistent with our 
plan to work to keep the province strong. That means focusing 
on the economy, the number one priority for Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
It will also mean keeping the province’s finances strong. I’m 
happy to report for members of the House that Saskatchewan 
today enjoys a AAA credit rating, in part because of the 
management that we’ve been able to provide and good fortune 
we’ve had as a government. And it’s our intent to ensure the 
finances of Saskatchewan are strong and that high-quality 
public services are delivered to Saskatchewan people. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, one of the sectors that lost the most 
jobs, tragically, is Education. StatsCan reported there were 
5,200 fewer jobs year over year — 5,200 jobs lost. 
 
Despite the rhetoric, conditions in the classroom have simply 
not been a priority for this government. Schools have been 
making do with less and teachers are doing all they can to 
minimize the impacts on our kids, but they are at a tipping 
point. 
 
Will the minister stop putting the government’s financial 
problems on the backs of our kids and will he commit to 
ensuring that class sizes stop climbing so that our kids can get 
the attention, the help, and the education that they deserve? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member for the 
question and want to congratulate her on her appointment to her 
role as critic for Education and look forward to working with 
her. 
 
I would like to say to her and to the members opposite that this 
is a government that believes strongly in the education of the 
students of our province, and we have in the past supplied 
resources for that purpose as we’ll continue to do that. In fact, 
Mr. Speaker, under our government the average student size has 
declined rather than gone up. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had this type of question before, and I 
can tell you again, we have increased operating funding by 31 
per cent. We’ve increased capital spending by four times what it 
was under the NDP. 
 
We’ve increased child care spaces by 53 per cent. We’ve 
increased pre-K [pre-kindergarten] spaces by 104 per cent. 
We’ve increased funding for early childhood intervention 
funding by 40 per cent. Mr. Speaker, we have made a strong 
commitment to education. We value the students in our 
province and will continue to ensure that they are funded well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the minister for his response 



May 18, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 15 

and I do look forward to working collaboratively where we can 
to improve education in this province. 
 
However in the discussions that I’ve been having over the last 
few weeks and over the last few years, there are many 
Saskatchewan classrooms that are already overcrowded, and 
teachers are telling me they can’t give the students the 
one-on-one attention that they need. 
 
With class sizes climbing — and they are climbing — and 
uncertainty growing, how much longer do schools have to wait 
for answers? Classrooms will only stay productive places of 
learning if there is a commitment to invest in our kids today. 
 
Now with so-called transformational change and after eight 
years of uncertainty, will the minister finally provide a funding 
model that is adequate, equitable, transparent, and predictable? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member 
opposite raised the issue of the funding formula and the funding 
model. In response to requests from the school divisions, we 
undertook a review of the funding model. We engaged Dan 
Perrins, former deputy to Premier Calvert. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Perrins has travelled around the province. He is in the final 
stages of doing his work so that we will have a consistent 
funding model that we believe will satisfy and answer the needs 
of the divisions across the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell you as well that we have seen increases 
in our funding to education each and every year that we’ve 
formed government. We have had operating increases in our 
province since November of 2007 by some 31 per cent. Total 
funding for pre-K in our province is now nearly $2 billion. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Crisis Services for Prince Albert 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, Sask Party cuts don’t end in 
the classroom. In exactly two weeks the mobile crisis unit in 
Prince Albert will be forced to cut services during daytime 
hours. Mr. Speaker, the crisis unit offers essential services like 
suicide intervention, mental health support, child abuse 
intervention, and they provide victim counselling in response to 
unexpected and traumatic events. 
 
In 2015 this government cut $100,000 of funding from the crisis 
unit. Mr. Speaker, those cuts mean cuts to services. To the 
Social Services minister: what is the government’s expectation 
for these cuts? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to thank the member for the question and 
welcome her to the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the changes that have been made to the Prince 
Albert mobile crisis unit referenced their support that they 
provided to the gambling line funding, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, less than 2 per cent of the calls that were received 
from that line were received by the Prince Albert mobile crisis 
unit, Mr. Speaker. In fact Prince Albert on average received 
seven calls a month, whereas Saskatoon received 13 and Regina 
just over 33. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it made more sense to consolidate that out of the 
more busier unit, out of Regina where it’s about $242 per call, 
whereas in Prince Albert it was well over $1,000 just to answer 
the call, Mr. Speaker. And as well consolidating the line to one 
service provider in Regina, that will allow for the introduction 
of online and texting components in 2016 which will improve 
the services for everybody across the province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from P.A. [Prince 
Albert] Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, this government commissioned 
a mental health plan almost two years ago but has failed to take 
any actions. In Prince Albert for four long years we have been 
missing a local representative willing to stand up for the needs 
of our community. Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m here now and I am 
ready to fight for my community. 
 
In the last year, the demand for mobile crisis services has grown 
in Prince Albert and, instead of supporting this important work, 
this government is cutting. Prince Albert is clearly not a priority 
for this government, and neither is mental health. 
 
When will this government stop ignoring the people of Prince 
Albert? And when will the minister finally get serious about 
offering the mental health services that the people of 
Saskatchewan need? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this government has 
certainly been very involved in investing in Prince Albert and 
area since this government formed in 2007, Mr. Speaker. A 
brand new long-term care facility, a brand new Carlton school, 
Mr. Speaker, in that community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of mental health we have, yes, provided 
for the work of a commissioner to look at the mental health and 
addictions system for this province, Mr. Speaker, but the work 
has actually begun, Mr. Speaker. In fact we have invested in 
police and crisis teams starting in Regina and Saskatoon. We’ve 
invested in specialized dementia units in this budget, Mr. 
Speaker. We have provided funding for a hot-spotting program, 
piloting that in both Regina and Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in fact we have seen a significant number, for 
example, of psychiatrists practising in Saskatchewan, about a 
22 per cent increase in psychiatrists just in the last eight years, 
Mr. Speaker. So investments have been made on the mental 
health and addictions side of government. More work needs to 
be done, Mr. Speaker, but I think the past action of this 
government shows that this is the party that’s going to get the 
work done. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
 



16 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2016 

Global Transportation Hub 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this Premier and the 
minister responsible have spent months refusing to answer 
questions on the ongoing and ever-growing GTH [Global 
Transportation Hub] land scandal that’s wasted millions of 
dollars, so journalists and Saskatchewan people have resorted to 
freedom of information requests. But those asking fair questions 
have been hit with fees that are so massive that a leading expert 
said that they’re clearly intended to deny all access to 
information. 
 
This outrageous stonewalling is absolutely unacceptable. In the 
spirit of a new session, will the Premier turn over a new leaf, 
ensure these basic questions receive fair treatment, and make 
sure that Saskatchewan’s freedom of information Act is 
respected? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition will know that the 
decisions with respect to FOI [freedom of information] requests 
are all dealt with by the appropriate officials in the appropriate 
ministries, including the determination of an assessment of fees, 
Mr. Speaker. There’s a tremendous amount of fees that go into 
doing some of these FOI requests, especially, Mr. Speaker, 
when the requests are significant. And the amount of money 
that was quoted, Mr. Speaker, with respect to this particular 
request I think is indicative of the size of the request that was 
made, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, they may not be happy with the amount of the fees that 
were quoted, Mr. Speaker. Certainly the Information and 
Privacy Commissioner has a role to play in reviewing that 
assessment. And I would just quote, Mr. Speaker, from the 
commissioner’s report back in 2005 where he said “. . . the fee 
regime should promote and encourage applicants to be 
reasonable and to cooperate with government institutions in 
defining and clarifying their access requests.” So when these 
requests, Mr. Speaker, are very, very broad, when they include 
access to thousands and thousands of documents, Mr. Speaker, 
that require review by officials within the government, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s wholly appropriate and within the legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, for the government to recover those fees. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Are you telling me that the Premier of 
Saskatchewan is actually defending, is actually defending, Mr. 
Speaker, those outrageous fees that are nothing more than a 
cover-up of that government’s scandal, Mr. Speaker? Is the 
Premier defending and standing with that outrageously obscene 
answer from the Justice minister? Stand up and provide some 
answers. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, the fee schedule that’s been 

used to calculate the fees required to comply with that access 
request were actually the same as were in place with the NDP 
from 1993, Mr. Speaker, and they haven’t been changed. And 
as I’ve said, Mr. Speaker, it’s indicative, the amount is 
indicative of the size of the request: thousands and thousands of 
documents which will need to be accessed, which will need to 
be reviewed and vetted for personal information before they’re 
disclosed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I will tell the member opposite — and he should know this 
— that our fee structure is virtually identical to almost every 
other province in this country, Mr. Speaker, so we stand by it. If 
there’s a decision that people want to make to have that fee 
request reviewed, Mr. Speaker, then that’s certainly available to 
them through the Information and Privacy Commissioner. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition, and 
I would remind him to please direct his questions towards the 
Chair. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that’s outrageous answers 
from the minister. The Premier can try to pretend like there’s 
nothing to see here, but what we’re talking about is a scandal 
that ultimately saw a Crown corporation pay two businessmen 
three times the estimated value of land. One of these men 
allegedly rents land to the minister responsible and they 
allegedly donate to the Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. When the 
businessmen actually flipped the land to the GTH, they made 
$11 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the Premier really expect the people of 
Saskatchewan to believe that this is just a coincidence? And if 
that’s his position, why is he hiding the facts? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is so 
much wrong with the preamble to the Leader of the 
Opposition’s question. I want to say to the House and to the 
Leader of the Opposition that this entire matter has been turned 
over to the Provincial Auditor for her complete review, 
including minutes from cabinet, cabinet documents, anything 
the Provincial Auditor would need to conduct a review and then 
report back very publicly to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Over and above that, when there were concerns about the 
individuals involved in the transaction side of the issue, the 
minister of his own volition went to the Conflict of Interest 
Commissioner and the Conflict of Interest Commissioner wrote, 
3 February 2016: “I can state unequivocally that you, the 
minister, are not in breach of The Members’ Conflict of Interest 
Act.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opposition tried to tell the story just the way 
they’ve told it now throughout a very long election campaign. 
Mr. Speaker, they’re trying to do the same thing again. I would 
encourage him and all members opposite to let the Provincial 
Auditor do their work. We’re going to respect those findings 
and we await them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty clear 



May 18, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 17 

that the Premier wants to talk about anything but his GTH land 
scandal and the budget. In fact in a sneaky and distractive 
move, he’s now even saying that he wants to have a supposed 
public discussion about selling off SaskTel, just weeks after 
we’ve had a provincial election. He’s pushing this at the same 
time he’s unwilling to have a public discussion about our 
finances, our budget, or his GTH land scandal, a scandal where 
appraisers, community members, and former landowners, 
including a group of nuns, all know this government’s line just 
doesn’t make sense. 
 
So either the government doesn’t know the difference between 
developed and undeveloped land or they’re misleading 
Saskatchewan people. Which is it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
We’re going to have a, I guess, a very sneaky public 
consultation on transformational change that will take a year 
and involve all Saskatchewan stakeholders. 
 
And then the reference to SaskTel is interesting. The 
government came forward and let the media and all the public 
know that we’ve asked for a risk analysis to SaskTel as a result 
of a takeover, and so I guess we’re going to have another very, 
somehow a sneaky but very public discussion involving all the 
stakeholders of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I guess the trifecta is, the trifecta here today is that we’re 
going to have a very public Provincial Auditor’s report into this 
entire matter. We’re going to respect the findings, and the report 
will be released, Mr. Speaker. The report will be released to the 
public, and we’ll respect the findings. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, while we’re talking about who might have 
something to hide in this House, I think the Leader of the 
Opposition should perhaps explain to the rest of the members of 
the Assembly why or who among his caucus colleagues have 
signed onto the Leap Manifesto. That’s the NDP document that 
would literally destroy Saskatchewan’s economy if it was 
implemented. It’s against oil. It’s against modern agriculture. 
It’s against mining. 
 
His Finance critic signed onto the Leap Manifesto and now the 
Leader of the Opposition, in appointing someone to renew the 
party, Nicole White, a former candidate, has managed to find 
another grim leaper to do that work because she signed the Leap 
Manifesto too, proving, Mr. Speaker, that despite the election, 
you can’t teach an old dogma new tricks. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Who signed on? Not a single one of 
these MLAs signed on, and you know that, and you had the 
answers. You know, the arrogance and spin from that Premier is 
outrageous. The fact though that he’s actually defending that 
minister is outrageous, Mr. Speaker. That minister should no 
longer be a minister. He should have been canned by that 
Premier a long time ago, a minister who’s presided over scandal 
after scandal after scandal: smart meters, the carbon capture 
debacle, GTH land scandal — all that have wasted millions of 
dollars, wasting dollars. 

The fact that this Premier stands by that minister speaks to the 
culture of his government, Mr. Speaker. Why won’t that 
minister . . . Why won’t that Premier can that minister and come 
clean with Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the most important issue in 
the province today is the economy. Now we had it publicly 
reported that his Finance critic, the Finance critic he appointed 
at least voted, voted for the Leap Manifesto. We note there’s a 
Nicole White who signed onto the Leap Manifesto. That’s the 
Chair of his renewal committee. If that’s the case, he should just 
stand up and condemn the federal NDP Leap Manifesto as it 
exists today because it runs contrary to everything that’s 
important to the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And as for the minister, as for the minister, let me just say this: 
these issues, the ones he just rattled off, were all raised ad 
nauseam and regularly in this House, as they should be, by 
members opposite. And then there was an intervening election, 
and in that election, Mr. Speaker, the member that he’s 
attacking got 70 per cent of the vote of his electors. And there is 
this day in the Legislative Assembly 50 members on this side 
and 10 on the other. I think the people of this province have 
weighed in on not just the issue of appropriate management of 
the province’s finances and files, but also they weighed in on 
which party has the ability to lead this economy through 
challenges and indeed keep the province strong, Mr. Speaker. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

ELECTION OF DEPUTY SPEAKER 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order on both sides. Members of the 
Assembly, pursuant to rule 44, it is your duty at this time to 
elect a member to serve as Deputy Speaker and Chair of 
Committee of the Whole. I now ask the Clerk to initiate the 
proceedings. 
 
Clerk: — Members of the Assembly, pursuant to the 
procedures specified under rule 43(1) and rule 46(4), the 
following member has declared his intention to stand as a 
candidate for election as Deputy Speaker and Chair of 
Committee of the Whole Assembly: Mr. Glen Hart, the Hon. 
Member of the Legislative Assembly for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it is my duty to 
inform you that Mr. Glen Hart, the Hon. Member of the 
Assembly for Last Mountain-Touchwood, has been elected by 
acclamation as your Deputy Speaker and Chair of Committee of 
the Whole. The House will now proceed to Orders of the Day 
. . . I recognize the member. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, first of all 
I would like to say that I am certainly honoured that the 
members of this Assembly have placed their trust in me to fulfil 
another term as Deputy Speaker and to serve them. It is 
certainly an honour to fulfil that role. And, Mr. Speaker, I think 
I’d like to make a few comments.  
 
As I said, I thank all the members for placing their trust in me, 



18 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2016 

but I think I may just make a few comments about our branches 
of government and the role that each branch plays. The 
Legislative Assembly is only one branch of the three branches 
of government that we have that provide the overall government 
for the people of this province. We have the Executive Council 
headed by the Premier and Cabinet, and then we have the 
judiciary, Mr. Speaker. And within the Executive Council, of 
course the Premier is head of that. The judiciary, we have the 
Chief Justice. 
 
But as far as the legislative branch, Mr. Speaker, it’s providing 
the officers, led by of course yourself, who are tasked with the 
responsibility of preserving the integrity of the Legislative 
Assembly and everything that it stands for. That means making 
sure that each member has the opportunity to fill the role that 
they were elected to do and so on. And that is very, very 
important. 
 
And sometimes the roles, the lines dividing these various 
branches can get blurred a bit. And, Mr. Speaker, I know you 
have in the past attended the conferences of presiding officers, 
and that’s something that is discussed and is a concern to all 
legislatures across Canada. And we have to be very clear that 
we don’t allow those divisions or those divides between the 
various branches to become too blurred because it doesn’t serve 
the people of the province well. And I think we need to be very 
conscious about that, and I certainly, I know I will be conscious 
of that as also you will, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So with those brief comments, Mr. Speaker, I look forward 
again to serving the members of this Assembly and to the best 
of my ability. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I ask for leave to introduce the motion regarding 
membership of committees of this Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — The House Leader has asked leave for 
discussion. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Appointment of Deputy Chair of Committees 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 
by leave: 
 

That the member for Batoche be appointed to preside as 
Deputy Chair of Committees of this Assembly. 

 
The Speaker: —The Government House Leader has moved: 
 

That the member for Batoche be appointed to preside as 
Deputy Chair of Committees of this Assembly. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — All those in favour? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Aye. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I ask for leave to introduce a motion regarding 
sessional order. 
 
The Speaker: — The House Leader has asked for leave to 
introduce the special order. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
grant leave? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
[14:30] 
 

Legislature Sitting Days 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move: 
 

That the first session of the twenty-eighth legislature shall 
be in three periods of sitting, with the following conditions 
and a revised completion day: 

 
1. The first session shall adjourn at the time of the daily 

adjournment on Thursday, June 30th, 2016; 
2. The sitting days to June 30th, 2016 shall be considered 

the spring 2016 sessional period; 
3. The rules of the parliamentary calendar for the 

procedures to dispose of any remaining budgetary 
estimates, budget-related bills, and the final 
Appropriation bill for the fiscal year 2016-17 budget 
shall be enforced on June 30th, 2016; 

4. Part 3 of this order shall be applied provided the 
cumulative total for debate on the estimates for the 
2016-17 fiscal year is no less than 75 hours; 

5. The first session shall convene for a fall 2016 
sessional period on Wednesday, October 19, 2016 for 
25 sitting days, concluding at the time of the daily 
adjournment on Wednesday, November 30th, 2016, at 
which time the first session shall adjourn; 

6. Government bills that are not budget related and are 
introduced during the spring 2016 sessional period 
shall be considered as specified bills in accordance 
with rule 34 and shall be subject to the conditions set 
out in rules 35 and 36 for disposal on the last sitting 
day of the fall 2016 sessional period; 

7. The time spent in consideration of any government bill 
not concluded during the spring 2016 sessional period 
shall be carried forward to the fall 2016 sessional 
period of sittings; 

8. The first session shall reconvene on Monday, March 
6, 2017 for the spring 2017 sessional period, and the 
rules of the regular spring period of the parliamentary 
calendar for the consideration and conditions of 
disposal of the budgetary estimates, budget related 



May 18, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 19 

bills, and the final appropriation bill shall apply; and 
further, notwithstanding rule 4(4), the completion day 
of the first session of the twenty-eighth legislature 
shall be the 29th sitting day after the budget motion 
for the 2017-18 fiscal period is moved; 

9. Any government bill not concluded under part 6 of 
this order shall continue to be considered a specified 
bill, and the time spent in consideration of the bill 
during the spring 2016 sessional period and the fall 
2016 sessional period shall be carried forward to the 
spring 2017 sessional period; 

10. Any government bill introduced during the fall of 
2016 sessional period shall be considered a specified 
bill in accordance with rules 34, 35, and 36 and the 
procedures to complete consideration of the said bill 
shall be the day prior to the completion day and set 
out by part 8 of this order; and further 

 
That sessional periods of this order shall not be affected if 
the Assembly is reconvened at the request of the 
government or any other time outside the sitting periods 
established by this order. 

 
I so shall move. 
 
The Speaker: — It is moved by the House Leader, the motion. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly that the members will take 
this as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Agreed. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today for the first time in this Assembly, humbled that I 
have an opportunity to represent the constituents of Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today I have an abundance of thank yours that I 
want to give, and I always think it’s a good idea to have your 
volunteers at the top of that list. First on that list would be my 
wife of 32 years, Karen Buckingham. Karen has always been 
my best friend and my biggest supporter. Mr. Speaker, Karen 
and I have raised three wonderful children, but really at times 
she has raised those children mostly on her own. I spent time 
working away from this province on the road due to the lack of 

opportunities in this province at that time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Karen and I have raised three children who now 
have went on to start successful lives of their own. Our oldest 
daughter, Deanna, who I am so very proud of, has Down 
syndrome and yet works full time and is always excited about 
getting to work. Mr. Speaker, I also want to say that having 
someone in your home with special needs teaches you things 
that you otherwise might have never learned. Her naturally 
optimistic personality is a daily reminder to appreciate the 
simplest things in life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our second oldest, Corey, is married to Jade. They 
have two daughters, Bentley and Hayden. Corey, at 28 years 
old, is a corporal with the RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police]. And, Mr. Speaker, our youngest daughter is Kayla, who 
is married to Lyndon Block, and they have one daughter, Ava. 
Kayla is 26 and has successfully received both a certified 
financial planner and chartered investment manager 
designations. As proud as I am of their successful careers, I am 
most proud of my children’s greatest accomplishments, my 
three granddaughters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to extend a special thank you to my 
father, Ervin Buckingham, who is 95 years old and still lives on 
his own. We have seen this strength and tenacity all through his 
life. Something he taught us is to always give more to society 
than you take from it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I think of the four boys he raised, I think a 
couple of the most important characteristics he taught us were 
to have a good moral compass and a strong work ethic. He also 
taught us the importance of always being a good person and a 
good neighbour. My father always taught us how to give a 
person a helping hand when they are in need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to give thanks to a friend and now 
colleague, the member for Biggar-Sask Valley. We became 
friends while I was a councillor with the village of Borden. That 
friendship has grown over the years as I became mayor and then 
with his help and guidance, a candidate with the Saskatchewan 
Party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to give thanks to my campaign team. 
Without them I am certain that we would not have had an 
opportunity to represent the constituents of Saskatoon 
Westview. An integral part of that team, Mr. Speaker, was my 
campaign manager, Rod Buckingham, who’s also my brother. 
Rod was someone I could trust and helped me build a team that 
in my mind was second to none. I should also point out that 
Rod is one of those enviable snowbirds, however he took off 
most of his winter to help us campaign and build a strong team. 
I also need to say a thank you to Rod’s wife, Marilyn, who 
spent most of her winter without her husband in Arizona. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Rod worked tirelessly with the Saskatchewan 
Party executive of Saskatoon Westview to build a team in the 
months leading up to the election. The constituency association 
executive was critical to providing the building blocks to a 
successful team. 
 
The members of my executive team were president Kim Groff, 
vice-president Tim Nolin, treasurer Usman Chaudhry, and 



20 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2016 

secretary Cornelius Unger, with some help in those duties from 
Kalle Curson. And I also had a membership Chair, Steven 
Davies. To the rest of the team of about 60 people that helped 
us, I say thank you from the bottom of my heart. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my election day Chair responsible for getting the 
vote out was Cameron Scott. Although Cam was not on the 
team very long before the election, he rose to the occasion like 
few others could. Thanks, Cam, for having the tenacity to bring 
it home. 
 
I would also like to thank the Saskatchewan Party team who 
worked so hard with my team and I, both before and during the 
last election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I realize that was a lot of thank yous, and there 
really are many more to thank that brought me here today. And 
normally, Mr. Speaker, I would not be long-winded whatsoever, 
and normally I would be able to wrap up what I needed to say 
in a couple of minutes. However it is not every day that the 
Premier of the province of Saskatchewan, and I might say the 
most popular Premier in Canada, asks you to move the Speech 
from the Throne. I am truly honoured to have been given this 
privilege. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we think of where Saskatchewan is today 
compared to where it was eight years ago, we need to remember 
who it was that got us to where we are. Mr. Speaker, I am 
humbled to follow in the footsteps of the original eight Sask 
Party founders. We need to appreciate the vision they had for 
this wonderful province, and we need to constantly remind 
ourselves to never become complacent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the theme for the Saskatchewan Party government 
is to keep Saskatchewan strong, and I think that’s the message 
that we need to keep working hard toward every day. Keeping 
Saskatchewan strong secures a better quality of life for all 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
The six core growth activities that the Government of 
Saskatchewan can undertake to foster economic growth and 
address the challenges of growth have been and will always be 
to keep investing in the infrastructure required for growth; by 
training and developing a skilled workforce; to keep ensuring 
the ongoing competitiveness of Saskatchewan’s economy; 
increased trade, investment, and exports through international 
engagement; by advancing Saskatchewan’s natural resource 
strengths, particularly through innovation to build the next 
economy; and by ensuring fiscal responsibility through 
balanced budgets, lower debt, and smaller, more effective 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nothing makes me more proud of our Premier then 
when he says we can always do better. What a humble remark 
from a leader who has provided us with such a remarkable 
vision for the future. Our Premier and the Saskatchewan Party 
government have seen optimism like never before. 
Saskatchewan has been a have province for every year since the 
Saskatchewan Party formed government. Let us not forget that 
Saskatchewan under an NDP government, Mr. Speaker, 
received equalization payments for 15 of the last 16 years that 
they were in government. 
 

Mr. Speaker, not that many years ago Saskatchewan was 
closing schools at an unbelievable rate. Under the government 
of the NDP, they closed 176 schools and undermined one of the 
most important building blocks of a successful province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since 2007 under the Saskatchewan Party 
government, we have built 40 brand new or replacement 
schools and have done 25 major school renovations. As we sit 
here debating today, work is being done on a brand new, 
joint-use school in Saskatoon Westview. Schools are one of the 
building blocks of our province’s infrastructure and my 
constituents are seeing this first-hand. Even last week, I 
attended a meeting about the new school in Hampton Village 
where you could sense the excitement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under the previous NDP government, they raised 
taxes 21 times — quite unbelievable when you consider that 
that’s more than once per year while they were in government. 
Mr. Speaker, under our Premier and the rest of the 
Saskatchewan Party government, they reduced property and 
income tax by record amounts, saving taxpayers billions since 
2007. Mr. Speaker, this contrasts to when the NDP were in 
government where they cut municipal revenue sharing by 500 
million. As a previous councillor and mayor, I can tell you that 
is not how you build strong communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government since 2007 has more than 
doubled municipal revenue sharing to municipalities from 127 
million, when our government was first elected, to 271 million 
this year. That money was invested in communities right across 
this province. As a former mayor, my community and I felt the 
direct benefits of the provincial government putting more 
money into the hands of the municipalities that needed it. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, another building block of a successful province is 
job growth, and under the NDP they had the worst job creation 
record in Canada, behind every other province. It is no surprise 
that with those numbers, Mr. Speaker, that more than 56,000 
people moved out than moved in. Mr. Speaker, when you look 
at the population and how it has grown by over 132,000 people 
since 2007, it is not a coincidence that our job creation has 
increased by almost 70,000 within that time frame. That is 
about one job per hour since 2007. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can go on and on about the past and how the 
NDP weakened our province by closing hospitals, care homes, 
and losing doctors and nurses. And that list could go on and on 
and on. But, Mr. Speaker, what I really want to talk about is the 
future of our province and how we will position ourselves with 
fiscal prudence and sound investments. 
 
Starting this year and over the next three years, this government 
will fix more highways through a $70 million surge in highway 
repair and maintenance. We will invest 2.7 billion in highways 
and transportation capital over the next four years. This 
government will continue to invest in many other important 
infrastructure projects such as schools, hospitals, long-term care 
facilities, and the Regina bypass by using traditional funding 
models and P3 [public-private partnership]. This will be a 
record $3.6 billion investment in important infrastructure by the 
ministries and Crowns. 



May 18, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 21 

Mr. Speaker, I spent many years going back and forth to 
Alberta like so many others to bring home a paycheque. I am 
very thankful that Alberta afforded us that opportunity, but I am 
excited that with the 68,000 jobs that have been created in our 
province since 2007, we and our children have an opportunity 
to stay and prosper right here in Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan 
has a diversified economy that helps us adjust to changing 
conditions and has positioned us very well for the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the reason I ran as a candidate in the last election 
was for a very simple reason: to make sure that there are 
opportunities now and in the future for all the generations to 
come. I am proud and humbled to represent Saskatoon 
Westview, a constituency with such diversity. People from all 
over the world now call Saskatoon Westview their home and I 
am honoured to represent them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government will work hard to keep 
Saskatchewan strong. Our Premier and our Saskatchewan Party 
government have always worked hard to keep their promises. 
That’s why with the Speech from the Throne, read yesterday, 
we are once again keeping the promises we made during the 
campaign. This way in the midst of a challenging time in the 
natural resources sector, we are making sure that we are acting 
responsibly with a plan to provide high-quality but efficient 
services, keep spending in check, and keep investing in 
infrastructure. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I walk up the steps to the legislature that our 
first premier, Walter Scott, helped create, I can only imagine the 
vision he had for our province. I am confident that he would be 
proud of our Premier and the MLAs on both sides of this 
Assembly that are the elected representatives of this 
twenty-eighth legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move the following motion, seconded 
by the member from Estevan: 
 

That an humble address be presented to Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor as follows: 
 
To Her Honour the Honourable Vaughn Solomon 
Schofield, Lieutenant Governor of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
May it please Your Honour: 
 
We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 
Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 
session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 
gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 
address to us at the opening of this present session. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Saskatoon Westview and seconded by the member from 
Estevan: 
 

That a humble address be presented to Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor as follows: 

 
To Her Honour the Honourable Vaughn Solomon 

Schofield, Lieutenant Governor of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
May it please Your Honour: 
 
We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 
Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 
session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 
gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 
address to us at the opening of the present session. 
 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Estevan. 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. First of all I would like 
to thank my Lord and Saviour. Without him, I would not be 
here today. I am so humbled to have the opportunity to serve 
the constituents of Estevan during this twenty-eighth sitting of 
the legislature. Mr. Speaker, as I’m sure you know, none of us 
got here all on our own, so I’d like to take this occasion to thank 
some of the people that helped me along the way that have 
made this possible. 
 
I’ve been very blessed to have the best family in the world. 
They have always been there for me and supported me in 
achieving my goals. My partner Bart who has been by my side 
every step of the way, over the past couple of years he has 
worked hard to get the nomination and then to move on to win 
the election. He never complained as he had to take over some 
of the household chores which I guess won’t be changing any 
time soon. I’m pretty sure he’s going to have to carry on with 
that. On top of having to be the person who put up all the 
highway signs or had to move furniture in and out of all of the 
offices we were moving to during this process, I thank him for 
not complaining and being there for whatever I asked of him. 
Our journey is just beginning. 
 
To my parents, Stan and Jolene Wicks, who have given me a 
strong foundation that has helped shape me into the person I am 
today. During the nomination process my father was very 
instrumental in helping me sell memberships. There were times 
when I just wanted to stay home and put my feet up, but my dad 
would show up and he would tell me where he had been, who 
he had visited with, and give me the stack of memberships that 
he had sold on my behalf. So with that extra motivation, it’s 
what I needed to keep the job going and manage to win the 
nomination — so thankful for my parents. 
 
To my sister, Lynda Chamney, who has been the biggest 
cheerleader a girl could ask for, not sure what I would do 
without her. She’s always the first one with words of 
encouragement when they are needed. She’s there with an ear to 
listen, and most importantly, she always has a home-cooked 
meal ready at a moment’s notice. Thank you, Lynda.  
 
And to my three wonderful children, Miranda, Mercedes, and 
Wyatt Morstad — they’ve all grown to be brilliant young 
individuals who have made me so proud to be their mother. My 
daughters are both schoolteachers and my son is a farmer. There 
were times as they were growing up that I would be busy at air 



22 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2016 

cadets or attending a city council meeting and they would be 
left to fend for themselves. But they never complained and 
always supported my activities as I supported theirs. I thank all 
three of them for supporting me in my endeavours and always 
helping when asked. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the constituency and campaign teams that 
worked so hard on my behalf to ensure we had a successful 
campaign. Special thanks to those who were there day in and 
day out: Carmella Mack, Jerry Fichteman, Glen Coles, Theo 
Bryson, Gale Hilstrom, and Rosalie Story. There were so many 
other individuals who helped out in so many ways: door 
knocking, putting up signs, taking down signs, manning the 
office, or whatever task there was to be done. I cannot name 
you all, but please know your efforts have not gone unnoticed, 
and as I mentioned earlier, I did not get here by myself. I 
needed help and lots of it. So thank you to all who helped in any 
way. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, lastly the most important group of all, my 
constituents. I have been blessed to be born and raised in the 
constituency of Estevan — the sunshine capital, the energy 
capital, and even though it’s not an official title, I like to call it 
the volunteer capital. Thank you for having the confidence in 
me to be your representative for the Estevan constituency. I will 
do everything I can to ensure I represent you as you would 
expect. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk about my constituency a little 
bit. Estevan area is known for four types of industry: oil, 
mining, power generation, and agriculture. While currently 
there are some struggles happening around the energy section 
that no doubt have a trickle-down effect on the economy of the 
Estevan constituency as a whole, the people of this constituency 
are resilient. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the Premier for keeping the 
plight of Saskatchewan’s oil and gas workers at top of mind, 
not only for this province but nationally as well. As the global 
downturn hit the economy, the Premier was quick to stand up 
for our province, our workers, and the sector as a whole. As we 
are all aware, when changes were made to the employment 
insurance program, it overlooked some of the hardest hit areas, 
including southern Saskatchewan. Thanks to the tenacity of our 
Premier, EI [employment insurance] benefits have now been 
extended and the constituency of Estevan is especially thankful 
for this. 
 
It makes me wonder why our opposition would support 
something like the Leap Manifesto. By embracing the Leap 
Manifesto, the NDP is calling for nothing less than the 
shutdown of our province’s energy sector. Myself and our 
government is proud to stand up for our energy industry and the 
thousands of workers it supports. 
 
We still have lots of positive stuff happening around the 
Estevan area. Where should I start? The coal industry is a vital 
part of our province’s electricity generation. Thanks in large 
part to the innovative solutions being developed at Boundary 
dam’s carbon capture sequestration plant, coal can continue to 
be a major part of Saskatchewan’s power generation capacity 
on an ongoing basis. This technology is attracting attention 
from around the world as a working solution to help meet 

climate targets. Without the solution being developed at 
Boundary dam, new federal regulations would require a 
decommissioning of these plants and the loss of thousands of 
jobs. 
 
Agriculture is also a huge part of Estevan constituency. These 
men and women are the backbone of our economy and our 
communities. I might add that since 2008, crop insurance 
premiums have decreased by 4 per cent while at the same time 
increasing coverage levels by 43 per cent — as compared to 
when the NDP was in power, premiums doubled and coverage 
decreased. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Estevan had the opportunity to host the Western 
Canada Cup earlier this month. The facility these games were 
played in would not have been possible without the 5.1 million 
in funding from the provincial government that went towards 
building Affinity Place. The facility is more than a hockey rink. 
It’s a gathering place for people in the Estevan constituency. It 
has been used for fundraising dinners, concerts of many 
different venues, as well as hosting events like the Western 
Canada Cup. It houses our library and our arts council. This 
facility is truly a building for all people and would not have 
been possible without the help of the Saskatchewan 
government, so thank you. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to take this opportunity to 
thank the Saskatchewan government for working with the Sun 
Country Health Region to place a CT [computerized 
tomography] machine in St. Joseph’s Hospital. 
 
In conjunction with funding from the community and private 
donors, this project became a reality. With the placement of this 
machine, it has not only helped with wait times but has truly 
helped people of southeast Saskatchewan. Now instead of 
having to drive into Regina or Saskatoon for the day or 
sometimes even an overnight trip, they are just a hop, skip, and 
a jump away from the CT machine right there in their own 
backyard. This is helping them save travel time as well as 
saving on gas and maintenance and repairs of their vehicles. 
Without this outside-the-box idea that was presented to the 
ministry, this project would not have moved forward. So I thank 
both the people who brought the idea forward and the 
co-operation of the ministry to work with the region. 
 
[15:00] 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in response to the Throne Speech, I’m 
absolutely delighted to see that the matters we will be working 
on in the twenty-eighth session of the legislature will be 
material that will truly help this province continue to move 
forward in such a meaningful and positive manner. Near and 
dear to my heart is keeping our young people in Saskatchewan. 
Not only did this government have the foresight to bring in the 
graduate retention program a few years ago, but now it plans on 
improving on the program that is already in place. Students will 
now be able to use a portion of their graduate retention monies 
to go towards the down payment of a new home. 
 
I was born and raised in Saskatchewan and chose to raise my 
family here. Now my children have chosen to take advantage of 
the graduate retention program and stay in Saskatchewan. 
Hopefully now they will be able to purchase a new home with 



May 18, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 23 

some of the help in this program and start families right here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m hoping that gone are the days under the NDP government 
that you would buy your children luggage for graduation and 
wish them the best of luck to whichever province it was they 
decided to move to. Since the graduate retention program came 
into place, 58,000 graduates have taken advantage of it. 
 
[Applause] 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you. That is 58,000 people staying in this 
beautiful province and 58,000 people who are keeping 
Saskatchewan strong and helping us move forward together. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another very positive thing I see coming out of 
this Throne Speech today is the fact that this government is 
committed to continuing to put money into roads and highways 
of this province. An additional $70 million over the next three 
years will help with repairs and maintenance. This is not a small 
sum of money that is being dedicated to our roads and 
highways, but because of the sheer number of roads and 
highways, it will be spread very thin throughout the province. 
So we will be focusing on the most vulnerable of roads. It will 
take time, but we are committed and will continue and will 
eventually catch up. 
 
And let’s not forget about the 2.7 billion that is being 
committed over the next four years for highways and 
transportation infrastructure. This is over and above the Regina 
bypass. This commitment is so important for the future of this 
amazing province that we live in. As we have grown over the 
past eight years and will continue to grow into the future, this 
infrastructure will be necessary to keep the people of our 
province safe. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the last thing I would like to touch on with 
regards to the Throne Speech today is the initiative that will be 
put in place to try and help seniors who are making less than 
$70,000 a year be able to defer the education portion of their 
property taxes. These are the people who have built this 
fantastic province we all live in. It was their hard work and 
dedication that has made it a place we all call home. If in some 
small way we can help them live in their homes a little longer or 
a lot longer than they would have been able to, then we are 
doing the right thing with this initiative. Having our seniors age 
in their homes is the best thing for both them and their families. 
It is proven that they will live longer and healthier lives in 
home. 
 
The reason I am here in this seat today is because the 
constituents of Estevan have put their faith in me, that I will 
serve our constituency with all of the zeal, passion, and earnest 
that I have. And that is my goal, while ensuring I also take into 
consideration the needs of the province of Saskatchewan as a 
whole. In the short time I’ve had to spend in this remarkable 
building, I have been amazed by the knowledge, commitment, 
and kindness of the people who work here. I look forward to the 
next four years and hope to make my constituency and my 
province proud. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would be honoured to second the motion for the 
Speech from the Throne, and God bless. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and it is 
indeed an honour to be able to rise to my feet today to begin 
with my comments on the Speech from the Throne and our 
reply to such. The Speech from the Throne falls short in many, 
many ways and so, as such, I will bring a motion at the end of 
my comments to amend it to properly reflect the reality facing 
Saskatchewan families today. 
 
But before I begin with comments on the Speech from the 
Throne, I do have some opening comments that I would like to 
make, Mr. Speaker. And initially, first of all I want to 
acknowledge that we are on Treaty 4 territory and indeed the 
table runner that sits in front of us at the Clerks’ Table 
constantly reminds us of that fact. Treaty 4 was signed in 1874. 
My home is in Treaty 6 territory in Saskatoon, which was 
signed in 1876. And those documents and those agreements 
with the First Nations that live here and lived here at the time 
and the settlers that were coming in are the basis for the fact 
that my family has been able to live here in Saskatchewan and 
succeed as we have. 
 
My people were the settler people. On my father’s side, my 
grandfather homesteaded in 1909, and on my mother’s side, my 
grandfather and his dad came as he was a medical doctor who 
moved to Saskatchewan to be part of the frontier development 
and delivered most of the babies in the area at the time along 
with the help of the midwives. But these are the hardy people 
that settled here in Saskatchewan as a result of the signing of 
the treaties, and indeed I feel very grateful for that. We’ve made 
our home here and we’ve been living in Saskatchewan ever 
since. I got raised on the farm that my grandfather homesteaded 
at, and moved to Saskatoon in ’79 with a view to going to 
university. But I’m very proud of the roots that my family and 
my settler family established here, and the values that come 
along with that. And I’ve spoken about that in the past here in 
the Assembly. 
 
It’s truly an honour to be re-elected to represent the citizens of 
Saskatoon Nutana and my constituents, and I’m always 
humbled by the responsibility that that carries with it in order to 
properly represent and to bring forward the issues that are 
important to my constituents. As you know, Mr. Speaker, we all 
signed the rolls here a couple of days ago and to do that is a 
very humbling experience as well. I was very humbled to be 
able to sign the rolls a second time as a re-elected member and 
incumbent for Saskatoon Nutana, and I don’t think that feeling 
will ever get old. I mean it’s an important symbolic gesture that 
we all make, and there are not very many people in 
Saskatchewan who have had the opportunity to do that. So it is 
something that I take very seriously, and every day when we 
walk into this grand building I think we’re all reminded of that. 
So again I am very thankful and humbled to be able to be here 
and make these comments and represent my constituents. 
 
And on that note I would like to say a few thanks before I carry 
on with my comments on the Speech from the Throne. First of 
all and foremost, I want to thank my family. I have mentioned 
my grandparents and certainly my parents. Dad is now 89 years 
old and mom’s 86 and they’re still living in their own home, 
with a little help from the health care system but also and 



24 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2016 

particularly from my sister and my two brothers who do the 
yeoman’s work in making sure that mom and dad are looked 
after and that medical appointments are attended to. And as they 
age gracefully in their home, I am so thankful for their health 
and insights and also for the support of my two brothers and my 
sister who live closer than I do. So it’s difficult for me to get to 
see them as much as I’d like to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And my dad is still my go-to guy. When it comes to farming 
issues, he has an incredible sense of farming in Saskatchewan, 
and certainly my two brothers who have both just recently 
retired from farming. We kept the home quarter, which is a 
thing I think that means a lot to all the members of my family. 
But my dad has an uncanny sense of picking out where this 
government has shortfalls and I really look forward to his 
comments, and he’s always anxious to have those discussions 
as well. So I’m very thankful for that and I’m blessed to have 
parents who were engaged in the political process, who knew 
the importance of the right to vote and the importance of being 
involved in their community. So I’ve learned so much from 
them and I’m thankful for that. 
 
Again thankful to my brothers and sisters, particularly my sister 
Maureen who is a huge support to me as well and to my kids. I 
always forget about this part and I never have a Kleenex handy. 
But my kids are always there for me, and again I think they are 
inquiring minds who have a very, very interesting perspective 
on what their generation faces in this society. 
 
And quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, you know my dad said a while 
ago, I think I’m one of the lucky generation because we never 
had to worry about what was going to happen in the future as 
far as what our climate would look like, what our world was 
going to look like. And he says, I feel sorry for the future 
generations. And I know for a fact that my two sons are very, 
very aware of the changing world we live in and feeling the 
burden of it, which I think is really too bad. But I think they’ll 
take it on with the challenge that the young people bring and the 
enthusiasm and conviction that they bring to dealing with issues 
that are important to them and their friends and their generation. 
 
Moving on though, I would like to now talk a little bit about my 
constituents. I’ve often said I think Nutana’s one of the best 
ridings in the province. I’m very proud to have lived there for 
over 25 years now, and it is indeed such an honour to be able to 
represent the folks that live in Nutana. I call it a triple-A riding 
because it’s full of artists and academics and activists, Mr. 
Speaker, and I really want to be able to represent them as well 
as I can here in the Assembly. 
 
It’s home to many cultures. It’s home to many religions. It’s 
very diverse, and I would like to think it’s very inclusive. It’s 
the home of the famous Broadway Avenue and the Fringe 
Festival. And it’s also home of the Open Door Society. And I 
think that really reflects many of the changes that we’ve seen in 
our culture here in Saskatchewan and particularly in Saskatoon, 
the many new cultures coming to settle and make roots and 
raise their families in Saskatchewan. And Saskatoon Nutana is 
certainly no exception to that. 
 
I would like to have a big thank you and a vote of appreciation 
for my campaign team who worked very, very, very hard during 
the election, in particular my campaign manager, Michelle 

Beveridge who was solid as a rock and a total support for 
everything I needed to do. And she made sure that our team ran 
like clockwork, was a well-oiled machine, and with Michelle at 
the helm I was very appreciative of that. 
 
I would also like to thank Lee for the voter contact work that he 
did, Beth for her election day work, and Bonnie for helping out 
in general, especially when Beth had to leave our team suddenly 
to have a baby a week before, a little bit earlier than we 
expected, during the campaign. So thanks to Bonnie for 
stepping in and filling in. Thanks to my business manager, 
Fahmy Bekhit, and of course my volunteer fundraisers, 
Lorraine Salt and Pat Atkinson. And also I’d like to thank Pat 
for her continual support and mentorship as I embark upon my 
career as a politician. She’s a great source of support. 
 
I’d also like to thank the many, many volunteers and the many 
donors who helped to make the campaign a success. 
 
And you know, I would also like to thank my opponents. Jamie 
Brandrick represented the Sask Party very well. Robin 
Schneider was the Liberal candidate, and Jaime Fairley was the 
candidate for the Greens. Again congratulations to all of them 
for stepping up and putting their name on the ballot. That’s no 
small step, and I certainly respect their work that they did and 
the conviction of their beliefs to put their name forward on a 
ballot for election. 
 
I really want to thank my constituency association who are 
always there over the years, and for sure my president, Kerry 
Schaefer; vice-president Jane Calder; our treasurer, Tim 
Hutchinson; Lorraine Salt, our secretary; Holly Ann, for 
showing up at meetings on a regular basis; and of course Lee as 
well. Lee Todd, my CA [constituency assistant], has now 
become an integral part of our team. 
 
And finally I would like to thank my caucus team and our 
caucus staff. I can’t be prouder of the group of folks that we 
have here, and I’m really looking forward to working with all of 
them as we move along in this twenty-eighth Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
So we had an election in April, and the people have spoken, Mr. 
Speaker. And as you can see, we are now forming the loyal 
opposition. And that is our task: to be the best loyal opposition 
we can possibly be, and I look forward to that challenge. 
 
I often like to sort of put a context around what that role means, 
and I’d like to quote from a book called O’Brien and Bosc’s 
House of Commons Procedure and Practice. And what they 
describe the role of the opposition is this: 
 

The role of the opposition is key to our system of 
parliamentary democracy. Prime Minister Wilfrid Laurier 
put it succinctly when he said: “… it is indeed essential for 
the country that the shades of opinion which are 
represented on both sides of this House should be placed as 
far as possible on a footing of equality and that we should 
have a strong opposition to voice the views of those who 
do not think with the majority.” 

 
And I think that’s something we need to take very, very 
seriously here on this side of the House that we have to propose 



May 18, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 25 

when it’s appropriate, oppose when it’s appropriate, and to 
shine . . . I often tell people our job is to shine a light, a critical 
light on the activities and the decisions of this government. And 
that is something I think that we will continue to do effectively. 
And certainly with our new team members, I look forward to 
doing it with aplomb and with grace. So this is something we 
will continue to work on, and I really am appreciative of the 
team that we have put together. 
 
[15:15] 
 
As I said, our job is to hold the government to account and by 
all intents and purposes and, by the looks of it, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re going to be very, very busy. We have a government that 
failed to introduce any Throne Speech at all in 2015. There was 
no budget before the election. We know that they’re hiding 
from the facts. They’re hiding from what happened in the GTH 
land deal. And this is something that all needs to be brought 
forward here in the House and thoroughly examined with a 
view to understanding and making sure the people of 
Saskatchewan understand what is going on. 
 
Now we had the Throne Speech read yesterday. In my view 
there’s not much in here and in fact it’s kind of tired and old. It 
makes more reference to things in the past than any 
forward-looking views. And indeed I think one of the pundits 
that have commented on it, as always, is our political reporter 
from the Leader-Post, Mr. Murray Mandryk. And there’s a 
couple of things that he said about the speech that I have to 
agree with 100 per cent.  
 
First of all he said this: “Mostly, it was a speech outlining 
decade-old positive stats even as newer Statistics Canada 
numbers are telling us a very different story.” And then he goes 
on to say: 
 

But with the current economic realities facing 
Saskatchewan, there is a lot to do here, too. And there was 
little in Tuesday’s throne speech to buttress Wall’s own 
rhetoric about improving the province’s finances and the 
economy. 

 
And I can’t — that’s the end of the quote — I can’t agree with 
Mr. Mandryk any more with those statements. And I think this 
is something that, as our job is, is to shine a light on that. 
 
This was a very underwhelming Throne Speech. It was 
something like maybe the ceremony the other night when we 
were supposed to see the new dome. It was a little bit 
underwhelming, and I think this speech is also the same thing. I 
think this government is good at over-promising and 
under-delivering, Mr. Speaker, and this is consistent with other 
throne speeches that we have heard, despite the fact that we 
didn’t have one in 2015. 
 
But if you look at what’s important about this Throne Speech, 
it’s about what’s not there. There’s no mention of increasing 
child poverty. There’s no mention of more and more seniors in 
the food bank lines. There’s no mention at all of increasing 
numbers of children in crisis due to mental health and cancer 
issues. No mention of the struggles that many families in 
Saskatchewan are facing today. 
 

And then what do they do, Mr. Speaker, right after the speech is 
introduced? They do a little diversion tactic. They start talking 
about SaskTel. They don’t want to talk about what’s happening 
with the finances of the government or the real numbers in the 
economy right now. So they’re just throwing these red herrings 
out right, left, and centre. 
 
I think it’s important for us as the opposition to talk about what 
the real financial picture is here in Saskatchewan today. This is 
a government that’s desperate for cash despite record revenues 
over the last many years. 
 
What are they doing? Well what we see in this speech, they’re 
selling off profitable Crowns. They started with ISC 
[Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan]. It was 
bringing in 12 to $15 million a year into the GRF [General 
Revenue Fund] for the benefit of the Saskatchewan people, and 
they needed cash so they sold it off. 
 
Now what do we see in this speech? Again a profitable Crown, 
SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority], and 
they’re privatizing these liquor stores that have brought in 
countless millions of dollars into the coffers of the GRF to 
provide programming and help people who are dealing with 
issues related to alcohol consumption, mental health issues — 
all those things that are so desperately short of funding. And 
they just sell it off because they want the quick cash. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked about this over and 
over again. We see countless small internal privatizations 
within the Crowns. We see shrinking of the public service and 
of highways, for example. What do we see? A lot of expensive 
consultants. We know that they’re paying more, but they’re 
actually paving less. That’s the theme that we’re seeing over 
and over in the Highways department, and I suggest that we are 
seeing it in other ministries as well. 
 
Let’s take a look at the real picture here. At the end of this year, 
2,500 jobs lost in the resource sector. That’s the projection. In 
the resource sector alone, there’s a projection of 2,500 jobs 
being lost since the peak in 2014. And what happened? What 
we have is the Premier’s hard line with the Prime Minister 
caused delays in proper employment insurance benefits for the 
people of Estevan, particularly hard hit by these job losses. And 
there was also no special funding that came forward because of 
his hard-line position with the Prime Minister of Canada. So 
this is not a progressive kind of activity that we see going on, 
on the part of this government. 
 
Since the election, since the election, Mr. Speaker, 130 jobs lost 
at Evraz, 500 jobs lost at Cameco, and 100 jobs lost in Sears. 
Overall we know that over 9,400 jobs have been lost in 
Saskatchewan since the peak, and this is during times of record 
revenue. What’s the answer from this government, the solution 
from this government? Home baking businesses. Wow, that’s 
really broad thinking, Mr. Speaker. We have those kinds of 
ideas coming through in a backdrop of picking winners and 
losers. This government does it over and over again, despite the 
Premier promising not to do that.  
 
Who are the winners and losers we’ve seen so far? WolfCop. 
We’ve been through that already. We know that Assiniboia 
Farmland made a whole lot of money on a deal that the Minister 



26 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2016 

of Agriculture could have shut down but chose not to until after 
the deal was done. And now we have good old SkipTheDishes. 
I’ve had small business owners calling me saying, what’s going 
on, what’s going on with this government when only certain 
people are being entitled to that kind of support and assistance? 
It’s not fair, and this government is picking winners and losers 
despite what the Premier has to say. 
 
We know as well the budget coming up is going to be full of 
bad news and bad choices. From 2007 to 2013 we have seen 
some positive things: record revenues, record investment, high 
resource prices, good crops, high prices in cattle and grain, and 
land prices going up. What do we get, Mr. Speaker? Another 
day older and deeper in debt. In 2006 Crown debt was $11 
billion. In record revenue years, it was down. In 2009 it went 
down to 9 billion, but in 2016 Crown debt is projected to be 
$13.5 billion. Now that’s the projection that we currently have, 
and we know indeed it could be far worse than that. So we are 
back further in debt than we ever were. And that’s not 
something that you would expect from a government that has 
received record revenues over the past decade. It’s simply 
unacceptable. 
 
We also know that the GDP [gross domestic product] is slowing 
down, and we know that that’s going to have a serious impact 
on our debt-to-GDP ratio. So these are some of the things that 
we’re actually facing and that weren’t talked about in the 
Throne Speech. 
 
Would you like to hear some more of the real picture, Mr. 
Speaker? Here we go. In 2015 Saskatchewan GDP shrunk by 
1.4 per cent. We know that construction is down by 19 per cent, 
manufacturing is down by 2.8 per cent. There’s a 49 per cent 
increase in unemployed people in Saskatchewan. EI rate is up 2 
per cent in one year, and I know solutions are more than just 
home baking businesses, Mr. Speaker. Home baking is really 
moving it forward. Capital investment, Mr. Speaker, is down 18 
per cent. And this something that’s really, really important, Mr. 
Speaker, if I can clear my voice through the din that’s going on. 
 
In the Throne Speech, they point out that Crescent Point’s 
investment this year is $800 million. What they don’t point out 
is that last year it was actually $1.2 billion. So it’s actually a 50 
per cent decrease from their 2014 year’s investment here in 
Saskatchewan. So what is the point of pointing out these 
investments when we know that investments are decreasing and 
capital investment alone is down 18 per cent? 
 
Another thing to talk about, Mr. Speaker, that we don’t hear this 
government talking about is that in four years of seven years, 
including this year and next year, we know that there was a 
deficit in four of those seven years. When they had record 
revenues, we are running deficits in this province. It doesn’t 
make any sense. And if we go forward to next year, depending 
on what happens, we’re possibly looking at five years of deficit 
in the eight most recent years. What kind of financial 
management are we looking at here, Mr. Speaker? 
 
I want to quote from the . . . Sorry. I just want to clarify where 
those numbers are coming from. I have the auditor’s report 
from April 2013, and they point out that in 2010, the actual 
deficit, despite what they recorded or reported as a surplus, 
there was a deficit of $409 million in Crown debt. Fast forward 

to 2011, guess what, Mr. Speaker? They called it a surplus, but 
the auditor points out it was actually a deficit of $13 million. Go 
forward to 2012, Mr. Speaker, and guess what? They projected 
a 352 million . . . in fact they didn’t project it, they reported a 
$352 million surplus. But really it was a $105 million deficit. 
 
We know the deficit . . . Oh, I’m going to go back to my notes 
here. I don’t want to get this wrong. Here, let’s fast forward to 
this particular year right now, the last budget that was tabled by 
this government. This year they started out with the $106.8 
million surplus. Now they had to revise that, Mr. Speaker. What 
were the numbers in mid-year? In mid-year they had to revise it 
to a deficit of $262.2 million. 
 
Now what happened in third quarter? Let’s go back again. In 
the third quarter, they had to increase the projected deficit to 
470.2 million. This government was out $534 million in their 
budget estimates last year. God knows what we’re going to get 
this time around, Mr. Speaker. And we do know that third 
quarter report . . . Actually the Premier himself has hinted that it 
might even be a higher deficit than what was actually presented 
in the third quarter report. So they can’t manage, Mr. Speaker. 
They can’t even get the estimates right. And then they’re 
reflecting that there are actually surpluses when they’re deficits. 
Like, you’ve got to wonder what the heck is going on. 
 
Now I want to talk a little bit about other parts of the Speech 
from the Throne that I think are really important to the people 
of Saskatchewan and certainly to the people that I represent. 
You know, we have to talk, not only about the jobs that we 
create and the economy that we need to sustain. Those are very 
important pieces. We have to put that in context. We have to 
talk about that in context with the air that we breathe, the water 
that we drink, and the land that we live on. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I really have to point out that this 
government is really changing its tune. I’m going to quote to 
you from the 2008 Throne Speech. What did they say in 2008? 
Here’s what was said in 2008: 
 

In a world that is starving for safe, secure and reliable 
sources of environmentally sustainable energy, 
Saskatchewan must begin creating just such an ecosystem 
of innovation. 
 
We must have the ability to conduct research into better 
ways of generating solar, wind and nuclear power. 
 
My government has a vision for Saskatchewan leading in 
the research and production of cellulosic ethanol from 
grass, straw and forest waste products. 
 
We must take current energy production and re-imagine it 
with an urgency heretofore not seen. 
 
This will require a trained workforce. 
 
This will require a cutting-edge scientific and technical 
infrastructure at our universities. 
 
This will require vision and leadership. 

 
I couldn’t agree more, Mr. Speaker. But let’s go on to 2009. 



May 18, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 27 

What happened in the 2009 Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker? I’m 
going to quote from that. Here we go. The reference there was 
to the United Nations climate change conference, and what was 
said was this: 
 

On this international stage, Saskatchewan will present its 
unique and practical plan to ensure carbon offsets or 
penalties imposed on heavy greenhouse gas emitters will 
stay in the province. 
 
This money will be used to fund continuing research and 
development of emissions-reduction technologies. 

 
Mr. Speaker, where has that gone? Absolutely nowhere. It’s 
disappeared completely off their radar and it’s disappeared 
completely out of their throne speeches. This is a government 
that has gone down a rabbit hole, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t 
know if it can find its way out again. There was strong talk 
about doing the right thing in 2008, 2009, and now we see 
complete avoidance. 
 
Where is the transformational change that they talked about in 
2008 and 2009? It seems to be limited now to health and 
education, but we need a government that has a much broader 
vision than that. This avoidance by this government is so 
insulting to so many people in this province, and I think they’re 
going to be called to account not only by my constituents. I 
know I’m going to hear about it from my constituents, but I 
would expect a lot of these MLAs are going to be hearing about 
that from their constituents as well. It’s disrespectful of 
people’s ideas and people’s desire for transformational change 
on that front. 
 
Other people are talking about this as well. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to refer to a report that just came out from the 
Conference Board of Canada. I need to find it though. Here it is. 
In April, just last month, there was a news release that came out 
from the Conference Board of Canada. I want to read the first 
two paragraphs for the record, just to be sure that all the new 
MLAs know about this. On April 21st in 2016, this was a news 
release from the Conference Board of Canada: 
 
[15:30] 
 

Saskatchewan’s heavy reliance on fossil fuels and its 
resource-driven economy give the province a “D-” grade 
overall and a last place finish among all provinces and 
international peers on The Conference Board of Canada’s 
How Canada Performs: Environment report card. 
 

Released on the eve of Earth Day, this is the first report card 
that compares the environmental performance of Canada and 15 
peer countries. 
 

“The resource boom made Saskatchewan an economic 
growth leader among the provinces up until recently. But 
that economic growth came with a hefty environmental 
price tag. Saskatchewan gets ‘D’ or ‘D-’ grades on all but 2 
of the 10 indicators used to assess the province’s 
environmental performance,” said Louis Thériault, 
Vice-President, Public Policy. 
 

He goes on to say: 

These results show that Saskatchewan and Canada need to 
encourage more sustainable consumption. Protecting the 
environment from damage is not a problem for tomorrow 
but a challenge for today. 

 
I end the quote there but, Mr. Speaker, that’s certainly what I’m 
hearing from my children and their generation of 
20-somethings. They want to see action taken today. 
 
I just want to quote a little bit more about how we failed 
miserably in this report card. In climate change, they 
acknowledge this: 
 

Primary industries make up a large share of 
Saskatchewan’s economy, resulting in high energy 
intensity and GHG emissions, and “D-” grades on both of 
these indicators. 

 
This is what’s really shameful, and I’m going to continue to 
quote here: 
 

At nearly 70 tonnes CO2 equivalent per capita, the 
province has a GHG emission rate that is six times as high 
as Quebec’s, the top-ranked province on GHG emissions, 
and over three times the national average. 

 
Saskatchewan also relies heavily on fossil fuels for 
generating electricity, and earns a D-minus on low-emitting 
electricity production. 
 
But the report doesn’t stop there, Mr. Speaker. It goes on to say, 
on a per capita basis, the province does poorly on all four 
indicators in the category of air pollution. D grade on sulphur 
oxides emissions, D-minus grade on nitrogen oxides, volatile 
compounds, and particulate matter. 

 
This is no laughing matter, Mr. Speaker. This is important. Did 
we hear anything from this government on any kind of 
transformational change relating to these serious situations that 
we are presented with as the people of Saskatchewan? Nothing. 
 
And let’s look at waste, Mr. Speaker. What’s happening on 
waste? Here we go: 
 

Saskatchewan is one of the worst-ranked provinces when it 
comes to waste generation; only Alberta ranks lower. 
Saskatchewan produces over 880 kilograms of waste per 
capita and scores a “D” grade. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is not something we can be proud of. And 
what do we hear this government saying about this? Absolutely 
nothing, other than the minister’s dismissing it as irrelevant. 
That’s shameful, Mr. Speaker, and it’s unacceptable. And it’s 
our job as the opposition, the loyal opposition, to continue to 
demand that this government takes the action that it needs to 
take. 
 
What else can we talk about on this? There’s a couple positive 
things I have to say are in the Throne Speech. They’re talking 
about continuing with the net metering program. I think that’s a 
great idea, but let’s be a little brave here and step out a little bit 
and maybe expand it. Countries all over the world, other 
provinces are working on things like feed-in tariffs. Countries 



28 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2016 

like China and India and France and Germany and Ontario, they 
are all looking at that. Why are we not looking into that? 
 
What about the First Nations Power Authority? Great idea. I 
give a thumbs up on that. I think it’s a wonderful move and it 
really helps develop and diversify the economy in the ways that 
we believe are important. But let’s look at what’s happening 
with the First Nations Power Authority. That’s 40 megawatts 
that they’re going to add to the power grid. Mr. Speaker, that’s 
less than 1 per cent of the power that is currently generated in 
this province. Now they have indicated that they would like to 
. . . Okay, I guess I’ve got to move on. They have indicated that 
they want to get us up to 50 per cent of renewables by 2030, but 
at this rate they’re barely going to hit 40 per cent. So that’s not 
good enough. 
 
I wish I had more time, Mr. Speaker. I wanted to mention 
agriculture. Barely a mention, only to brag about trying to take 
credit for the success of our producers who have worked very 
hard in this province to make the success that they have created. 
And my hat’s off to the producers, to the grain farmers and the 
cattle producers and everyone else that’s making Saskatchewan 
a great supplier of the world’s food supply. Interesting to see 
how this government likes to take credit for that. 
 
First Nations. Again what’s missing is there’s no mention of the 
Truth and Reconciliation Commission. This is an important 
piece that I think the Speech from the Throne should really 
reflect, but nothing there. 
 
So I will move to my closing at this point, Mr. Speaker. First of 
all and foremost, I am very, very, very proud to be from 
Saskatchewan. I have strong roots here and I know I have a 
future here, as do my children. We are innovative and 
community minded. We’re creative and vibrant. We’re 
resourceful and inclusive, and our government needs to reflect 
that. 
 
But this Throne Speech does not live up to the promise of the 
people who live here and who work here and who raise families 
here. We need to protect our economy and our jobs while 
engaging in transformational change, but not just in health and 
education. It’s not easy, but to flat out refuse and stick your 
head in the sand is not the way to go. This Throne Speech lacks 
vision and does nothing to move Saskatchewan into the future. 
Rather, it is backward looking at best. 
 
We need to make Saskatchewan and Canada and the world a 
better place. I agree. We need to look after our workers and we 
need to look after the air we breathe, the water we drink, and 
the land we live on. So I’d like to close with a quote from John 
Kennedy, and this was from . . . well 53 years ago, 1963, and 
this was the American University speech. And he was talking 
about world peace, but I think it really applies to what we see 
here today. And this is a quote from John F. Kennedy. He says: 
 

For, in the final analysis, our most basic common link is 
that we all inhabit this small planet. We all breathe the 
same air. We all cherish our children’s future. And we are 
all mortal. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, on that note, I’m adamant that this Speech 
from the Throne fails us all, and so I would like to move the 

following motion: 
 

That the motion be amended by adding the following: 
 
and that this Assembly does not support the government’s 
refusal to properly address the issues in health care and 
education, adequately protect Saskatchewan jobs, and 
ensure transparency and accountability to Saskatchewan 
people. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — We have a motion from Saskatoon Nutana, 
seconded by the member from Athabasca. The question before 
the Assembly is the proposed amendments. And first off, will 
the members take the amendments as read? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Okay. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the amendments? I recognize the member for Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
proud to stand in my place as the member for Athabasca and to 
second the amendment proposed by my colleague and dear 
friend, the member from Saskatoon Nutana. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to do my presentation in three or four particular stages as I 
begin to propose what I think is really important from the 
northern Saskatchewan perspective. 
 
I first of all want to thank the many people that supported me in 
this past election campaign. There was a lot of teamwork, a lot 
of connection, and there was a lot of support in many of the 
communities that we travelled, Mr. Speaker. And one of the 
challenges that we certainly faced was, obviously a challenge 
faced throughout Saskatchewan, is really getting the vote out, 
Mr. Speaker. I want to recognize my team, the people that 
worked very hard, in particular my campaign manager, Darwin 
Roy, who’s a young guy that really wants to learn a lot about 
how politics works. And I certainly foresee a future for him and 
many people his age. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as we look back and we certainly reflect 
some of the kindness that was shown to us during the campaign, 
Mr. Speaker, I want to pay a special tribute to the community of 
La Loche, Mr. Speaker. La Loche was one of the communities 
that we spent quite a bit of time in. And, Mr. Speaker, this 
particular community has been going through a lot of 
challenges, a lot of hurt, and certainly a lot of thought as we 
certainly want to recognize some of the risks and some of the 
opportunities that the community faces as they build forward. 
 
I think it’s important to say, Mr. Speaker, that La Loche really 
epitomizes what northern Saskatchewan people are all about. 
Through a lot of tragic events and some very, very tough 
consequences, Mr. Speaker, they are resilient people, Mr. 
Speaker. They have suffered through years of changes to their 
life, Mr. Speaker. They have been removed from the land. They 
have suffered through many other indignities such as not having 
proper housing, not having proper water and sewer, and 
certainly not being part of the economic fabric attached to the 
land and certainly surrounding their particular community. 
 



May 18, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 29 

So I think La Loche really epitomizes the resilience of all 
people of the North, and of course that’s a tribute to all people 
of Saskatchewan. So I wanted to say that at the outset, that over 
time we’ll be spending a lot of time focusing on the issues that 
have occurred in our northern communities. La Loche is one of 
the communities that certainly was one of the areas that 
received a lot of national attention. And we are certainly going 
to be spending quite a bit of time talking about the issues that 
not only plague La Loche, Mr. Speaker, but plague many 
northern Saskatchewan communities and many communities 
throughout the province. And we’ll certainly have this 
opportunity in the session to do so, but I wanted to point out 
that the La Loche people, the Dene people, that you’re never far 
from our thoughts and prayers. And that as we move forward 
and rebuild, Mr. Speaker, that there is a great amount of 
strength and honour sent your way from many people that 
understand the challenges you face. And that certainly goes for 
our caucus on this side of the Assembly. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to be, as I mentioned, bringing 
up a lot of issues surrounding the particular challenges the north 
face, faces overall, Mr. Speaker. But I want to spend a bit of 
time, a bit of time on the actual, the Throne Speech, in which 
we’re beginning to see a lot of hurt, a lot of hurt, Mr. Speaker, 
that I think people in Saskatchewan anticipate. They’ll be hurt 
in the classroom. They’ll be hurt in the health centres. They’ll 
be hurt in the ER [emergency room] rooms. And some of the 
power bills that we’re going to be paying, insurance, property 
taxes. There’ll even be a high cost to the taxpayers out there. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, and then you’ll combine with the fact that 
there is a lack of job creation by the Saskatchewan Party. 
People will soon realize what a failure that the Saskatchewan 
Party government has become, Mr. Speaker, despite given 
record revenues, a booming economy, and growing population, 
Mr. Speaker. And at best of times, they could not get the job 
done, Mr. Speaker. They could not get the job done. And we 
will explain to the people of Saskatchewan exactly how they 
somehow messed up that opportunity. 
 
Now in saying thanks to the many voters, Mr. Speaker, that 
have supported us over time and certainly supported me as a 
candidate, that I’m willing to say this to them. That I really, 
truly am thankful for the support that was shown to me during 
our campaign. To the help that we got from the two 
constituency assistants that worked very hard — Darlene 
Bernard and Vye Bouvier — these two ladies worked very, very 
hard, and at times they were part of a very small team that 
surrounded me and Darwin Roy and my wife, Beckie. But we 
somehow managed to capture the imagination of the people of 
Athabasca and we certainly want to thank them for their kind 
support. 
 
I want to also recognize the new MLAs that are here today, 
certainly on our side of the Assembly, and the new ones on the 
opposite side of the Assembly, that it takes a great amount of 
work and it certainly takes a lot of commitment to try and make 
a difference for the people that you represent in our province 
overall. And I pray that your journey here and your experience 
here is rewarding and satisfying. And I certainly want you know 
that in spite of us being of different political stripes that well 
wishes are always important to share. And I want to take this 
opportunity to do that. 

But that being said, Mr. Speaker, that being said, we’re all 
entitled to make mistakes. And I have made many and I will 
continue making more, Mr. Speaker. And we just have to 
simply survive those mistakes and continue moving forward. 
 
But I want to talk a bit about the throne from the speech, Mr. 
Speaker. You know when things are getting absolutely 
ridiculous when the Throne Speech says that over the next three 
years, they’re going to spend $70 million on highways, Mr. 
Speaker. I think in our last budget when we were in 
government, Mr. Speaker, that’s what we spent on improving 
community access roads. I think it was 65.5 million. These guys 
are bragging about spending $70 million over the next three 
years, Mr. Speaker. So we decided to calculate . . . We decided, 
okay, four years, and we decided to calculate how many 
kilometres a year throughout the entire province of 
Saskatchewan that the Sask Party that’s so broke . . . They’re so 
broke that they’re highlighting the fact that they’re going to be 
paving 25 kilometres per year for four years. That’s their 
highlight of their Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker. The 
Premier said, we are spending $70 million over the next four 
years on Saskatchewan highways; we’re paving those. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, through the entire province, 25 kilometres of 
highways for the next four years is what they highlighted in 
their Throne Speech. 
 
So you can say goodbye to northern highway improvements. 
You can kiss the P.A. bridge goodbye, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker, for all the economies that thrive in our certain regions 
of our province that need the proper infrastructure, well you can 
kiss those goodbye too, Mr. Speaker. That’s their vision. 
 
[15:45] 
 
Now what I’m going to tell the people of Saskatchewan, a 
couple of other points that’s really, really important are some of 
the cuts that are happening already, Mr. Speaker. We are 
hearing in northern Saskatchewan, La Loche, Buffalo Narrows, 
Pinehouse, Ile-a-la-Crosse, that this government is now cutting 
what they call the winter works program. 
 
Let me explain what the winter works program is all about, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s when they hire people that are on assistance or 
eligible for EI, Mr. Speaker, that they put them to work 
maintaining our recreation facilities, whether they’re curling 
rinks, outdoor rinks, or skating rinks or ski trails, whatever the 
people of that particular community want maintained for the use 
of our kids, our children, and our youth and certainly adults as 
well. And this government’s already cutting in that particular 
area, Mr. Speaker. And this is the kind of cold-hearted cuts that 
we’re going to be expecting. 
 
And as I mentioned before, it’s going to be felt in the 
classroom. It’s going to be felt in our hospitals. It’s going to be 
felt in our ER rooms. Utility rates are going to increase, Mr. 
Speaker. So the list is going to go on and on as to where this 
government’s going to try and squeeze every dime out of 
regions and people that can ill afford those increases. And 
families are going to be paying more and more and more, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now what I saw happening, Mr. Speaker, prior to the last 
election, the Premier didn’t have the courage, the Premier didn’t 



30 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2016 

have the courage to share the financial picture with the people 
of Saskatchewan. He looked next door and saw Prentice in 
Alberta saying, well I’m going to let the people of Alberta 
know what their budget looks like. And what happened to 
Prentice, Mr. Speaker? Prentice went down in flames. And I 
think our Premier saw that coming. Our Premier saw that 
coming, when you have a $700 million loan last year alone, 
plus they went 4 or 500 more million dollars in debt. 
 
Now we’re at 1.2 billion. Now what’s it looking like recently, 
Mr. Speaker? Well I saw that our Premier didn’t have the 
courage to tell the people of Saskatchewan what our financial 
situation is like. But, Mr. Speaker, it’s coming. It’s coming. 
And when the people of Saskatchewan find out, when the 
people of Saskatchewan find out how they’ve been hoodwinked 
by the Saskatchewan Party government, I think they’re going to 
get very angry, Mr. Speaker. They’re going to get very angry. 
 
And there’s one thing that’s really important as well, Mr. 
Speaker. We talk about the sale of the Crowns. They talk about 
P3s. We talk about the waste, Mr. Speaker. They brag about 
their highway improvements. And the people of Saskatchewan 
pay very close attention to what this particular government is 
doing. We know, we know, Mr. Speaker, that they’ve got some 
major troubles. We know they’ve got some major financial 
issues, and we are going to be watching very carefully where 
this particular government cuts. 
 
Now one of the things the Premier said is that we’re going to 
hold the line on taxes — no tax increase. Well to the taxpayers I 
say this, that not only are they going to be selling our Crowns, 
our Crown corporations . . . Because these Crown corporations 
generate profit. And the profit they generate from public liquor 
stores or the profit they generate from, well at one time from 
land titles branch, and they’ve since sold that. And now they’re 
eyeing up SaskTel, and now they’re going to be eyeing up 
SaskPower, Mr. Speaker. One of the things that the taxpayers 
should know is this, that they’re holding the line on your taxes. 
That’s what they’re saying this year. But if you start 
incorporating the forgone revenues that the Crowns generate in 
future years, then guess what? Those revenues are gone forever 
and then we’ll have to go back to the taxpayers. That’s what the 
Premier’s not telling anyone. 
 
The other example is the P3s. They brag about the schools that 
they’ve built, Mr. Speaker. The reality is, the schools that you 
built are owned by private corporations. And guess what? You 
pay the private corporations not only money to build them, 
which is fair, but you pay them a higher interest rate, and then 
they also get a maintenance contract. So you don’t own the 
schools; the people of Saskatchewan don’t own those P3 
schools. The people of Saskatchewan owe these companies for 
these P3 schools. So guess what? Those cost money down the 
road.  
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, you look at the waste. Whether it’s the 
smart meter debacle or whether it’s that silly lean exercise in 
health care, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s a GTH land deal — look 
at those wastes. 
 
So if you combine poor management of the finances, you sell 
off your profit-making Crowns, you waste a whole bunch of 
money, you keep pushing your P3 model, well, Mr. Speaker, 

that’s a recipe for decline in revenues. And then you combine 
all that with the fact that this Premier has alluded to it already, 
and I hope he doesn’t because I want the people of 
Saskatchewan to have their opportunity at him one more time, 
but he’s alluded already that he’s ready to head out of Dodge, 
Mr. Speaker. He’s ready to head out of Dodge because he sees 
the problems are coming down the pike, and he’s a fair-weather 
Premier. But they want to head out of Dodge as quick as they 
can, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I tell the people of Saskatchewan this: be very careful and 
watch over the next coming days because you’re going to see a 
government that has lived way beyond its means. It did not take 
the proper steps to diversify the economy, and it drained the 
rainy day fund, Mr. Speaker. During the best years of 
Saskatchewan, they have undelivered.  
 
And that’s why the North, the North felt very clear about what 
they thought of their government over time, that this particular 
government has not delivered anything to them. And the North 
got sick and tired of poor highways, of overcrowded housing, of 
poor infrastructure, and a lack of opportunity for our young 
people, and a lack of access to their lands. And that’s why I say 
to you today, in the absence of good government, the North is 
going to rise again. The North is starting to organize, and the 
North has a plan that many people are working towards. And I 
say to the Saskatchewan Party, stay tuned, stay tuned because 
the North’s not going to continue accepting the indignity that 
you have treated northern people with, and we are going to 
make a difference in our own lives. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s really, really important 
overall is that people need to see the Saskatchewan Party for 
what it is. It came in at the right time, Mr. Speaker. It blew all 
the revenues it possibly could, and now the tough times are 
coming around the corner, Mr. Speaker, and half of them will 
head out of Dodge over the next two or three years, Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
And you will see that the New Democrats are prepared once 
again to clean up their mess and rebuild our economy, rebuild 
our province, and rebuild our communities one step at a time, 
one step at a time, Mr. Speaker, something that they have no 
record in achieving. And I’ll tell you why, Mr. Speaker. I’ll tell 
you why. This is the first opportunity that the Saskatchewan 
Party has had, the first opportunity to clean up a mess. They 
have enjoyed record revenue. They have enjoyed a booming 
economy. They have enjoyed, Mr. Speaker, a growing 
population. They inherited that. They never done anything to 
deserve that; they simply inherited that. 
 
And now when the time comes for the tough times, Mr. 
Speaker, first thing the Premier does, says I’m heading out of 
Dodge. First thing he does, Mr. Speaker. The second thing 
they’ll do is they’ll decry our financial state to justify selling off 
the Crowns, Mr. Speaker. And they’ll continue ignoring certain 
specific areas that are important to our economy such as job 
creation. They will continue gouging homeowners and families 
through things like increased utility bills, whether it’s power 
bills. You watch. Those bills will be going up. If they don’t tax 
you, Mr. Speaker, they’re going to get you some other way 
because of their incompetence and mismanagement and lack of 
foresight on how to strengthen our Saskatchewan province and 



May 18, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 31 

our people, Mr. Speaker, in many, many areas. 
 
So I say again today, Mr. Speaker, the election result was not 
what we expected, but the fight and determination on this side 
will continue because sooner or later the people of 
Saskatchewan are going to see exactly what we see from this 
end, that that is an incompetent government, Mr. Speaker, that 
has wasted so much money and so many opportunities pursuing 
their ideology and trying to get rid of our Crowns, going to war 
with our working people, Mr. Speaker. And we’re going to see 
evidence of their true colours come budget time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I look at with great amusement the current Minister of 
Finance, Mr. Speaker. The current Minister of Finance, he said 
we’re borrowing $700 million, $700 million we’re borrowing is 
what he said last year. But it’s not debt. It’s operational costs. 
That’s what he said. It’s operational dollars. Well I tried to 
borrow $700 off my colleague, my current leader, and I said it’s 
for entertainment debt. Well guess what? He wanted his 700 
bucks back, so I didn’t take it. Debt is debt is debt, and that’s 
what I keep telling a Tory, that debt is debt is debt. No matter 
how you colour it, debt is debt, Mr. Speaker. And for them to 
turn around and try and hoodwink the people of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, I think that’s very unfair. And I think the people 
of Saskatchewan are going to quickly realize that this 
Saskatchewan Party government has hoodwinked us for the last 
time. And we’re going to see, we’re going to see a change, Mr. 
Speaker. And we’re going to continue fighting on this side of 
the Assembly. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the New Democrats really, truly believe that 
there’s great opportunity in empowering and working with First 
Nations and Métis people. We think that they’re one of the key 
ingredients to making a successful economy last, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also think that green energy is an important opportunity, 
Mr. Speaker. A water management strategy, an aggressive 
water management strategy is required, Mr. Speaker, for 
agriculture, for the many mining companies that use water, Mr. 
Speaker. And we’ve got to engage the agricultural community, 
the farm families, Mr. Speaker. Where we see the Saskatchewan 
Party in tough times, when they had the greatest agricultural 
transportation crisis in the history of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, 99.99 per cent of them sat on their hands over there, 
Mr. Speaker. Not a word about the transportation crisis, and to 
this day none of them have spoken up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then we hear some of the new MLAs talk about 16 years of 
NDP rule. Well, Mr. Speaker, for the record, the 16 years that 
the NDP ruled this province, it took us 14 of those 16 years to 
clean up a Tory mess. And that is the record, and the history 
will reflect that, Mr. Speaker. So once again, once again we sit 
here, and from the northern perspective, as we see no support 
for improving our highways, we see no new housing strategies. 
I understand La Loche might get 55 houses over three years, 
Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, La Loche needs 200 houses. 
 
And the people of the North are saying this to a lot of 
companies. They’re saying, whether it’s a forestry company or 
a mining company or a rare earth company, that we like to see 
development. But all we see happening right now is you guys 
come in to develop our resources, and then you send the 
royalties to Regina and Regina doesn’t give us anything back. 

They give us nothing back, but they take the resources. The 
government does. 
 
So the mining companies and the companies that want to invest 
in the North, they know this. They pay their corporate fees, and 
they employ their people which is supported. But, Mr. Speaker, 
this government just takes all the taxes and the opportunities in 
the North and puts nothing back. 
 
The First Nations and the Métis people know that in northern 
Saskatchewan. And the one message they have, Mr. Speaker, 
the one message that they have, whether it’s La Loche, whether 
it’s Pinehouse, whether it’s Pelican Narrows, or whether it’s 
Fond-du-Lac or Black Lake, that I think it’s time that the North 
is going to get organized. They’re going to work together. 
They’re going to build a new plan for northern Saskatchewan in 
the absence of a considerate, caring government. And that’s 
exactly what they’ve gotten from this government and from this 
Premier. They have gotten zero acknowledgement of the 
challenges that the people of the North have faced, and many 
other sectors and areas of the province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the fight has not stopped. The fight has not 
stopped on this side. It won’t stop until we get action by this 
government to address these long-standing issues. 
 
The people of the North have one simple message to this 
government: we are not going to accept less anymore from this 
government. And if you don’t have the fortitude and the 
foresight to begin engaging First Nations and Métis people and 
the non-Aboriginal community that call the North their home — 
they’re part of our communities — if you don’t have the 
foresight and the fortitude to deal with these people in a fair, 
respectful manner, then we’ll figure out how best to govern 
ourselves, Mr. Speaker, because quite frankly this government 
has failed miserably on all those fronts. 
 
And I think the people of Saskatchewan are going to see 
first-hand how the North has been treated, and then they’ll see 
how they’ve been treated, and I think, Mr. Speaker, that this is 
going to be the opportunity for the people of Saskatchewan to 
really, really begin to see what the Saskatchewan Party’s really 
about. 
 
So I think overall, Mr. Speaker, to the taxpayers that are 
worried about their taxes going up, the Sask Party’s going to 
raise your taxes but they’re going to call it utility rates. The 
Sask Party’s going to raise your taxes but they’re going to call it 
the P3 modelling deal. The Sask Party’s going to raise your 
taxes by selling off the Crowns and foregoing revenues. So no 
matter how you look at it — whether you call it taxes or 
increased utility rates or foregone revenues or expensive P3 
models or waste, waste, waste, as the member from Kindersley 
is often known in this Assembly for — well, Mr. Speaker, no 
matter how you cut it, the Sask Party couldn’t manage in the 
best of times. Stay tuned because the worst of times is coming 
around the corner, and you’re going to see the worst of the 
Saskatchewan Party and the conservative ilk that they represent, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:00] 
 
So once again I think what’s really important is that on this side 



32 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2016 

of the House, on this side of the House, we got some new 
members, Mr. Speaker. And I was very inspired to hear two of 
the members from Prince Albert and Regina speak up. There’s 
another one going to speak fairly soon. And I’m inspired, Mr. 
Speaker, because these are fighters. They’re going to fight for 
what is right in Saskatchewan. 
 
And what is right in Saskatchewan is that we take all people’s 
issues into consideration because this fight is about economic 
and social justice. It’s not about ideology and opportunity as 
shown by the Sask Party. And watch, learn, and listen, people, 
because the Saskatchewan Party are going to show their true 
colours, Mr. Speaker. They’ve got choices to make, they have 
choices to make, and those choices are going to be coming 
fairly clear over the next couple of days. 
 
And I encourage our people in the health care sector, I 
encourage the people in our education system, I encourage our 
people of the North to brace yourselves, Mr. Speaker, because 
these are the people that are going to come at you, and they’re 
going to show their true colours. And I think, Mr. Speaker, the 
people of Saskatchewan are not going to appreciate that as 
much as they’ve not appreciated being hoodwinked. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out in my closing comments 
that quite frankly as you look at how the Premier skirted the 
issue around the finances of the province — the waste, the 
expensive P3s, the list goes on — those bills are now coming 
due. Those bills are now coming due. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
bittersweet point that I would point out in the direction that the 
people of Saskatchewan chose — and I always respect the 
decision that the voters have chosen, Mr. Speaker — and I 
sense that they will soon find out that their trust and confidence 
was misplaced, that their trust and confidence was misplaced. 
So I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, that the people of Saskatchewan 
will be as patient next time. 
 
And that’s why I think the Premier is certainly assessing the 
situation of the land, and I think he’s made the suggestion that 
he’s going to heading out of Dodge. And I’m really sorry, Mr. 
Speaker, to see that primarily because he should be here when 
the times are tough, not be here just when the times are 
opportune for him to put on yet another announcement and to 
look good. Mr. Speaker, we in the Saskatchewan New 
Democrats want to be good, and that’s the biggest difference.  
 
So on that note, I move that . . . I want to second the 
amendment proposed by my colleague and my friend, the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana, and I hereby again second the 
motion. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Stonebridge-Dakota. 
 
Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and congratulations on 
your election. I support the Speech from the Throne and support 
the motion moved by the member for Saskatoon Westview and 
seconded by the member for Estevan. 
 
You get asked in this line of work whether this is what you 
always wanted to be. Did you always want to be a politician? In 
my case, it’s hard to say. When I was at ballet school in Toronto 
at 10 and in Winnipeg at 13, I dreamed of setting Stan Kenton 

to choreographic wonder. Or it was acting. When I was in 
musicals under the directorship of the wonderful Bob Hinitt in 
Saskatoon when I was young, or in plays in high school as 
Antigone or Gigi or a character called the richest girl in the 
world or as the third witch in Macbeth at university, yes, an 
actress I was sure was what I wanted to be. 
 
But then after university, well, the law, I wasn’t so sure that was 
my destiny, although I did make the mistake of not pursuing 
what I was truly interested in, legally speaking, in my heart, 
which was defence law. I chose a marine and insurance firm 
instead, but then came legal journalist and editor in London, 
Milan, and Frankfurt, columnist, broadcaster. Certainly the idea 
of being an investigative British broadsheet-type journalist or a 
foreign correspondent had always held great appeal. I loved 
teaching German at the U of S [University of Saskatchewan]. 
But slowly the pendulum to politics started to shift more 
formally: school board trustee candidate, MLA. 
 
The funny thing is not too long ago I found a little postscript in 
a diary entry from when I was around 14. It was from New 
Year’s Eve. In this case it was a bit like a resolution for the 
years to come and it said, I want to leave a public mark. And 
that continued through the years. I would write, I want to leave 
a public mark. And here I am in the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan, this beautiful building with its freshly clad 
copper dome, this proud institution, honoured to be here with 
all of you. 
 
My mother, Sigrid Eyre, came here with my grandfather when 
she was about eight, and she remembers him telling her that is 
the Speaker’s Chair. And the next time she came was to 
accompany me last spring when I was first introduced in this 
House, and of course again on Monday when I was sworn in. 
 
This legislature, as we know, was built between 1908 and 1912, 
roughly over the years my grandparents were born, all here in 
Saskatchewan, following their respective settlements in the 
Ituna, Tullymet, and Pelly areas by their parents, except for my 
maternal grandfather, Fred Klaus, who immigrated from 
Germany between the world wars in 1929. He landed in Halifax 
and took the train across the country to Odessa where he spent 
two years until the drought started to hit. So he decided to head 
northeast until, it’s been said, he hit green in the parkland area 
around Pelly. He cleared land north of town himself and went 
on to marry my grandmother, Ingeborg Raabel, the daughter of 
Norwegian settlers. And the young people moved into a 
homestead, then built a house together near Maybridge. 
 
This is where my mother and her brother Jon grew up and 
where I visited for several weeks every summer when I was 
young, which I count among my happiest memories. As my 
mother puts it, my grandfather farmed spring, summer, and fall 
and then read all winter, books he ordered from the Book of the 
Month Club or which he bought at sales or in a second-hand 
shop right here in Regina — wonderful histories and now rare 
editions of novels, which we still have. He was mayor of Pelly 
in the late 1960s, early ’70s, and he and my grandmother were 
influential in founding the Pelly museum which so tragically 
burned to the ground last summer. 
 
My Norwegian granny, his wife, was the most resourceful, busy 
person I have ever met. She could easily have been a teacher or 



May 18, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 33 

a nurse. She was very clever at math, but she gave up school 
without resentment after grade 11 to help her mother at home 
and to help bring up her eight siblings. I will always remember 
her with a pail attached to an extemporized belt of some 
leftover quilting material hanging from her waist as she picked 
berries from one of her three gardens. She knitted, quilted, 
thought nothing of baking for 12, and I always think it’s that 
generation that were the natural recyclers. No sour cream or 
milk container, let alone potato water, ever went to waste if my 
grandmother had anything to do with it. 
 
My other grandmother, Kay Eyre, born Jaworski, was equally 
resourceful. Born to Ukrainian-Polish émigré parents, she faced 
some degree of ethnic discrimination when she was young, 
which always stayed with her. She married, at 16, my 
grandfather Tom Eyre who taught in a teacherage around Ituna. 
Together, among other ventures, they would run a café in Red 
Deer, Alberta where she always said she worked the hardest she 
ever did, getting up early in the morning for example to bake 
bread and homemade pies. 
 
When my grandfather went overseas to serve as a spotter in 
Lancaster Bombers in World War II, she took hairdressing 
training in Saskatoon, and my father, Wayne, the youngest of 
three boys, was one of very few children at that time who was 
enrolled in day nursery at three so that she could work. And 
work she did. So much so that she would get what she called 
antsy on Sundays when she had a day off. She worked in her 
own hairdressing salon in the basement of the Senator hotel in 
Saskatoon until the day that she had a heart attack at age 82. 
Needless to say her ladies, as she called them, had all been 
getting a bit older and attracting new customers had come to be 
a bit of a challenge. 
 
I often think of my two grandmothers. They were a source of 
inspiration to me. I remember my Norwegian granny telling me 
that when she started school she could barely speak a word of 
English as they spoke only Norwegian at home, and yet she 
learned. Everyone picked it up, she said. That’s what you did. 
 
My other granny, the hairdresser, once told me that her own 
personal principle was that you should clean floors, anything, 
before ever accepting any variation of what she called relief. 
When her mother told her she couldn’t attend a chautauqua that 
was coming to town, which she had so wanted to when she was 
a little girl, she decided then and there that she would never 
from that day forward attend a chautauqua or any kind of fair 
ever. And she didn’t. That generation, the original recyclers and 
mighty tough guys, and some of that spirit I think we shouldn’t 
dismiss out of hand — the self-reliance, determination, 
individuality. It is what formed us. 
 
But of course the greatest formers of character are one’s 
parents, and mine are no exception. There’s so much to say 
about the three of us, but when I look back, what I remember 
most is the fun and the laughing and the talk, the endless talk, 
from mornings during summer holidays when my mother and I 
would get so carried away talking, we’d finally realize we 
actually had to be somewhere, until evening when my parents 
and I would often talk into the darkness. 
 
When we went on car trips, I would often sit on my mother’s 
lap in the front. Those were the days before car seats — retro 

parenting, as comedian Craig Ferguson once called it. And she 
would read poetry: Auden, Eliot, Lawrence, Thomas. Or we 
would play one of my dad’s jazz cassettes, of course, in those 
days. 
 
A lot of people like jazz or say they do, but my father is a true 
expert and a pretty tough critic. He went on a jazz tour at 18 
across the US [United States] on a Greyhound bus and saw 
many of the greats. Music from his old LPs [long-playing 
record] always filled our house: Julian Adderley, whom I would 
have been named after had I been a boy, Miles Davis, Maynard 
Ferguson, Dave Brubeck, Duke Ellington. 
 
Both my parents were true products of a liberal arts education, 
which is why I’ve always believed so much in the importance 
of it: both English — and in my mother’s case, English and 
history — majors, both high school teachers. My father also 
taught English at the U of S and went on to be a writer, editor. 
My mother was a lecturer in agriculture on campus for many 
years. 
 
They can both remember a line like that of Marvell’s or 
Donne’s or Browning’s. Or I just have to say to my mother, 
what was going on in France around 1569? And she will start to 
tell me, really tell me. It drives me crazy. All my life I’ve 
always felt I needed to self-improve because of them. Read 
more history. Read more poetry. Read more philosophy. And of 
course we always talked about politics. 
 
When I was really little, we’d put up an orange sign, but then 
my parents saw the light. I remember my mother taking me to a 
pretty rowdy Pierre Trudeau rally just to experience it in 
Convocation Hall at the U of S, and later to see Brian Mulroney 
speak at the Midtown mall. 
 
I grew up during those polarizing Reagan-Thatcher years so 
there was always lots of talk about William Buckley and the 
National Review, lots of talk. I remember one hot discussion 
about whether a younger Hillary Clinton should wear a crucifix 
as a fashion statement, or whether freedom of speech should 
extend to David Duke, or whether in Canada, the West should 
just separate when it seemed we would never really belong to 
the Canadian contract. 
 
I did a big interview when I edited The Sheaf on campus with 
renowned feminist Germaine Greer, who had come to speak. 
And although my parents didn’t agree with everything she said, 
I was pretty taken with a few of her points. And it was 
formative, as we were to say how many times, formative for all 
three of us. Talk, different perspectives, they’re always 
formative. And I’ve never understood why as a society we don’t 
do more real talking, why so often we tend to shut down or 
subvert the real exchange of ideas. 
 
As the iconic Margaret Laurence writes, “What’s the matter 
with us, that we can’t talk? How can anyone know unless they 
say? How come we feel it’s indecent?” 
 
Another Canadian, Pierre Berton, once said that people were 
always telling him, you can’t say that, and you can’t say that. 
“Why not?” he asked. 
 
And I’ve always challenged myself and tried to challenge others 



34 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2016 

by asking that simple question. You can always do it elegantly. 
You can always do it with wit. 
 
At any rate, my parents encouraged me always to stand my 
ground, stand up for myself, argue from the thesis, avoid cliché, 
never let my French get rusty, and never make a grammatical 
mistake. 
 
Speaking of politics, I did run for academic VP [vice-president] 
of the USSU [University of Saskatchewan Students’ Union] on 
campus against a fellow who, I recall, had the residence vote 
wrapped up as he had lived in residence for something like 12 
years. I lost. It was an early blow. I came second. I remember 
the act of handing out campaign flyers to students as they 
descended the Arts escalator — a strange experience 
foreshadowing of so many more to come. Meanwhile the only 
ones who got my attempt at copying Kim Campbell’s law gown 
off-the-shoulder pose were students in Law. I won that college. 
 
[16:15] 
 
I can’t leave off the personal before acknowledging my 
husband, Richard, and my darling 11-year-old son, Max. He 
puts everything into perspective. He is so full of ideas and 
projects and elaborate plans. Right now he tells me he’ll either 
be a chemist or a comedy script writer. And his utter carpe diem 
approach to life is a constant source of joy and inspiration to 
me. I couldn’t be prouder of him. And he’s into politics, so the 
chain continues. I’ve always liked Truman Capote’s line, 
“There is no one love, only a chain of love. And with children, 
that chain goes on.” 
 
When I decided to run in the brand new constituency of 
Stonebridge-Dakota, we had lived in Stonebridge for just over a 
year. From our house on Whalley Crescent, you could see all 
the way to the “Saskatoon Shines” sign on Highway 11. That 
was in 2011. There was more dirt than houses. No more. The 
Stonebridge neighbourhood has expanded, as we all know, into 
one of the most booming areas in Saskatoon. It includes 
residential, of course, but also substantial retail development. A 
brand new joint-use school is opening there next fall, which 
really completes the community. 
 
And Highway 16 is being twinned to Clavet, thus radically 
improving on an important commercial commuter connector. 
The constituency of Stonebridge-Dakota is a dynamic mix of 
urban and rural. It includes the RMs [rural municipality] of 
southern and eastern Corman Park, Blucher, Dundurn, and the 
southern part of the RM of Aberdeen, as well as the Willows 
and a portion of Briarwood in the city. 
 
Some of my favourite spots in the constituency, along with 
Stonebridge itself of course, which is home, include some 
amazing vistas. The high rises of land for example, south of 
Aberdeen with the views of the city — at night they’re 
absolutely beautiful. Or driving north toward Dundurn from the 
Indi Road with the Blackstrap Valley spreading out to the right. 
Or the views out of back windows of homes in southeast 
Briarwood, Beechmont View, for example, that overlook as I 
understand it the old road to Regina. Pure prairie beauty. 
 
As far as the nomination and campaign go, it’s been a process 
of almost two years. Along the way I have met and worked with 

some amazingly committed people, many of whom I now count 
as friends. So many to mention in so many varied, important 
roles, some as mentors and others givers of excellent advice: 
Harold Lane, Jim Kerby, Brent Banda, Kevin Hill, Senator 
David Tkachuk, Garry Benning, the Huckles, Mark Brayford, 
Garry Derenoski, the Minister of Education. 
 
And of course my wonderful volunteer Chairs during the 
campaign, Robin Dunlop and her husband Marlo, and my 
all-around amazing aficionado Carrie Zdunich, who is now my 
CA. There were so many volunteers who helped out in and 
from the campaign office, answering phones, phone banking, 
door knocking, from my great stalwart Doug Renwick — we 
covered a lot of road — and Tony Lalonde to Betty Anne 
Stevenson, Arlaine Moe, Audrey Crosson, Joan Grozell, Trevor 
Hannay, Murray Helmer, Ian Rowswell, Robin Mowat, and the 
Kvellos. And that’s not everyone. I hope I didn’t leave out a 
single person from volunteer to donor when I sent out 350 or so 
personal thank yous a few weeks ago. But Carrie put the list 
together, so I doubt it. 
 
I am proud to represent beautiful Stonebridge-Dakota and to 
serve with this government under Premier Brad Wall who, as I 
said repeatedly during the recent campaign, has given 
Saskatchewan such a can-do pride of place in this country. And 
so begins a new chapter, a new adventure, so many new 
challenges, and I am so excited. I’ve made a list, being me, of 
all the issues I hope to address during these next four years, and 
I will never forget what people at the door said they were 
actually voting for me for, which is to uphold and stand up for 
common sense. And I will do that to the best of my ability. I 
hope only to honourably and decisively leave my public mark. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always 
a privilege to enter into the debate with respect to the Throne 
Speech. Firstly, I’d like to congratulate all members of the 
Assembly on both sides of the House, the returning members 
and the new members, for their successful election campaigns 
that they experienced on April 4th. 
 
And I also want to congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, on your 
election as Speaker to the Assembly and to thank you for your 
future rulings as I believe your presence will continue to 
contribute to our democratic process that we believe in with 
integrity and fairness. So congratulations. I welcome your 
leadership in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
I would also like to thank the member from Cannington for his 
years of service as Speaker of the Saskatchewan legislature, and 
thank him for his mentorship and his leadership. 
 
Now as is customary, I wish to humbly thank the constituents of 
Saskatchewan Rivers for once again re-electing me and 
believing in me for a third mandate. Their trust has encouraged 
me to do my best. We’ve had many Saskatchewan people 
involved in the various political parties putting their names 
forth as candidates, and I thank them all for their contributions 
to our democracy in this great province of Saskatchewan. 
 



May 18, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 35 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to acknowledge my campaign team 
who worked so hard to be successful. There was Marcus, the 
two Lindas, Cora, Norm, and Brigitt, along with all the other 
countless volunteers who gave of their time, what time they 
could. I offer my gratitude for their encouragement and the 
chance to serve once again in this House. 
 
A big thank you to my husband and our four grown adult 
children for their ongoing support and love. Even the 
grandchildren were working with our team of supporters out 
there with Grandma, knocking on doors. They are in a big part 
why I continue to serve in this province, keeping Saskatchewan 
strong for our future generations. I believe the public responded 
to our past history and this platform that we have implemented, 
and will continue to do so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve reflected on the past election and the previous 
elections before that. We spent every moment we could on the 
farm gates of our riding in this province, making our case for a 
renewed mandate to serve once again in keeping Saskatchewan 
strong. 
 
We concluded we did benefit from good fortune and planning 
in our first term, so we also approached it as a job interview on 
our second election in 2011, and we did so again in 2016 with 
an attitude of humility and servitude. So I say, Mr. Speaker, to 
the people of my constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers and to 
the people of this great province, thank you. We are going to 
work hard to earn your trust once more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, throne speeches are important to each one of us 
members. They are one of the two times annually when every 
Member of the Legislative Assembly stands up to thank their 
loved ones and their constituents. We discuss the issues of 
importance to them and their respective ridings. This is where 
we make decisions and laws to make sure we benefit the 
citizens, the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
With respect to the substance of the Throne Speech, the best 
thing was the debate by the people of this province. They chose 
our platform, our vision, and our unwavering sight to continue 
to keep our economic growth strong. I quote from the Speech 
from the Throne: 
 

These important infrastructure investments by ministries 
and Crowns will total $3.6 billion this year — a record 
investment that will help meet the needs of a growing 
province, facilitate our growth plan and create jobs and 
opportunities that will keep Saskatchewan strong. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that volunteers were created to help 
humanity. They do the good work with the resources they have, 
with the best of their abilities, and with generosity. The 
Saskatchewan spirit lies in the souls of those generous acts of 
volunteerism that strengthen our communities. They work with 
joy, they work with enthusiasm, and they work without benefit 
of payment for service of others. Our greatest strength in our 
province is our people, the people in our communities we call 
home. 
 
Just recently I was honoured to help present 10 citizens of 
Saskatchewan the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal for this very 
work. Ms. Jeannette Eddolls was the recipient of this award. 

She also lives in the constituency that I represent. I was very, 
very humbled to listen to the bios of these generous people who 
live in our communities. These are very rewarding and selfless 
acts that drove home to me our countless volunteers who work 
hard and invest in our province and our economy. Our rich 
history of the province demonstrates the willingness of the 
people to shape their communities into welcoming places to 
live, to raise their families, and to work. 
 
The specifics of the Throne Speech address these visions and 
goals that our province and our government has, Mr. Speaker: 
communities like Big River where our government invested a 
94 per cent increase in revenue sharing to ensure that their 
community benefits and keeps Saskatchewan strong, or Candle 
Lake, who received 115 per cent increase since we formed 
government in 2007. 
 
As a Human Services Committee member, I’m eager to discuss 
the organ transplant and donor issue with respect to the Throne 
Speech. We will listen, and then we will make 
recommendations on how to increase the donor rate in our 
province that will enable our friends, our neighbours, and our 
families to have a better quality of life. How many of us have 
signed our own donor cards in a selfless act to help someone in 
need? It’s something to think about and ponder, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Standing up for others’ interests, especially Saskatchewan’s 
interests, has always been the Saskatchewan way, and our 
government will continue to attract new investment while 
fulfilling its commitments to helping seniors and children 
through important improvements to health care, long-term care 
homes, and the graduate retention program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 2004 our party presented an economic paper for 
the province called The Promise of Saskatchewan. It was a 
paper promising new policies, the development of a platform 
proposed by the people of Saskatchewan offering promises to 
grow Saskatchewan. This came from a broad and sweeping 
review of all party in the province beyond the membership of 
the party. One financial business writer wrote our plan was 
pragmatic and visionary, ambitious and achievable. I believe 
the Throne Speech demonstrates our history as well as our 
visionary future. I will always prefer the challenges of growth 
to the challenges of decline. Saying that, Mr. Speaker, I vote in 
favour of the Throne Speech and oppose the amendment. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I 
start off, I would also like to congratulate all of the people that 
won their respective elections. Also I’d give a note of gratitude 
to anybody that put their name forward to run during the 
election. There is a lot of great people, and there was only 51 
that could be elected. We appreciate the efforts of all of them 
and congratulations to the ones that were successful here for the 
reasons that they put in the work. And I too would like to 
congratulate you on electing as Speaker of the House. We know 
you will uphold the tradition in fine style and we look forward 
to this term. 
 
[16:30] 
 



36 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2016 

Mr. Speaker, thinking back and going back to thank some of the 
people that were helpful in my re-election in Moose Jaw North 
. . . And like everywhere else, you don’t do this alone. You do it 
with your family. You do it with a lot of volunteers and a lot of 
help. And I would like to thank Christopher Thresher and Ron 
Hardy who headed up my campaign and did an admirable job of 
organizing and knowing the community in some respects and 
knowing the procedures in the other. So the two of them 
worked very well together and led to a lot of good work that 
went very well in every aspect. 
 
We also had a number of volunteers in door knocking that went 
out and did a lot of work with the volunteers of door knocking, 
for putting up signs. Our sign campaign people were very 
diligent in getting the signs, the frames erected for the bigger 
signs, having the position. And within hours of the call of the 
election, these people were out and had the signs in place. 
 
And it was unfortunate that early on in the campaign there was 
some vandalism of the signs that really kind of took a lot of 
wind out of a lot of people with the disgusting effort. But our 
sign people were very quickly to get up, and the only thing we 
had to hold them back a little to get the press a little opportunity 
to take pictures and make a news story out of it. And what 
looked like it could be something that was very negative in our 
campaign ended up being front page news and leading the 
newscasts every hour on the hour the next day. And although 
nobody was committed or got charged for doing the vandalism, 
Facebook and social media were not that kind to those kind of 
people. And words that I won’t repeat in the House, but it really 
kind of showed the people that did the vandalism the true spirit 
of what is meant with the election campaign. If you go against 
. . . You may not agree with something, but at least you have to 
respect the process. And I think that really showed up. 
 
I’d also like to thank the member for Lumsden-Morse and the 
member from Wakamow for our three constituencies to work 
together with a common campaign headquarters. It showed a 
unity between us and worked well with volunteers, with 
signage, with visibility and profile in the community. 
 
And like everybody else, you really have to have your family 
behind you to work on this. And I can’t say enough about my 
family. My son took some time off work to help with the 
election campaign. My two daughters who live in Moose Jaw 
were very diligent in helping out as far as putting up signs, to 
helping door knock, to doing meals and getting food prepared. 
And I tell the story about us, my wife and I, out campaigning 
and door knocking for hours, days on end. And one night we 
returned home about . . . It was well after dark, only to find out 
that our house was broken into and our fridge was filled with 
food. So we knew the kids were there. And it was certainly a 
nice touch to have and to have a little bit of a laugh about it. 
 
You know, I can’t say enough about my wife, my partner for 
life, and the dedication she had to the cause of the campaign 
and to the election, somebody that I would have never guessed 
in knowing her as well as I do that she would be as outgoing 
and be as committed to the door knocking and campaigning as 
she was. But she certainly was with me step by step all the way, 
and I can’t thank her enough and speak highly enough about the 
effort that she put into it. 
 

I know one particular day we worked all day and started with an 
interview on the local radio station and then you know, during 
the day, I felt I was a little bit kind of hungry. And she was 
going in one way and I was going the other. We met up and I 
says, you know, we should stop and have something to eat. And 
here it was 4:30 in the afternoon. We hadn’t stopped for lunch. 
And I think that’s the same with most of the people around 
here, that you just get caught up doing what you really believe 
in and what is right, and you just continue on. 
 
And other than that, there are 4,424 other people in Moose Jaw 
North that I’d like to thank because of their commitment to the 
Saskatchewan Party, their support in me, and their confidence 
in me for the third time. And coming from an election in 2007 
where we won by a majority of 33 votes, to go the route we did 
and to have the support and the understanding of the people of 
Moose Jaw North, thank you, thank you so much for the 
confidence and your reaffirmation of the Saskatchewan Party 
and me as your representative there. 
 
In the last two terms when we look at Moose Jaw, the previous 
16 years Moose Jaw really hadn’t done much. Their claim to 
fame by the former member who I took his place was that 
Moose Jaw had the nicest looking Liquor Board store in 
Saskatchewan, and he’s probably right. But that’s not much of 
an achievement in 16 years of being representative of the area. 
 
So Moose Jaw really had nowhere to go but up. And we did a 
lot of things. The Mosaic Place is a big entertainment centre, 
have attracted a lot of concerts as well as being home to the 
Moose Jaw Warriors. We have Yara Place, which is an indoor 
track that again came after we had formed government. And our 
biggest achievement of course was the new Moose Jaw Hospital 
that was opened up last October. With it is an MRI [magnetic 
resonance imaging] that added to the services that can be 
provided through the hospital in Moose Jaw. And we appreciate 
the efforts that we’ve put into it, and the community come 
around to raise their share of the funding for the hospital. 
There’s a few start-up problems for sure, as getting things 
organized, but I’m confident that those are being worked on and 
moving forward, and we have a very fine facility to look after 
Moose Jaw and the Five Hills Health Region. 
 
As we look at what we’ve achieved as a government, looking 
forward and even looking backward, but looking forward, it 
really affirms the reason that I got into politics in the first place. 
And I remember thinking that Saskatchewan, being 
Saskatchewan, could be so much more than we were — a 
have-not province with almost half of the agricultural land, with 
mining, with uranium, with potash, with forestry. And to be a 
have-not province was just not right. That was kind of the 
inspiration that got me involved in politics the first time. 
 
Looking back at the last two terms that I served, I believe that I 
was entirely right, that Saskatchewan is much more than it was 
under the former government, and doing well. And as we look 
at things, the province has moved forward so much. I wish my 
mom and dad were alive today to see the province they loved 
and worked very hard through those farming years, the pioneer 
years, and existing in this province and always hoping for more 
and better. And we’ve reached that. And there’s more to do and 
there’s much more, but as the Premier says, our best days are 
still ahead of us. And I truly believe that and I think the people 



May 18, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 37 

on this side of the House believe that as well and we’ll work 
toward those ends. 
 
The strong and diversity of our economy continues to attract 
new investment and new ways of life in this province. We look 
at our manufacturing industry that has boomed over the last few 
years. And being the Legislative Secretary for manufacturing, 
I’ve visited dozens of them and seen what they have. I’ve 
looked at the challenges they face, and bringing them back and 
trying to work toward answers and toward better ways to get 
them for their investment and attract more people, more 
investment, and improve the economy and move forward. 
 
You know, the people of Saskatchewan like Saskatchewan. The 
people of Canada like Saskatchewan. The people of the world 
like Saskatchewan because we have what they want. The 
strength of the people that live in here and work in here and 
continue to see the promise of a future is remarkable when you 
think for the province that we love and is now being led by a 
Premier that understands the challenges and continues to be 
somebody that’s humbly carrying, moving forward, and doing 
the things that make Saskatchewan great. 
 
I took exception when the member from Saskatoon Nutana was 
talking about the Saskatchewan Party government: they’re 
overpromised and underdelivered. And I thought, you know, 
how can you say that after the past eight years of real growth 
and real prosperity in this province, especially when under their 
party there was 156 schools that were closed and 52 hospitals 
were closed? And here’s a government that is building schools 
and building hospitals and expanding our economic activity to 
make this a better place. 
 
Under the NDP, our major export was our people. There was 
major out-migration. And another big thing they did was with 
their legislation against the potash industry that caused a 
company like K+S to actually move out of the country. Well 
they’re back. They’re building north of Moose Jaw. Next year 
they’ll be on stream as the newest potash mine in 
Saskatchewan, and likely the CEO [chief executive officer] of 
K+S says, we’re not leaving this time. So it’s good to have that 
kind of mentality, that kind of thinking that will move our 
province forward. 
 
People like the idea of lower taxes for individuals, for families, 
for homeowners, and for businesses. And that’s what this party 
has done. That’s what this government has done as far as 
putting people first and making a better place for people to live 
here. Our government believes in young people and has made 
every effort they can to keep them in the province, to keep them 
going to school or to start in careers of their own, to raising 
their families, and creating jobs and ultimately growing our 
economy. 
 
The program, the graduation retention is one of the best 
programs across the country for youth retention, and it really 
works, Mr. Speaker. There are 58,000 people, young people 
that have taken advantage of that. And in this Throne Speech 
it’s gone one step further, that they can now use part of that 
now to . . . the graduation retention has been improved to allow 
them to use up to $10,000 toward purchasing their new home. 
Isn’t that a great opportunity when the price of housing . . . 
because the economy has improved. And now here’s an 

opportunity for young people to actually start their own home, 
and the Government of Saskatchewan will help them do that. 
 
I think the people like the idea that the revenue-sharing increase 
for municipalities has more than doubled. In Moose Jaw, we 
went from $2.8 million to $7.1 million. But right now there’s a 
lot of controversy in Moose Jaw about the replacement of the 
water mains. And I know that $4.3 million that they now get 
from the government that they never got before is certainly a 
welcome asset to helping the city move forward and replace 
some of the water mains and the other things that the 
municipality is responsible for. 
 
We have record investment in infrastructure, improvements in 
education. We’ve built schools. We’re building schools, 18 
more schools. We’ve renovated dozens of schools, and in 
Moose Jaw, we’ve got schools that have been renovated and 
upgraded. 
 
Our health care system with this government has improved the 
waiting list from the worst in the country to the best, the fastest 
in the country. And we’re not finished yet; we still want to do 
more. We want to improve the wait times even more, bring 
them down. And part of the Throne Speech talks about the CT 
scanning program that will increase the number of scans that 
can be taken by using the private sector, as it did with the MRI, 
and will make our wait times even less. 
 
We look at highways, the record highway investment that this 
government has made and will continue to do so, the record 
investment in new highways with the highways 2020 plan 
which will invest $2.7 billion over the next four years. With 
better highways we can increase our economic development 
because we’ll have . . . As a landlocked province, we have to 
rely on transportation to get our products and services to our 
manufacturing units and to our markets. That’s why we need 
highways. We need improved highways, and we’ve constantly 
kept improving the highways of Saskatchewan. We’ll continue 
to do so, which will be safer, which will be more efficient, and 
it will create jobs. And because it’s creating jobs in the sector of 
resource development and agriculture, that’s all-new creation of 
jobs, growing the economy of Saskatchewan and increasing as 
we grow stronger. So we will continue to have a strong and 
diversified economy in agriculture, in manufacturing, in 
mining, and research. 
 
The new tax incentive, the patent box tax incentive, is a great 
idea. Why wouldn’t we do this? It’s a great incentive for people 
to patent ideas. So it’s not only encouraging people that do the 
manufacturing and the processing now, but it also encourages 
people to invest in Saskatchewan so that their patents can be 
processed in a timely manner with the tax incentive. 
 
[16:45] 
 
And that takes us to the home-based food processing to sell 
directly to the consumers and retailers. Again, what a great 
concept. It’s the Saskatchewan way to have these kinds of 
processing done by people that start little manufacturers and 
processing of food. And I think of Emmy Barr, the Queen of 
Caramel, which many of you have met either in the legislature a 
couple of years when she was here, or just because of the 
product. Now here’s a little entrepreneur that has to have a 



38 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2016 

commercial kitchen to do her product. Why would that be 
necessary? Yes, there has to be regulations and inspections and 
that. But here’s a little entrepreneur with an idea that can grow 
and blossom. 
 
And I mention K+S, and I know K+S didn’t start as a 
multi-million dollar corporation at one time. Somewhere it 
started as a small idea and grew accordingly. That’s what we 
would expect from some of the food producers, and that’s why 
we have put this home-based food producing, allowing them to 
produce food products in their homes and sold it accordingly to 
markets directly from their home. 
 
We’ve reduced the red tape. We’ve opened and expanded new 
markets. And another thing that Saskatchewan is doing very 
well — our Premier is leading us in this — is working within 
Canada to promote Saskatchewan, to lower interprovincial trade 
barriers, not only in Canada but around the world. 
 
My son-in-law is an exporter and does a lot of marketing in 
peas, split peas to India and to Pakistan. And without those 
trade missions that the Premier has led, we wouldn’t have those 
kinds of markets. So it’s something that we have to look at. And 
it’s something that’s good to see in the Speech from the Throne, 
that this kind of investment will continue, this kind of energy 
will continue as we move forward. 
 
Investment into skills training, like the Saskatchewan 
Polytechnic, I can’t say enough. I know there’s more to be 
done. We’ve taken some great steps in developing it into a 
Saskatchewan Polytechnic, to develop that workforce that is so 
much needed here in Saskatchewan. 
 
We have moved a long way in health as far as waiting times, 
the number of doctors, the number of nurses that we’ve 
acquired, the MRI expansion, and now the CT scanning. The 
innovation remote technology to deliver better health care in 
northern Saskatchewan, the pilot project seems to be working 
well. And with the commitment to provide an additional 
$500,000 to remote communities in northern Saskatchewan, I 
think that’s very powerful. It’s good to see it continuing and 
improving. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve gone along for some time, and there’s 
certainly much more to say about the seniors’ care, about the 
tripling of the seniors’ income plan that we’ve done, the 
replacement of 500 long-term beds. In the Speech from the 
Throne, our government will redirect health regional savings 
from administrative reductions. And those administrative 
reduction savings will go to improve seniors’ care by hiring 
more registered nurses, more licensed practical nurses, and care 
aids in long-term care facilities. I think that’s an important part. 
And as we go one step further, we will assist seniors in 
remaining in their homes, to allow them to defer their education 
portion of their property tax. And that’s important, again to 
keep seniors in their homes as long as they can. 
 
As I reach the end of my remarks . . . And one more thing that I 
think is very important is the end-of-life care that is an issue, 
and can become very personal and very important to those who 
are in their final stages of life, but not only just for them but for 
their family and the loved ones that get so emotionally involved 
with care and compassion. And that’s such a critical time of life 

and it’s such an important time to be calm and to have that 
assurance that you can be around those ones that you love and 
to take care of them. 
 
So it’s time that we’ve extended that eligibility to 28 weeks of 
leave, and it’s perhaps overdue. And I’m most grateful that this 
government has thought of the plan to move forward on that 
very item. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne is very powerful. It’s 
very strong. It will move the province forward and continue 
Saskatchewan to be a leader in most aspects of our economic 
development and our place in Canada. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
appreciate the opportunity to speak. I will not support the 
amendment but, Mr. Speaker, I will support the motion on the 
Speech from the Throne. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to 
congratulate you on getting elected as the Speaker. I would also 
like to congratulate Deputy Speaker from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood constituency, and thank you to my 
colleagues for their gracious welcome and remarks. 
 
It is a great privilege to be here today to represent my 
constituency and to provide some opening remarks in this 
Chamber. I am truly humbled and honoured to be appearing 
here among my colleagues who have made a positive impact in 
our great province, especially the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to believe it’s been only a month since I 
was re-elected. Mr. Speaker, with this title comes great 
responsibility, and I will work hard to fulfill this role and serve 
all of the constituents, not only the ones that voted for me but 
everyone in Saskatoon Meewasin, and as well all the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have so many people to thank for helping me 
along this path to get re-elected. Mr. Speaker, I would like to, 
first and for the most important people in my campaign, and 
that is my family. Mr. Speaker, I want to thank my wife, Sheila, 
who door knocked with me every evening after she got off 
work. In my opinion, she worked harder than anyone, as she 
worked at her job from 7 a.m. until 4 every day and then came 
to my campaign office to door knock with me for three to four 
hours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, next I want to thank my daughter Shanaya, who 
came to the campaign office daily with my now 10-month-old 
grandson Nash, who always puts a smile on my face, and I can 
always get him to smile. Mr. Speaker, my daughter’s fiancé also 
came every day after work, Kyle Klassen, and we all went out 
door knocking. If it was nice enough for Nash to be out riding 
in his wagon, he would come with us. Otherwise three of us 
would go out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank all the people who helped 
me out in our campaign office. Brent Penner was our campaign 
manager and did a wonderful job making sure that daily things 
were done. Gwen Joa, who was there every day with her 
beautiful dog Annie. Mr. Speaker, let me tell you, we ate like 
kings as Gwen cooked us nightly meals after we were done 



May 18, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 39 

door knocking. And, Mr. Speaker, usually during a writ I lose 5 
to 10 pounds from poor eating and lots of walking. Mr. 
Speaker, this writ I gained 5 to 10 pounds even though I door 
knocked all the time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have lots of others to thank who were in the 
office doing all the chores that are required during a campaign. 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank Jill Joa, Barb Martin, Gary 
Thiesen, Susan McDonald, who were in the office almost every 
day, also in the office helping Barb Martin and Elaine Petersen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, next I would like to thank all the people who came 
out and door knocked with me during this campaign. All the 
people who came from other constituencies and helped out was 
very appreciated. And from my constituency, Tim Steuart, 
Maddie Merta, Tim Merta, Barry Jones, Carl Friske, the 
member from Biggar-Saskatchewan Valley, Senator David 
Tkachuk, Kevin Waugh, Tim Thoen, Chad Poitras, Randy 
Donauer, Lauren Donauer, Pam Donauer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, next I would like to thank the lawn sign dynamic 
duo of Ed Hudson and Jack Wilson who were out no matter 
what the weather was like putting up lawn signs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank our e-day team who spent 
the better part of the day being my runners, for instance 
Zachariah Merta and Joshua Merta. And of course, Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to thank all the scrutineers that I had that 
worked for me that day: Wendy Richards, Rick Ellson, Murray 
Blanch, Bryan Sly, Cody Wheler, Sheree Sawatsky, Les Bitz, 
Marguarita Wiggins, Cherene Assman, Brian Assman, Randy 
Donauer, Lauren Donauer, Barry Jones, Rosane Jones, Lisa 
Rogalski, James Richardson, Barb Tymchak, Tim Merta, 
Sharmaine Merta, Ty Hamil, Barb Martin, Tim Thoen, Ed 
Hudson, and Jack Hudson. 
 
Mr. Speaker, keeping Saskatchewan strong is very important to 
this party. Keeping the province’s finances strong, keeping 
Saskatchewan’s position in Canada strong by always standing 
up for Saskatchewan’s interests, Mr. Speaker, keeping 
promises. 
 
Mr. Speaker, starting this year and over the next three years, 
government will fix more highways through a 70 million surge 
in highway repair and maintenance. This is part of a new 
highways 2020 plan to invest 2.7 billion in highways and 
transportation capital over the next four years. Mr. Speaker, 
government will continue to move forward on many other 
important infrastructure projects such as schools, hospitals, 
long-term care facilities, the Regina bypass, using both 
traditional funding models and P3s. These important 
infrastructure investments by ministers and Crowns will total 
3.6 billion this year, a record investment. 
 
Keeping our economy strong, Mr. Speaker. From January 1st, 
2006 to January 1st, 2016, Saskatchewan grew by 150,000 
people, or 15 per cent, the strongest sustained period of growth 
since the earliest days of the province. Compared to January 
1st, ’96 to January 1st, 2006, Saskatchewan population dropped 
by nearly 24,000 people as thousands left the province to pursue 
opportunities elsewhere. Mr. Speaker, government will consult 
with industry on the establishment of a new growth tax 
incentive. Mr. Speaker, the new patent box tax incentive is 

designed to create jobs and investment through an advantageous 
tax rate for the commercialization and patents of intellectual 
property right here in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this session government will be introducing 
legislative amendments to remove the Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority from the Crown corporations ownership Act. 
This change will be part of a campaign commitment to convert 
40 government-owned liquor stores to private stores, adding 12 
new private liquor stores and create a level playing field for 
liquor retailers in the province and provide more choice, more 
convenience, more competitive pricing for Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a better quality of life. Over the past eight years, a 
growing economy has enabled government to reduce surgical 
wait-lists to the point that in 2015 Saskatchewan had the 
shortest wait times in Canada. Again, this is a complete reversal 
of the previous decade which saw Saskatchewan with the 
longest surgical wait times in Canada. The dramatic turnaround 
from the longest to the shortest surgical wait times has been due 
to, in part, government’s decision to allow private surgeries 
within the public-funded system. Mr. Speaker, government will 
expand this innovative approach to launch a remote technology 
pilot project to deliver better health care to Pelican Narrows in 
northern Saskatchewan. Our government will fulfill its 
commitment to provide an additional 500,000 a year to expand 
this innovative technology to remote areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, standing up for Saskatchewan. It is troubling that 
today there are some in the country who would, given 
opportunity, would shut down major parts of Saskatchewan’s 
economy and put thousands of hard-working Saskatchewan 
people out of work, all in the name of some misguided dogma 
that has no basis in reality. Our government . . . Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. I support the Throne Speech. 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 5 p.m., this Assembly stands 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................................9 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................... 10 
  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 10 
  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................... 10 
  Cheveldayoff ................................................................................................................................................................................ 10 
  Steinley ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 10 
  Sproule ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 10 
  Fiaz ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 10 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 10 
  Forbes .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 11 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Keeping Saskatchewan Strong 
  Bradshaw ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 11 
 Role of the Official Opposition 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................... 11 
 Fort McMurray Fire 
  Young ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 11 
 Broadcaster Inducted Into Hall of Fame 
  Forbes .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 12 
 Unveiling of the Legislative Building Dome 
  Fiaz ............................................................................................................................................................................................... 12 
 Adoption of the Saskatchewan Flag  
  Marit ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 12 
 Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal Recipient 
  Hargrave ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 13 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Wildfire Management 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................... 13 
  Wall .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 13 
 Tabling of Budget 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................... 14 
  Wall .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 14 
 Funding for Education 
  Beck .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 14 
  Morgan ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 14 
 Crisis Services for Prince Albert 
  Rancourt ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 15 
  Duncan ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 15 
 Global Transportation Hub 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................... 16 
  Wyant ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 16 
  Wall .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 16 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
ELECTION OF DEPUTY SPEAKER 
  Clerk ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 17 
  Hart .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 17 
MOTIONS 
 Appointment of Deputy Chair of Committees 
  Cheveldayoff ................................................................................................................................................................................ 18 
 Legislature Sitting Days 
  Cheveldayoff ................................................................................................................................................................................ 18 
SPECIAL ORDER 
ADDRESS IN REPLY 
  Buckingham ................................................................................................................................................................................ 19 
  Carr .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 21 
  Sproule ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 23 
  Belanger ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 28 
  Eyre .............................................................................................................................................................................................. 32 
  Wilson .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 34 
  Michelson ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 35 
  Parent ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 38 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


