






















































Hansard: November 02, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 35A  WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (Ind.) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10; Independent (Ind.) — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1085 
 November 2, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — To all members, I’ve got a special 
introduction today. We’re lucky, or I’m lucky to have in my 
gallery, my mother-in-law, Zoria. If you would give a quick 
wave. Zoria and Bernie have been great supporters of me 
throughout my endeavours in politics, and I’m very appreciative 
of the support and love. Without them, I couldn’t do this job, 
especially now with our two young sons at home. Zoria has 
been a huge help in making that possible for me to serve down 
here in the Assembly, and I’m so appreciative of her support 
and care for our two boys, Jacob and James, that affectionately 
call her nana. And we’ll be showing Jacob and James the 
proceedings here soon enough. So I would like to thank her for 
coming down. 
 
And also with Zoria are a couple of her brothers and sisters. 
Melvin Moroz, give us a wave. We got to know Melvin a 
couple of years ago when he had a little bit of a fall and he 
spent some time at Zoria’s house recovering. And very 
appreciative, it was right around Christmastime and it was a 
special time of year to see him recover. And I’m very grateful 
for Melvin to be here today. 
 
Also with us is Leonard Moroz and Donna Moroz, and then 
Gordon Wolitski and Janice Klisowsky. They were lucky 
enough to join us today; they did a quick tour of the Assembly. 
And I’m very honoured for them to be here in their Assembly. 
So would all members please join me in welcoming them to 
their Assembly. 
 
I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
have a request of the House and of the Speaker to move a 
motion. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has asked 
leave to introduce a special motion. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Motion to Authorize Interpretation 
From the Chamber Floor 

 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker: 
 

By leave of the Assembly 
 
That members be authorized to address the Syrian refugee 
guests in the gallery and simultaneously be permitted, and 

that language interpretation be permitted on the floor of the 
Chamber to speak for the interpretation for our Syrian 
guests [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has made a 
special motion. We’ll take it as read. To the members: all those 
in favour? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Bring in our guest please, Sergeant. 
 
[Mr. Ziad Al-Husseini took his place on the floor of the 
Chamber to provide interpretation services.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
[Mr. Al-Husseini provided interpretation in Arabic throughout 
the following remarks.] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very, very much, Mr. Speaker, 
to members for leave for this special occasion. And may I make 
the first introduction be of our translator, Ziad. Welcome here 
and thank you for the services you will provide the members 
and our guests in the gallery. I think he deserves an advanced 
warm congratulations.  
 
I’m going to be mindful of consecutive translation, to be fair to 
the translator, and also so that our guests may understand how 
warmly they are welcomed here today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, joining us today in your gallery are 90 newcomers 
to Saskatchewan from Syria. They are accompanied today by 
representatives from the Regina Open Door Society and the 
Regina Adult Campus. Other groups that we need to 
acknowledge who’ve been a part of the settlement include the 
Saskatoon Open Door Society, Global Gathering Place, Moose 
Jaw multicultural centre — these are universal words, Mr. 
Speaker — and the Prince Albert YWCA [Young Women’s 
Christian Association]. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are so very, very grateful for our guests today. 
We’re very, very grateful for all of those who have worked in 
these agencies to make the settlement a success and our guests, 
our newcomers, feel welcome. 
 
Saskatchewan originally committed to take our per capita share 
of the newcomers to Canada, which would have been roughly 
850. But these 90 newcomers and guests to our Assembly — to 
their Assembly — are representative of actually 1,236 Syrian 
refugees that have been welcomed in the province of 
Saskatchewan over the last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 5 million people have fled Syria. The world’s 
response to this crisis has been imperfect but still generous. 
Today we acknowledge those that have made it happen with 
respect to the government refugees, but also to non-government 
agencies and churches across Saskatchewan who have also been 
a part of the effort. 
 



1086 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2016 

I would say to our newcomers . . . And I notice one newcomer, 
I believe, has a Saskatchewan Roughrider shirt on, so the 
settlement is happening smoothly. Mr. Speaker, unless we stand 
here today in this Assembly as a First Nation or someone of 
Aboriginal descent, then we are all newcomers. We are all the 
sons or the grandsons or the great-granddaughters of 
immigrants. 
 
These last few years have been terribly traumatic for our guests, 
especially these last few months of great change. They need to 
know that others have gone before them and faced similar 
challenges. And our province is richer for it, and so are those 
that came anew to the province. 
 
The motto of our province is “from many peoples, strength.” It 
is on full display today, not just with the newcomers to 
Saskatchewan but with those big-hearted Saskatchewan people 
who have made their arrival and their settlement such a success. 
 
Later on we’ll have a reception and some cake and some fun 
activities for the kids. But may I just say now on behalf of 
members on this side, you’re very, very welcome in this, your 
Assembly. I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming these 
newcomers, new Saskatchewan citizens, to their Legislative 
Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
[Mr. Al-Husseini provided interpretation in Arabic throughout 
the following remarks.] 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, 
and thank you to Ziad, our translator here today. 
 
It’s my honour to join with the Premier, as the Leader of the 
Official Opposition Saskatchewan New Democrats, to welcome 
this incredible group of Syrian refugees to their Legislative 
Assembly here today. 
 
The circumstances that have brought you to Saskatchewan have 
been shared with me by many new Syrian refugees. The crisis 
and stress that you have endured as refugees is barely 
imaginable to most of us here in Saskatchewan. The very 
strength that brought you here, the perseverance, the fact that 
you’re here and building your life in Saskatchewan speaks to 
the strength of you as individuals, overcoming such crisis, such 
hurt, such loss, such violence, and such insecurity. 
 
As you continue to build your life in Saskatchewan and Canada, 
we wish and want to work with you to ensure peace and 
security and opportunity for each and every one of you and your 
families.  
 
As referenced by our Premier, our motto is “from many 
peoples, strength.” Certainly those that are in this gallery here 
today on Treaty 4 territory demonstrate that, and it’s on full 
display, including those that are providing supports to these 
newcomers that are building lives here in Saskatchewan. 
 
[13:45] 
 
It’s a pleasure to welcome Regina’s Open Door Society, an 
organization that has provided so much support to so many and 

so many of these families, as well as the adult campus here 
today. And I see Gisele Carlson here today. It’s a pleasure to 
welcome Gisele, as well as Bonnie Sorensen. 
 
I’m also thankful to the other organizations that are with us 
today and that have supported so many: the Global Gathering 
Place, The Moose Jaw multicultural centre, Prince Albert 
YWCA, Saskatoon Open Door, along with the families, the 
churches, the individuals all across our province that have 
extended that Saskatchewan care and compassion at a time 
where families needed it most. 
 
I’ve had the privilege of meeting many families of Syrian 
refugees. I’ve had the privilege of gathering for community 
dinners and have learned much already from these Syrian 
refugees who are building their life here in Saskatchewan. To 
these families, to these Syrian refugees I say, we’re all in this 
together. We will work together to build and strengthen 
Saskatchewan, and each and every one of you and your families 
are a vital part of that. And for that I say, thank you. 
 
And as one final note, the official opposition would believe that 
these translation supports will greatly assist the clarity during 
question period here today. 
 
On behalf of a grateful official opposition, most importantly a 
grateful province, I say welcome and thank you for building 
your lives here in Saskatchewan to help shape and define the 
bright future for all of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
[Mr. Al-Husseini provided interpretation in Arabic throughout 
the following remarks.] 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
want to welcome our Syrian guests. And the point that I wish to 
make is that our leader made reference to Treaty 4 territory. 
And I just want to point out that I am one part of the original 
peoples of this land, and we welcome you to our beautiful 
province. 
 
And that the people should know, throughout your travels 
you’ll hear the phrase “First Nations” and that is meant to 
respect the original inhabitants of this land, which are the 
Aboriginal people. And I will say in one of the original 
languages of our land, after I’m done my comments, a welcome 
to you. So bear with me as I explain to you in our own 
language, an original language of this land, a welcome to you. 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
And in the original language of this land, I say I am glad you 
are here. I welcome you. I look forward to your contributions 
and I’m glad that you all came here as a family and there is 
plenty of room in the First Nations lands. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
[Mr. Al-Husseini provided interpretation in Arabic throughout 
the following remarks.] 
 



November 2, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1087 

Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would just like to 
join along with the members opposite and welcome the Syrians. 
Being the only First Nation member of this Chamber, I would 
like to welcome them. 
 
As an indigenous woman, and our role in our societies, I would 
like to extend a sincere welcome. Along with being a member 
from Saskatoon Fairview, I am a member of Treaty 4 territory. 
Welcome. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You stole a bit of my 
thunder earlier but, Mr. Speaker, to you and through you and to 
all members of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce Leonard and 
Donna Moroz, Melvin Moroz, and Gordon Wolitski, all from 
the great community of Wishart in my constituency. And I 
would ask all members to join me in welcoming them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
[Mr. Al-Husseini provided interpretation in Arabic throughout 
the following remarks.] 
 
The Speaker: — Before we carry on for further introductions 
of the day, I’d like to first thank our interpreter for coming 
today on short notice. Much appreciated. And for the opposition 
and government House leaders for making this a possibility of 
having him on the floor, and the Sergeant-at-Arms and the 
Clerks, and for Hansard on how to figure out how we’re going 
to . . . [inaudible] . . . all of this. Thank you very much. 
 
Before our interpreter goes, just one more remark, two remarks 
to our audience. Thank you for being here in your Assembly. 
We’re happy that you are here, but please remember not to take 
part in the debate. And that includes applauses. 
 
Sergeant-at-Arms, would you please escort our interpreter out. 
Thank you, sir. I recognize the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
join with you in welcoming your special guests, and one in 
particular, a constituent of mine, Janice Klisowsky from Dysart. 
Janice is giving us a wave. The Klisowsky family has been 
residents of Dysart for quite some time. And one of her sons, 
Nathan was my youngest granddaughter’s soccer coach and did 
a fine job, kept her in line, kept her focused, and they did well. 
And so I’d like to ask all members to welcome Janice to her 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
If I could, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I would just like 
to also welcome our special guests from Syria. And the reason 
that I’d like to do that, Mr. Speaker, is because my wife 
Marlene was not born in Canada, came at the age of five with 
her family to Canada, not knowing the language, and faced 
many challenges. Certainly did not experience the trauma that 
I’m sure many of our special guests have experienced before 
they got here, but at least it gives me a little bit of an 
understanding of some of the challenges that they are currently 
going through. 
 
And I know my in-laws, they learned from their children — my 

wife and her brothers — the language, and the young people 
help their parents navigate their new settings. And so with that, 
I would like to extend a very special welcome to our Syrian 
guests on behalf of myself and especially on behalf of my wife, 
Marlene. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Steele: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I’d like to welcome the grade 7 class from Gull Lake, 
Saskatchewan, my hometown; their teacher, Ms. Calli Illerbrun; 
accompanied by Ms. Tammy Murray, Ms. Cindy Girodat, the 
education assistants; plus parent chaperones, Ms. Joanne 
Zanidean and Mr. Rob Myers. I’d like to welcome you to your 
Assembly. Thank you. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to also welcome to 
the Assembly Mr. Tim Geiger, a long-time friend from the 
Leader, Saskatchewan area. Tim has been an active councillor 
and reeve in the RM [rural municipality] of Happyland for 25 
years. So would you all help me welcome him here today. 
Thank you so much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you and to 
all members of the Assembly, I would like to introduce Ms. 
Fallon Prince and 16 grade 12 students of the Langenburg 
Central School seated in the west gallery. This grade 12 class 
that you have before you will be the first graduating class from 
the brand new school built in Langenburg, the Education 
minister, myself, and former members Ken Krawetz and Bob 
Bjornerud got the privilege to help open on September 2nd this 
year. 
 
I look forward to having a great discussion with these bright 
young students and with Ms. Prince, who is an innovative 
teacher, was a great neighbour to us on the farm, is an 
accomplished musician, and is a new mom. So please help me 
in welcoming the Langenburg grade 12 students and teachers to 
the Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all the members of the Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce two gentlemen in the west gallery. They are Kyle 
Moffatt and Adam Kletchko, Mr. Speaker. They joined us 
earlier this morning to raise the Movember flag out front of the 
Assembly with some of the members of the Regina Fire & 
Protective Services, Mr. Speaker. We’ll learn more about what 
they’re here for in members’ statements soon to come. I just ask 
all members to help me welcome them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
welcome these folks, Kyle and Adam, as well. I do know that 
our side is willing to step up. We’ve got Team Jack happening. 



1088 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2016 

And Team Jack has a proud, proud history in Canada, and we’re 
alive and well here. 
 
And as a survivor of prostate cancer, I have to tell you this is a 
very important issue for me as well, and our whole side and our 
Legislative Assembly. We have huge support for men and 
mental health and prostate care, cancer or care, here. So thank 
you so much. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from the citizens who are opposed to 
the federal government’s unilateral decision to impose a carbon 
tax on the province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the great citizens of 
Kelvington, Foam Lake, Rose Valley, Wadena, Weekes, Prairie 
River, Porcupine Plain, and Kindersley. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition to reverse the cuts to the Lighthouse 
program. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that the Minister 
of Social Services, in 2014, said the Lighthouse in Saskatoon 
would “. . . take pressure off existing detox facilities, hospitals, 
and police cells, while keeping people safe, especially in our 
brutally cold winters.” The petitioners also point out that the 
Minister of Health said that “We want to ensure that individuals 
with mental health and addictions issues have a safe place to 
stay.” 
 
[14:00] 
 
I think it’s quite relevant, true to say, Mr. Speaker, that the 
pressure that the Saskatoon Health Region is experiencing in 
their hospitals in the last few weeks could be also attributed to 
the cuts at the Lighthouse, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to read the 
prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately reverse 
their recent cuts to funding that allows extremely 
vulnerable people to access the services of the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit in Saskatoon, and revisit their imposition 
of a strict and narrow definition of homelessness in 
November of 2015 which forced the Lighthouse to cut 
back its hours of essential services in February of 2016, 
and take immediate steps to ensure that homeless people in 
Saskatchewan have emergency shelter, clothing, and food 
available to them before more lives are lost. 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Saskatoon. I 
so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure once again to rise to present a petition for a second 
bridge in Prince Albert. And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

That they respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan ask the Sask Party government 
to quit stalling, hiding behind rhetoric, and refusing to 
listen to the people calling for action, and to begin 
immediately to plan and then quickly commence the 
construction of a second bridge for Prince Albert using 
federal and provincial dollars. 

 
And the people that have signed this petition are from all 
throughout the province of Saskatchewan. We’ve presented 
page after page, Mr. Speaker, and the pages that we have here 
that I wish to submit are people that have signed from Spruce 
Home and from White City, Yorkton. And I so present, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition regarding wetlands in our province. Wetlands 
serve a very vital function in our ecosystem. They take the form 
of marshes, bogs, fens, swamps, and open water. Wetlands are 
home to wildlife, including waterfowl. They clean the water 
running off of agricultural fields. They protect us from flooding 
and drought, and they are a playground where families can 
explore and play. In the worst cases, such as some areas on the 
prairies, as much as 90 per cent of our wetlands have 
disappeared. As they continue to disappear, so too do the many 
benefits they provide. 
 
Sound wetland policy will allow Saskatchewan to provide 
sustainable development for all sectors of business in the 
province. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the petition that reads as follows, respectfully 
request the Government of Saskatchewan to: 
 
Increase funding to do the proper inventory work, putting 
Saskatchewan in a better position to manage the water 
resource; 
 
Speed up the evaluation of high-risk watersheds where 
there is significant damage annually from flooding. This 
evaluation must include a recognition of drainage works 
that could be closed or restored that will alleviate some of 
the issues downstream with respect to flooding and nutrient 
loading; 
 
Create a sound and transparent mitigation process that 
adequately addresses sustainable development. The 
sequence should first focus on avoiding the environmental 
harm whenever possible, before a secondary focus on 
minimizing the harm with compensation being sought only 



November 2, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1089 

when the development is deemed essential and the first two 
stages cannot be met. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by individuals from Denzil, Regina, 
Wadena, Rose Valley. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition in support of Wakamow Valley Authority in Moose 
Jaw. And we know that as a result of the passage of The 
Wakamow Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2016 on June 30th, 
the Wakamow Valley Authority lost its statutory funding of 
$127,000 from the Saskatchewan government, in addition to the 
$30,000 in supplementary funding, and this loss of annual 
funding negatively affected the ability of Wakamow to maintain 
its lands and repair its facilities and provide services to the 
Moose Jaw area. 
 
This funding cut resulted in a layoff of one-third of the park 
staff, and included two summer students, two regular 
employees. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately repeal The Wakamow Valley Authority 
Amendment Act, 2016 and reinstate statutory funding to the 
Wakamow Valley Authority. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
Saskatoon, Buffalo Narrows, Lloydminster, Regina, and of 
course Moose Jaw, Saskatchewan. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present to you a petition condemning the Sask Party’s cuts to 
the SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for disability] 
program. After nearly a decade of wasting the economic boom 
and blowing through the savings, the government is now 
forcing the province’s most vulnerable people to pay for the 
Sask Party mismanagement. 
 
The Sask Party’s latest cold-hearted cut will take money away 
from people who are unable to work due to a disability; that 
many of these people being hurt by the Sask Party’s cuts live 
with serious illnesses such as multiple sclerosis, cancer, autism, 
and many other illnesses; and that contrary to the Minister of 
Social Services’s claims, the government underfunds clients in 
regards to shelter allowance, and that shelter allowance should 
be reflective of the current rental costs. I will read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Sask Party government to stop their plan to cut the SAID 

funding and immediately restore funding for those living 
with a disability; that shelter allowance is reflective of the 
current rental costs; and that the Saskatchewan Party 
government implement the recommendations of the 
advisory group on poverty reduction. 

 
The residents that signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from 
the communities of Saskatoon, La Ronge, Stanley Mission, Air 
Ronge. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to present 
a petition regarding child care in Saskatchewan. The 
undersigned of this petition wish to draw our attention to the 
following: across Saskatchewan, licensed non-profit child care 
centres are taxed inconsistently. Many of our licensed 
non-profit child care centres pay commercial taxes, and this is 
not done in Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, B.C. [British 
Columbia], or New Brunswick. 
 
Child care is essential to the economy, yet most centres struggle 
to balance their budget. This issue threatens both the quality and 
the number of child care spaces. Quality child care has an 
enormous positive impact on a child’s future and yields high 
rates of economic return. Child care centres are institutions of 
early learning and childhood development. It is appropriate that 
they have the same tax treatment as schools. Mr. Speaker, I’ll 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognize 
that licensed non-profit child care centres provide 
programs that are foundational to a healthy society by 
including them in The Education Act. Exempt all licensed 
non-profit child care centres in Saskatchewan from 
property tax through changes to appropriate legislation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve been receiving hundreds of these petitions. 
The ones that I will submit today are signed by citizens of 
Pense and Regina. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition from citizens calling for a stop to the Sask 
Party sell-off of SaskTel. The petitioners point out that in the 
recent election campaign and, I might add, other previous 
campaigns, Mr. Speaker, the Premier and the Sask Party 
promised that they would not privatize SaskTel. The petitioners 
are calling that instead of looking at their own waste and 
scandal, the Sask Party is now talking about breaking their 
promise and looking to sell off SaskTel to make a quick dollar, 
and the petitioners also point out that once SaskTel is gone 
there’s no getting it back and no telling what else the Sask Party 
will sell. Mr. Speaker: 
 

In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners 
respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan call on the Saskatchewan Party government 
to keep their promise, stop their plan to sell off SaskTel, 
and keep our valued Crown corporation in the hands of the 



1090 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2016 

people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this particular batch of petitions is signed by 
citizens from Saskatoon, Warman, Lanigan, Grandora, and 
Churchbridge. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to once 
again present a petition calling on the government to reverse its 
short-sighted cuts to the Aboriginal court worker program. The 
Government of Saskatchewan cut the budget for the Aboriginal 
court worker program in the 2016-2017 provincial budget, and 
as those on this side of the House know, Aboriginal court 
workers play an important role, helping Aboriginal people in 
criminal and child apprehension cases. Aboriginal peoples are 
disproportionately represented in Saskatchewan’s correctional 
centres, and Aboriginal court workers successfully help to make 
our communities safer through reduced recidivism rates. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan reverse its 
short-sighted and counterproductive cuts to the Aboriginal 
court worker program. 

 
And those people signing the petition today are from the Regina 
and Moose Jaw area. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
to stop the redirection of funding of the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, Inc. A recent report showed that 
94 per cent of NORTEP [northern teacher education program] 
grads found employment in the North. NORTEP has improved 
teacher retention in northern Saskatchewan. NORTEP has a 
positive economic impact in northern Saskatchewan. NORTEP 
provides high quality face-to-face instructional services to 
students. The province’s financial deficit cannot be fixed by 
cutting indigenous education in the North and a program that 
has served the North for over 40 years. And the prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to immediately restore the 
five-year agreement to fund the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, Inc. and to continue funding 
NORTEP-NORPAC programs in La Ronge. 

 
It is signed by hundreds and hundreds of people in northern 
Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Disc Golf Gains Popularity in Regina 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to 

speak about a local gem located within the constituency of 
Douglas Park. My constituency is home to Regina’s only disc 
golf course, a free 18-hole course in Douglas Park, with 
Wascana Lake posing a serious hazard on some holes. The 
course is relatively new, Mr. Speaker, and it wasn’t without a 
handful of community partnerships and grants that the Regina 
Disc Golf Association was able to have a quality and permanent 
location for the sport. 
 
Aside from Douglas Park, courses have sprung up in Saskatoon, 
Martensville, Prince Albert, North Battleford, Humboldt, 
Vanscoy, Lumsden, Yorkton, Manitou Beach, and Waskesiu. 
 
I had the chance to watch disc golf for the first time on 
Saturday, September 17th in Douglas Park for the annual 
Tommy Douglas Open. Tommy Douglas Open is the new 
name, and rather appropriate, I might add, Mr. Speaker, for the 
Regina Disc Golf Association’s annual year-end tournament. 
 
Disc golf is gaining popularity across the province, and disc 
golf communities are getting larger and larger, with this year’s 
tournament attracting over 50 competitors. 
 
I need to thank Stacy Martin for giving me a quick tutorial that 
day. I’m sure I’m not the first beginner to need some of his 
guidance. Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 
congratulating the Regina Disc Golf Association for hosting a 
wonderful event and for a great season of disc golf in Douglas 
Park. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Coronation Park. 
 

Welcome to Syrian Refugees 
 
Mr. Docherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Salaam alaikum to 
our guests today. 
 
Last December I had the honour of representing the province at 
the Regina Airport as we welcomed our city’s first Syrian 
refugees, the Al-Bardan family. In total, Mr. Speaker, our 
province has welcomed 1,236 Syrian refugees to date as part of 
the federal government’s initiative to settle 25,000 
government-assisted refugees by the end of 2016. This could 
not have been accomplished without the tireless work of staff 
and volunteers at the five refugee settlement agencies across the 
province. 
 
I’d also like to thank the Regina Open Door Society, the 
Saskatoon Open Door Society, the Global Gathering Place in 
Saskatoon, the Moose Jaw Multicultural Council, the YWCA 
Prince Albert for the amazing work they’ve done to help settle 
Saskatchewan’s newest residents. I’d also like to thank other 
immigrant and integration agencies across our province, in 
addition to hundreds of community volunteers for all that 
they’ve done over the past year. 
 
Since 2007, Mr. Speaker, more than 77,000 immigrants have 
settled in over 400 communities across Saskatchewan. Our 
provincial motto, “from many peoples, strength,” could not be 
more true today. Together our province is stronger. 
 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming Syrian refugees to 



November 2, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1091 

our province and in thanking all those who have been 
instrumental in helping to ensure that refugees feel at home in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Prince Albert Powwow Contributes to  
Inclusive Community 

 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to attend the 18th 
annual Northern Lights Casino Thanksgiving Powwow, and I 
was honoured to take part in three of the grand march entrances 
throughout the weekend. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, this annual powwow is a major event within the 
city of Prince Albert, and is a wonderful way to get involved in 
the community and experience culture that has been shaped by 
thousands of years of living on the prairies. 
 
More than 500 dancers from across Canada, the United States, 
and South America competed in this powwow, and 
approximately 2,600 came through the doors on each of the two 
days of the event. 
 
The Northern Lights Casino Thanksgiving Powwow has a huge 
impact on Prince Albert’s economy, filling our hotels, 
restaurants, and stores with visitors. More importantly it 
provides a unique opportunity for First Nations children and 
non-First Nations people to learn more about First Nations 
customs and traditions in a very inclusive environment. In fact, 
Mr. Speaker, organizers of the event reminded us that the 
reason this powwow was started 18 years ago was to build a 
bridge between First Nations and non-First Nations people. 
Prince Albert continuously strives to become a more inclusive 
community, and the Prince Albert Thanksgiving powwow 
contributes greatly to this endeavour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 
congratulating the board and staff of the Northern Lights Casino 
and the organizers of this event on yet another successful 
Thanksgiving powwow and to join me in acknowledging the 
powwow’s 18 years of providing our community with great 
cultural education and advocacy. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

Funding Requirements for Refugee Students 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Over the past year 
our provincial schools welcomed 534 new students from Syrian 
families. While we are always excited to welcome new students 
to our province as they make Saskatchewan more culturally rich 
and diverse, adding this many students at the same time is not 
without challenges. Our school divisions are reporting that 
many of these children are behind grade level and have only 
been taught in Arabic. School divisions and educators are 
working hard to provide supports like literacy and language 
work, counselling, cultural integration, and work with parents to 
assist them as they send their children to school each day. Our 

goal is to ensure that these children succeed and integrate 
effectively. We commend our schools across this province for 
the outstanding work they have done in welcoming and 
supporting these students. 
 
This year we provided 5.4 million in funding to divisions 
specifically to support Syrian students. However, at a projected 
cost of 10 to 13,000 per student, without additional support our 
divisions will face significant pressure. Mr. Speaker, the federal 
government made a promise to support these families. 
Therefore I ask all members to join me in calling on the federal 
government to fulfill their promise and provide financial 
support for Saskatchewan’s education sector to ensure that all 
of our children reach their full potential. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Gardiner 
Park. 
 

Children’s Hospital Radiothon 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to inform the 
Assembly that today and tomorrow the 14th Annual Children’s 
Hospital Radiothon is broadcasting live across southern 
Saskatchewan from Hill Centre Tower II in downtown Regina. 
Harvard Broadcasting is hosting the radiothon on three of its 
local radio stations, 620 CKRM, MY92.1, and 104.9 the 
WOLF. 
 
Over the course of the two-day broadcast event, we will likely 
hear courageous stories of Saskatchewan families who have 
faced tough battles with infant and childhood illnesses, and the 
medical professionals who treat them. I’m sure these stories 
will help to inspire the generous people of our province, which 
they are always very accustomed to doing, to donate to help 
raise funds to purchase urgent pediatric medical equipment for 
the new children’s hospital of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ground was broken on construction of this 
important facility in September of 2014 and the project is now 
nearly 30 per cent complete and remains on schedule to open in 
2019. The work of the Children’s Hospital Foundation and its 
donors will ensure that the hospital will have the necessary 
equipment and furnishings so that children can stay with their 
families close to home while receiving the best treatment 
possible. 
 
I ask all members to join me in wishing Harvard Broadcasting 
and the Children’s Hospital Foundation success once again with 
this year’s radiothon. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Movember 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With the passing 
of the 1st of November, something very familiar starts to 
happen. That something shows up as a shadow on men’s faces, 
a little extra insulation for the increasingly cool days of the 
Saskatchewan winter, and for some, the one month of the year 
that you can sleep in an extra five minutes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is Movember, a month dedicated to men’s 
health and the finest facial hair possible. It was great to be 



1092 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2016 

involved in the flag raising earlier today where we were joined 
by the provincial Movember organizers who were introduced 
earlier. This month is dedicated to improving the health of men, 
young and old. With all the moustaches around, we need to 
make sure we have conversations about men’s health issues 
such as prostate cancer, testicular cancer, poor mental health, 
and physical inactivity. Too often men are reluctant to take 
action on our health, but we have the power to change that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is an honour once again to participate in this 
great cause. And I will also be joined by the Minister of 
Agriculture, Rural and Remote Health, and of Highways. Mr. 
Speaker, I would ask that all members join me in thanking the 
organizers for helping make Movember happen, and to join me 
in growing a mo to save a bro. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Protecting Saskatchewan Jobs 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP never miss an 
opportunity to miss an opportunity, an opportunity to put 
partisan politics aside and stand up for Saskatchewan jobs. 
Yesterday the Premier sent a letter to federal Minister Goodale, 
asking him to be a voice of reason at the federal cabinet table 
and stand up for Saskatchewan jobs against a national carbon 
tax. 
 
We know that no economic impact assessment has been done of 
what this new tax means for Saskatchewan jobs. We know that 
the federal government claims this tax can be revenue neutral, 
but it is not sector neutral and will hit the energy, mining, and 
agriculture industries hard. 
 
But the people should also know that originally there was a 
second signature line on that letter, an opportunity for the 
Leader of the Opposition to sign that letter as well and stand up 
for Saskatchewan people. He refused, Mr. Speaker. For the 
second time in a week, he refused to stand with us against this 
carbon tax. He’s standing with the federal NDP [New 
Democratic Party] whose main concern that the tax isn’t high 
enough. He’s standing with his Finance critic who thinks we 
need to shut down coal, shut down oil, and adopt the Leap 
Manifesto. He’s taking ideology over Saskatchewan families. 
 
Will he stand up today and join us in protecting Saskatchewan 
workers? Mr. Speaker, we are about to find out. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transaction 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, back to the phone call that 
everyone but the Sask Party wants to learn the facts about. Let 
me take you back. The former scandal-plagued minister had just 
gotten the go-ahead to buy the 204 acres of land for the GTH 
[Global Transportation Hub]. Then he got a phone call from 
someone who just so happened to have the very same 204 acres 
available. Mr. Speaker, imagine, imagine the coincidence. But 
according to the version of the story from the minister, he took 

the call and wrote down nothing. Not the name of the lawyer. 
Not the name of the company. And, Mr. Speaker, he developed 
no follow-up plan, and he didn’t even note it enough to 
remember who the caller was. 
 
Mr. Speaker, has the Premier not sat down with that former 
minister and pushed him to remember? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, at the first hint of some 
interest in the particular transaction, that former member went 
to the Conflict of Interest Commissioner, the independent 
officer of the legislature, and the Conflict of Interest 
Commissioner indicated that he was not in conflict. 
 
Well here again they’re heckling, Mr. Speaker. They don’t like 
the answers. They don’t like the fact that that was the answer 
from the Conflict of Interest Commissioner. They don’t like the 
fact that the Provincial Auditor . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Well there again, the Deputy Leader of the NDP is trying to 
shout down the answer to the question, and the reason is, is that 
they’ve asked the same question over and over again, ignoring 
the fact that all of this has been canvassed and available to be 
canvassed by the Provincial Auditor’s review, something which 
they requested. 
 
And so the Provincial Auditor looked at all of these things, had 
access to the email that references the call, Mr. Speaker, went 
on to point out that there were important improvements needed 
to be made on the government side, which we agree with, also 
in the press release that accompanied the report said 
unequivocally that there was no evidence of fraud or 
wrongdoing or a conflict of interest by the board of directors, 
which includes the minister. And as to the call, the auditor 
noted it in the timeline section of the report and never mentions 
or comments on it again. She later identified in the report that 
the call was not germane to the audit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — So no answer from the Premier. It’s sort 
of strange for him to say there’s no politics when he couldn’t 
figure out who owned the land, and the minister won’t share 
who actually called them. This is a multi-million dollar deal that 
wasted millions of dollars. How is it honestly possible that the 
Premier hasn’t pushed for an answer from that minister? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there was no follow-up on the 
call. There was no follow-up on the call. That’s why the auditor 
notes the call in the . . . Well, Mr. Speaker, this is the auditor’s 
findings. The auditor notes the call and indicates that, in the 
timeline section, indicates the call was not germane to the audit, 
an audit that looked at all of these issues. 
 
Every single issue he’s raised breathlessly in this legislature this 
week, all of it was available to the Provincial Auditor. Every 
single question that he’s asked, every one, was available to be 
canvassed by the auditor. The auditor did a full and complete 
review. The Government of Saskatchewan said to the auditor, 
you can have any cabinet document you want because we know 



November 2, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1093 

exactly what this is and what this isn’t, Mr. Speaker. So we 
made available every document to the auditor. The auditor did a 
report, made recommendations about a lack of communication 
between arms of the government, some other challenges with 
respect to acquiring land, which we’re dealing with.  
 
But as to the question and the inference that we hear day after 
day from the Leader of the Opposition, the press release that 
accompanied the audit said unequivocally — and I ask him, 
does he agree with this or not? — when the auditor said she 
found no evidence of wrongdoing, fraud, or conflict of interest 
by the board of directors. And the board of directors includes 
the former minister, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I’d ask members to respect the other member 
that is going to be answering the question and asking. I 
recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Not an answer again from the Premier. I 
think it’s time that the Premier stopped hiding behind an audit 
that was scathing and exonerated no one, Mr. Speaker. You 
know, that minister should have been booted a long time ago, 
but when he did go, instead the Premier and the members of 
cabinet heaped praise on him. So this is on the Premier and the 
whole cabinet. How is it acceptable to believe that the minister 
took that call and had no record of it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Leader 
of the Opposition said, hiding behind the audit. The auditor had 
access to literally thousands of documents, Mr. Speaker, had 
access to cabinet documents, had access to individuals involved 
in the transaction. The auditor’s conclusion — after having 
gone through thousands of documents, hundreds and thousands 
of emails, interviewing all of those involved in the transaction 
— her conclusion at the end of that was that there was no 
wrongdoing. there was no fraud, and there was no conflict of 
interest. How the Leader of the Opposition can say that we’re 
hiding behind the audit, somehow impugning the work that the 
auditor did, that’s the inference that he’s making. 
 
The auditor did outstanding work. The auditor did what she was 
asked to do by both the cabinet and by the Public Accounts 
Committee and what was demanded by the opposition, Mr. 
Speaker. Her conclusion was that. Just because the Leader of 
the Opposition doesn’t like that conclusion doesn’t mean he 
shouldn’t accept it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The question was to the Premier. No 
answer again. A simple phone call, but phone records exist. 
Phone records actually exist. And I don’t know how many 
phones the minister had at the time. I don’t know if he had one 
to do his deals with his farm, including the land that he rented 
from the land speculator; if he had one to do his SaskPower 
deals; or if he had another one to do his GTH deals, but those 
phone records exist and they could be checked by this Premier. 
So I guess my question to the Premier, to answer to this GTH 
scandal, has he gotten those phone records yet? 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — The accusations the Leader of the 
Opposition is making in this House, shielded by privilege, I 
would really encourage him to go out into the rotunda after 
question period and make that same accusation of the former 
member, the former minister, Mr. Speaker. I would really 
encourage him to show the courage of his convictions and make 
that same accusation outside of the House. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor 
had access to all of these records, to all of these documents — 
thousands and thousands of documents. She fully canvassed all 
of these. Her conclusion was that there was no wrongdoing, that 
there was no fraud . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Her conclusion was that there was no 
wrongdoing, that there was no fraud, and there was no conflict 
of interest. And just because the Leader of the Opposition 
doesn’t like that conclusion, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t mean he 
shouldn’t accept it. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — That minister can point his little finger 
at me all he wants and try to threaten me about what will be 
said out there. Well we’ll fight for Saskatchewan people every 
day of the week and to get to the bottom of this scandal and this 
basic phone call. 
 
How can the Premier, how can the Premier pretend that there 
was no conflict when this call has never even been 
investigated? How can he say that there’s no issue when he 
hasn’t even looked into it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Speaking of standing up for 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, this is a Leader of the Opposition 
that wouldn’t even sign a letter defending this province against 
a massive new carbon tax, wouldn’t even sign a letter to which 
we offered to work with him on the wording. A categorical no 
from the Leader of the Opposition in standing up for 
Saskatchewan — that’s their record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As far as this matter, we have fully canvassed this on the floor 
of the Assembly. We fully canvassed this in the rotunda of the 
Assembly as well. The auditor has fully canvassed this with 
access to all of the documents to which she asked for access — 
thousands and thousands of documents, of emails, of access to 
all of the individuals who are involved in the transaction.  
 
Her conclusion was unequivocal in the press release, Mr. 
Speaker, accompanying the report. That conclusion was that 
there was no wrongdoing, there was no conflict of interest, and 



1094 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2016 

there was no fraud. And she subsequently said there were no 
red flags, Mr. Speaker, that required further follow-up. 
 
Does the Leader of the Opposition accept that report? Yes or 
no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — So they’ve got one thing right. I’m not 
going to be signing on to a letter with a Premier with no 
credibility, on a torqued-up letter that the Premier’s off in all 
directions. We’ll stand up for Saskatchewan people, not for . . . 
I would sign a letter though any day of the week to call for a 
judicial inquiry into the GTH . . . [inaudible] . . . in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And as the Minister of Justice has shared, you can’t find a 
conflict if you don’t know who you’re buying from or if you 
don’t know who the minister was speaking with. How does the 
Premier not get this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Just to address the preamble to this, 
Mr. Speaker. A torqued-up letter? The Premier wrote a letter to 
Minister Goodale laying out Saskatchewan’s position in 
opposition to a carbon tax which will disproportionately harm 
the economy of this province. The Leader of the Opposition 
refused to sign on to that, Mr. Speaker. I think we know why. I 
think we know why. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition has admitted that he supports 
carbon pricing. He’s admitted that, Mr. Speaker. We know what 
carbon pricing means. That means a carbon tax. And we know, 
Mr. Speaker, I think everybody, I think everybody in this 
province knows that if they were in government right now, this 
province would have a carbon tax. I think everybody knows 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Remember, look, look to our west. Did Rachel Notley 
campaign on a carbon tax? No, she didn’t, Mr. Speaker. She did 
it though after she was elected. We know that they would do the 
exact same thing. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Donations to Saskatchewan Party 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Either they don’t get 
it or they hope the people of Saskatchewan won’t notice. 
Saskatchewan’s campaign finance laws are the weakest in the 
country and often are described as the wild, wild west when it 
comes to campaign donations. 
 
The Premier says our campaign finance laws are completely 
fine, and it’s no surprise. He’s raked in, for example, over $2 
million in out-of-province corporate donations alone, the 
majority of which came from Alberta — $2 million, Mr. 
Speaker. That might explain why he’s always so quick to weigh 
in on Alberta’s issues. Mr. Speaker, they are the ones financing 
his election campaigns. 

There’s really nobody he won’t accept a cheque from, Mr. 
Speaker. And by his own admission, his party average corporate 
donation is 10 times larger than their average individual one. 
Will the Sask Party commit to working with us to get corporate, 
union, and out-of-province donations out of Saskatchewan 
politics and put a cap on individual contributions? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, over the past 10 years, the 
Saskatchewan Party has received nearly $30 million in 
donations, and we’re grateful for that support. I can share with 
members of the House that about 10 per cent of that comes 
from corporations whose headquarters is outside the province. 
 
And we ought not to be surprised by the fact that a lot of 
companies from outside Saskatchewan and other parts of 
Canada, not only in Alberta — who are invested here, who are 
creating and sustaining jobs here — would have a real interest 
in public policy, and yes, even elections in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Some of them, for example in the resource 
sector, would have grave concerns about the potential of the 
people of the province electing a government whose Finance 
critic supports the Leap Manifesto that wants to stop pipelines 
and stop natural resource development in the province.  
 
I think the people in the . . . Perhaps those who are invested in 
the province, creating jobs here, would want to indicate support 
or a lack of support in this case for a leader that for example 
won’t even stand up on the issue of the carbon tax, won’t sign a 
simple letter to Ralph Goodale. I expect that they’re going to 
want to be involved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, average corporate donation’s $1,000. A hundred 
dollars is the individual average donation to the party. In the 
meantime, we’ve brought in the lobbyist registry so there is 
greater transparency in the system, Mr. Speaker. And I look 
forward to the next question. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Provisions of The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday in the 
rotunda and here in the Chamber, the Minister of Finance 
refused to acknowledge that selling off any more of 10 per cent 
of our Crowns would result in Ottawa being able to take 15 per 
cent of their revenue. He claims this isn’t even being 
contemplated by the government. But the truth is, the Premier 
and the Attorney General have made it clear that the Sask Party 
wants to open up the Crowns to outside investment. For now 
let’s call it whatever they want, but it still ends up with 
provincial dollars going into federal coffers. 
 
When it comes to our Crowns, details matter. And the detail 
that this minister doesn’t want to talk about, or maybe missed 
entirely, is that the federal corporate tax rate is 15 per cent. 
What analysis has the Finance minister done to determine how 
much the Saskatchewan people stand to lose under their plan to 
have Ottawa tax our Crowns? 
 



November 2, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1095 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, one of the things you learn 
in basic media training is you never answer a hypothetical. And 
the fact of the matter is, is that the opposition is trying to chase 
us down a rabbit hole, Mr. Speaker, with some fantastical 
hypothetical with respect to some scenario they dreamed up 
over here to try to fearmonger amongst the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
What we’ve done in the legislation, Mr. Speaker, is introduced 
a bill to amend The Interpretation Act to define privatization. 
Now the NDP want to chase everybody down a rabbit hole in 
the hopes, in the hopes, Mr. Speaker, of scaring the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan when we’re trying to manage a 
very difficult economy right now, Mr. Speaker. That’s what 
we’re focused on. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s quite a surprise to find 
out that the Income Tax Act is a fairy tale. I just didn’t know 
that. This government loves to make it look like they are 
defenders of Saskatchewan against the federal government. 
Well that certainly wasn’t true when it was the Conservative 
government, and it’s not true now. Instead of protecting our 
Crowns from being taxed or closing the door to the Ottawa 
carbon tax, the Sask Party’s way of protecting Saskatchewan 
from Ottawa looks a lot like leaving the door wide open and 
throwing a temper tantrum when the Liberals let themselves in. 
 
My question is for the Finance minister or perhaps the Minister 
of Intergovernmental Affairs, the Premier. When Bill 40 was at 
the cabinet table, did he raise the issue of federal taxes? Did he 
have any economic analysis done? Or is the government just 
making it up as they go along? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, the Ministry of Finance 
would do some analysis on an offer that came forward if there 
was an offer brought forward, Mr. Speaker. There’s been no 
offer brought forward. 
 
If, in the event in the future, there was ever an offer brought 
forward to invest equity into one of our Crown corporations, of 
course the Ministry of Finance and the Government of 
Saskatchewan would do its due diligence and its analysis as to 
what the impact might be on the province’s finances, Mr. 
Speaker, on the individual taxpayer here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, what it would mean for that corporation should 
they expand beyond the boundaries of the province of 
Saskatchewan to compete in the rest of the country of Canada, 
Mr. Speaker. Absolutely we’d do that kind of analysis. 
 
Right now we’re not going to follow the NDP down a rabbit 
hole, Mr. Speaker, on some fantastical hypothetical they want 
to use to fearmonger in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Funding for Lighthouse Emergency Shelter 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — The mismanagement goes so far. Mr. 
Speaker, the consequences of their cuts to the Lighthouse in 
Saskatoon are being felt across the city.  
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Lighthouse was recently proven to be a 
money saver for the government. A study of the Lighthouse 
program estimated that for every dollar invested, at least $2.18 
was saved. Mr. Speaker, there was 24 per cent reduction in 
emergency department visits from Lighthouse clients, a 57 per 
cent decrease in ambulance visits to the Lighthouse, a 10 per 
cent reduction in intoxicated individuals staying in police cells, 
and a 47 per cent decrease in complications from poor 
medication used by clients living in complex mental health 
beds. 
 
We know that the health region didn’t support the cuts. In fact 
they weren’t even consulted. So why would Social Services cut 
funding to a program that is saving lives and money? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
fact of the matter is the member opposite referenced Saskatoon 
Health Region. The Saskatoon Health Region continues to fund 
the Lighthouse, Mr. Speaker, to the tune of $620,000 last year 
and $620,000 this year, Mr. Speaker. They also continue to 
fund some employees that work in the stabilization unit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the issue that the member is referring to is simply 
a matter of Social Services enforcing a contract that was in 
place. They fund the first night, not consecutive nights. Mr. 
Speaker, the member should get her facts straight before she 
stands in the House. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Provision of Long-Term Care 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, government waste and scandal 
take funding away from health care. They take money away 
from long-term care. Mr. Speaker, instead of cleaning up its act, 
the Sask Party is once again leaning further and cutting more. 
This government is cutting staff, cutting so deep they know 
they’ll be short-staffed. Instead of keeping more front-line 
workers, they’re using John Black lean forms which outline 
exactly what can be cut when there are too few caregivers. 
That’s right — tens of millions of dollars spent on how to 
provide less service with fewer people instead of spending that 
money to actually hire enough people to provide the care 
needed. 
 
Cuts to front-line care impact patient care, and with almost 100 
fewer workers on the front line, basic services get cut, services 
like getting seniors to the bathroom, Mr. Speaker. Will this 
government finally admit that their mismanagement means 
people in long-term care have to go without the care they need? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, just simply the whole 



1096 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2016 

premise of that question is just wrong. Mr. Speaker, the member 
refers to the John Black contract which was finished months 
ago.  
 
Mr. Speaker, long-term care has been a significant priority for 
this government. Mr. Speaker, we have many more workers in 
long-term care than the members did opposite. The members’ 
legacy for health care is less long-term care beds. It’s 52 
hospital closures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government, 13 new long-term care facilities 
built. Mr. Speaker, this government, a brand new hospital in 
Moose Jaw, a new hospital in North Battleford. Mr. Speaker, 
we will take no . . . Do we have more work to do? Absolutely 
we do. But we will take no lessons from the members opposite 
on this topic. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at these how-to 
lean forms. They make it clear there’s no need for adequate 
staff. Residents should just stay in bed. Baths should be 
cancelled altogether because once a week is too many anyway. 
The hydration cart should be parked . . . [inaudible interjection] 
. . . The former Health minister is chirping from his seat, Mr. 
Speaker, and that is exactly what it says. All bowel care, Mr. 
Speaker, bowel care, Mr. Speaker, apparently that should be 
stopped too. I’d like to ask this Health minister to stop with 
bowel care and see how that works for him. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question is, what do the forms say the staff can 
do? Well when they are short two care aids, the “focus is on 
feeding.” This is the Sask Party way — waste tens of millions 
of dollars running the remaining care aids off their feet, and tell 
them to leave seniors in bed all day without baths or bowel care 
and just make sure they get fed. What about this makes the Sask 
Party think that care is not compromised? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, as I said, we take long-term 
care, we take all health care very seriously, Mr. Speaker. We’ve 
made it the priority of this government. But, Mr. Speaker, if the 
member would stop and think about what she’s saying, she’s 
talking about being short-staffed in long-term care. There’s 780 
more employees in long-term care than there was when those 
members were in government. If that’s the case, what was the 
situation then? Mr. Speaker, this is just absolutely ludicrous. 
We’ve made health care a priority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she talks about cuts. The NDP used to like to talk 
about where did the money go. Let me tell her where the money 
went: a $1.7 billion increase to health care since 2007; $1.2 
billion on new major health care projects, capital projects, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s nearly 650 more new doctors. There’s over 
3,000 more nurses. Mr. Speaker, the list goes on and on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these members, as I mentioned the other day in 
the House, they just can’t get it through their head that 
somehow they don’t own the whole health care system 

anymore. Mr. Speaker, we’ve been innovative; we’re going to 
continue to be. We realize we have more work to do, but we’re 
going to do it. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just point to the work 
standard form, John Black and Associates licensed materials. 
So if working two continuing care aids short: no bathing, 
personal care to clients and diaper changes. No bowel care; 
focus is on feeding, personal care, changing and repositioning. 
This is a government that is, instead of funding front-line care 
workers, instead of ensuring there are enough people on the 
front lines to deliver service, they’re planning for not having 
enough service on the front line, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government has had ample opportunity to put in place 
minimum quality of care standards. Two opportunities they’ve 
had with a private member’s bill before them, and they’ve voted 
that down, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the one tool we have to keep this government 
accountable when it comes to long-term care are the CEO [chief 
executive officer] tour reports. I’m wondering, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve been waiting and waiting for the most recent CEO tour 
reports that hit his desk at the end of September. Can that 
minister table those reports today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, I would again point to our 
record on long-term care. Thirteen new long-term care facilities 
built in this province, Mr. Speaker. Those CEO tours she’s 
referring to were initiated under this government, and she’ll see 
the results of that in due course, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. Speaker, 
to stand here and be lectured by the members opposite on how 
we treat our seniors in this province when those members cut 
long-term care beds and we built new projects, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
just a little much to take. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue to make our seniors a priority, as 
this government always has. We’ll continue to make health care 
a priority, as this government always has. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 127 through 137. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 127 to 137. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 41 — The Coroners Amendment Act, 2016 



November 2, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1097 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move second reading of The Coroners Amendment 
Act, 2016. The Coroners Amendment Act, 2016 will repeal 
legislative requirements under section 20 of The Coroners Act, 
1999 to hold mandatory inquests related to in-custody deaths. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to assure members of the public and 
members of this Assembly that in-custody deaths will continue 
to be thoroughly investigated by the coroner, who will have the 
opportunity to develop relevant and practical recommendations 
in relation to prevention. I’d also like to note that the chief 
coroner will retain the authority under section 19 of the Act to 
conduct inquests where he or she is of the opinion that an 
inquest is necessary. This is entirely in his or her discretion on a 
case-by-case basis. Mr. Speaker, as a matter of policy, we’ve 
reached an understanding with the chief coroner that inquests 
will be held for those in-custody deaths that have already 
occurred as of the date of Royal Assent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this change will provide the discretion to the 
office of the chief coroner to determine when an inquest into an 
in-custody death would add value. Prevention will remain the 
focus of the office, but this goal may now be pursued in 
whatever manner the office views as most appropriate in the 
circumstances. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that I’m pleased to move second reading 
of The Coroners Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Justice and Attorney General 
has moved second reading of Bill No. 41, The Coroners 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to offer our initial comments as the official opposition 
around this particular bill, Bill No. 41, The Coroners 
Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
Now what I want to tell the people that may be watching the 
proceedings, Mr. Speaker, is that the thrust of the bill — which 
is really important for those that are involved with our legal 
system, those that really want to understand what the coroner’s 
office is all about and what the rules and regulations around 
when the coroner’s empowered to do investigations, Mr. 
Speaker — what is happening is this bill in its purest translation 
for the average person, which includes myself, Mr. Speaker, 
because I don’t have any legal background, it’s important, as a 
everyday common person, that I want to understand this as 
well. So we have people that research these bills and give us the 
one-liners that really explain what the bill is actually about. And 
quite frankly, Bill 41, The Coroners Amendment Act, what it is, 
is this bill removes the requirement for a coroner’s inquest 
when a person dies in custody. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we often speak about 
is that — the Justice critic made reference of it yesterday — 
when someone dies in custody, then it’s important that we take 
the proper steps to understand how this individual died and the 
circumstances in which this person died and what could be done 

in the future to prevent such death if the death is not deemed of 
natural causes. 
 
This is a really important point that I would want to raise in 
some of our discussions around this particular bill, Mr. Speaker. 
It is really, really important to note that if there is a suspicious 
death, it’s important that the government put in standards when 
people are in custody, to make sure that there’s a full inquest 
with a number of people being involved with the coroner to 
ensure that there is this transparency and certainly accountable 
practice in place to understand how and why this individual 
may have passed. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think I would point out that there are a 
number of things that people in Saskatchewan should 
understand. And I think what I want to do, if I can, is kind of 
walk down the history as to the duty to notify and the role of a 
coroner when it comes to a death, Mr. Speaker. And people out 
there all have an obligation that if you were to have the 
unfortunate encounter of finding someone that may be 
deceased, what does an individual do? What does a police 
officer do? What does the average public person do? Like a lot 
of people don’t know the exact ramifications of what The 
Coroners Act entails, and certainly what the role and 
responsibility of an average citizen is when they have this 
unfortunate encounter, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I want to point out to the general public, there are general 
duties that one must undertake. And I want to read from the Act 
itself. And the reason why I’m going to the Act, Mr. Speaker, is 
because people have to know what the coroners do, what the 
average citizen do, what the police do. This is very important 
for the premise of my argument later on as to why this bill 
needs to really be properly vetted to ensure that there is the 
notion of accountability and transparency no matter how the 
individual dies, or in this case, where the individual dies if she 
or he are in custody. And that’s really, really important. 
 
Now I want to point out at the start of my argument, Mr. 
Speaker, as it refers to this particular bill, the fact of the matter 
is that those that are in charge of creating laws, those that are in 
charge of upholding laws, those that are in charge of enacting 
laws, it’s really, really important to point out that they hold the 
standard. Because in our society in general, they have to have a 
higher standard of how they perform their duties when it comes 
to the delivering of just circumstances to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now I’m trying my darndest to try and sound like the layperson 
that I am when it comes to the legal proceedings. And there’s 
obviously . . . And certainly the legal terminology, there’s 
obviously people within my caucus that are much more astute at 
this process than I, so I know they’ll have a lot to say on this 
particular bill as we begin to dissect the bill and certainly offer 
the opposition’s perspective on this particular bill. 
 
But in general, Mr. Speaker, people should know that when you 
are approached by a police officer, that they’re there as a 
member of the justice system, and that the whole premise is that 
justice must be blind, justice must be accountable, justice must 
be neutral. When I say blind, I’m talking about dealing with 
people of different background, that they can’t simply decide 
not to deal with an individual based on the colour of their skin 



1098 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2016 

or their financial circumstance nor their religious beliefs, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In that sense, justice needs to be neutral. It needs to be blind not 
to predetermine whether a crime has been committed against a 
person or by a person based on any of the conditions that I 
made reference to here a few seconds ago. That being said, Mr. 
Speaker, the important premise is that those that enforce our 
laws must be held to a higher standard of abiding by those laws 
than the general public. Why, Mr. Speaker? Because if they 
don’t do that, if they don’t do that, then there goes the base of 
our justice system in a sense that people will have less 
confidence as we’re seeing evidence of that . . . [inaudible] . . . 
across the country, less confidence in the justice system based 
on some of the issues that I am speaking about or have spoken 
about earlier. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that The Coroners 
Amendment Act and the role of the coroner, and that’s why I’m 
going to get through that whole process here so people that are 
out within the province and listening to this debate, they will 
know, Mr. Speaker, the role of the coroner, who notifies the 
coroner. And what this bill does, I think it weakens the 
transparency and accountability around the whole notion of 
examining how people die in custody. 
 
We need to make sure that the people of Saskatchewan know 
that this kind of activity doesn’t happen on a daily basis within 
our institutions, whether they’re in remand or whether they’re 
in a correctional centre or the penitentiary, Mr. Speaker. We 
have to know that people that are inmates, certainly their 
families in the event of a death, they have a right to know how 
that individual died if it is not deemed of natural causes. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this bill weakens that process. And this is 
why it’s important that we look through the bills, understand the 
bills, and try and educate the public as much as we can, as much 
as we can as legislators, so that they know exactly what we’re 
trying to deal with. And thus a well-informed public can 
certainly participate and give us their opinions and views. And 
this is the reason why we have this process through our 
Legislative Assembly where the opposition certainly has their 
opportunity to challenge bills and to point out the weaknesses 
and encourage participation by the general public or those 
organizations and people impacted by the bill that we’re 
speaking about today. 
 
So I would encourage the people that are listening to take 
advantage of that, to look at that role that they could play, and 
to certainly point out that advice is something that we need on 
every single bill and we would open the door to that particular 
invitation on Bill No. 41, The Coroners Amendment Act. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to go to page 5 of the bill itself. And 
this is what’s really important on this particular bill. And I’m 
going to quote from the bill, part III. It’s when you have the 
notion of everyone’s duty to notify the coroner of a death, and 
this is people out there that may have the unfortunate encounter 
of finding a dead individual, whether it’s family or not. What 
does that person do? 
 
[15:00] 
 

Well, Mr. Speaker, one of the general duties to notify a coroner 
is: 
 

7(1) [where it says] Every person shall immediately notify 
a coroner or a peace officer of any death that the person 
knows or has reason to believe: 
 
(a) occurred as a result of an accident or violence or was 
self-inflicted; 

 
So everybody needs to contact a coroner or a peace officer if 
they believe, have reason to believe or certainly knows of a 
person that may have died as a result of an accident. 
 
The second section where the coroner should be advised as 
well, Mr. Speaker, by anybody in the public is, “occurred from 
a cause other than disease or sickness.” 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, obviously that’s a straightforward, common 
sense issue and that’s why it’s important to know what does the 
public do. So if you’re the public that’s involved with this, that 
you have a responsibility to immediately notify a coroner or a 
peace officer if you have a belief that someone has deceased: 
 

. . . as a result of an accident or violence or was 
self-inflicted; 
occurred from a cause other than disease or sickness; 
occurred as a result of negligence, misconduct or 
malpractice on the part of others. 

 
That’s a really important point to also stress, Mr. Speaker, 
“occurred suddenly and unexpectedly when the deceased 
appeared to be in good health.” 
 
That’s another condition in which a coroner or the peace 
officers have got to be involved. And certainly, Mr. Speaker: 
 

occurred in Saskatchewan under circumstances in which 
the body’s not available because: 

 
(i) the body or part of the body has been destroyed; 
 
(ii) the body is in a place from which it cannot be 
recovered; or 
 
(iii) the body cannot be located. 

 
The other item, Mr. Speaker, is “(f) was a stillbirth that 
occurred without the presence of a duly qualified medical 
practitioner.” If people have evidence of that, then their duty is 
to contact the coroner or police officer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
“Occurred as a direct or immediate consequences of the 
deceased being engaged in employment, an occupation or a 
business” — that’s another circumstance where John Q. Public 
has to notify the coroner. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Every peace officer who is notified of a death pursuant to 
subsection (1) [the section I just read into record, Mr. 
Speaker] shall immediately notify a coroner of the death. 

 



November 2, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1099 

So, Mr. Speaker, it is important that the public know that under 
those circumstances that you have an obligation or a duty to 
report a death, as I’ve identified, to a coroner or to a peace 
officer. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we were talking about institutions in which 
people that are . . . Again, the bill talks about that: when a 
person dies in custody, what happens in that instance? And I 
want to go back to section 8, Mr. Speaker, when we talk 
specifically about the duty of the institutions to notify a coroner. 
And here are the rules around the institutions that have this 
responsibility. 8(1) where it says: 
 

Where an inmate of a jail, military guardroom, remand 
centre, penitentiary, lock-up or place where the person is 
held under a warrant of a judge or a correctional facility 
[that’s defined] . . . dies, the person in charge of that place 
shall immediately notify a coroner of the death. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, this has to be an immediate response by the 
official on any facility. Because sometimes you can have a 
facility that may not be a jail. It may be a remand centre. It may 
be an institution, Mr. Speaker. If they are held in custody, then 
upon their death they are be immediately . . . they are to 
immediately notify the coroner of that death. 
 
The second section of this Act, Mr. Speaker, says: 
 

Where a person dies while in a custody facility as defined 
in The Youth Justice Administration Act, the person in 
charge of that facility shall immediately notify a coroner of 
the death. 

 
And what that section is saying, Mr. Speaker, that under The 
Youth Justice Administration Act, youth facilities are also 
included in the definition of those held in custody. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the third part for this is important, is: 
 

Where a minor dies while a resident of a foster home, 
group home or place of safety within the meaning of The 
Child and Family Services Act, the person in charge of that 
place shall immediately notify a coroner of the death. 

 
So when we say custody, Mr. Speaker, we’re not just talking 
about those in jail. We’re talking about people that may be in 
jail. Obviously the initial thought that people, when you talk 
about people that are in custody, we think about those that are 
in jail. And yes, the Act involves them, but it also involves the 
youth justice centres or the youth centres that we have 
throughout the province where young kids are kept in custody. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’re also talking about residents of a foster 
home or a group home or a place of safety that the child and 
family services department of Social Services places these 
young kids. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s also a fourth section when we talk 
about the issue of custody and it says, “Where an involuntary 
patient admitted pursuant to section 23 or 24, or detained 
pursuant to section 24.1, of The Mental Health Services Act to 
an inpatient facility within the meaning of that Act dies, the 
person in charge of that facility shall immediately notify a 

coroner of the death.” 
 
So I just want to recap. Those that are in custody, Mr. Speaker, 
do not just mean those that are in jail, Mr. Speaker. Yes, jail is 
part of it. A military guardroom is part of it. A remand centre is 
part of it. A penitentiary lock-up is part of it. A place where a 
person is held under warrant by a judge, that’s part of it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But it’s also involving the youth facilities in our province, so 
the youth are also involved when we talk about custody. And 
we also talk about a minor dying in a foster home. Well that’s 
also considered custody under the Act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it also talks about an involuntary patient, those that may 
have mental challenges, Mr. Speaker. The Mental Health 
Services Act. . . Cognitive disabilities, Mr. Speaker, is the 
proper phrase. But those under The Mental Health Services Act 
are also involved because they’re considered to be in custody as 
well. 
 
And so the duty mentioned in all of these particular 
explanations of custody, the duty mentioned in this section 
applies whether or not the person died on the premises or in 
actual custody or the person was an inmate, resident, or patient 
at the time of death, the death was caused at that place. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, where a person dies while in a hospital to 
which that person was transferred from a place mentioned in 
this section, the person in charge of the hospital shall 
immediately notify the coroner of the death. So as they transfer 
from these facilities and they arrive at the hospital deceased, 
Mr. Speaker, then a coroner has got to be advised of this as 
immediately as possible. 
 
So I want to tell the people out there that may be confused as to 
the role of the coroner and who does what, when. Now 
obviously when you come across, as I mentioned, a deceased 
person, then you have an obligation. Or you have a belief that 
there’s been deceased person somewhere, you have an 
obligation to notify the peace officer or the coroner. That is 
everybody’s obligation. 
 
And a second thing is when we talk about the Act specifically. 
When does the coroner become involved? Well this becomes 
very complex, Mr. Speaker, because we’re not just simply 
dealing with those that are inmates in our jails because 
sometimes we tend to think that way. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s a bit wider ranging than that, and that’s 
why we have to have a good cross-section of opinions and 
consultation with different groups, Mr. Speaker. And that’s kind 
of what I think the purpose of the opposition is, is to hold the 
government to account, to point out that there are errors and 
there are omissions and there are mistakes in some of the bills 
they bring forward. And we know, Mr. Speaker, that the 
Saskatchewan Party is quite prone to a lot of errors. And we’ve 
seen that most recently in the last several years, and we’re 
going to continue paying the price for the errors over the next 
several years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what the important thing is, that when you have people in 
custody, yes, it is jails, those that are in jail but, Mr. Speaker, 



1100 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2016 

it’s also those held in youth facilities. It’s also those that are . . . 
a minor that dies in, a resident of a foster home, a group home. 
It also involves involuntary patients that are admitted to the 
mental health services facilities that we have throughout the 
province. So it’s wide—ranging. It is wide—ranging. 
 
That’s why this Act is so bloody important, that we pay 
attention to what’s going on. It is significantly important, Mr. 
Speaker, because there are a wide range of institutions involved. 
It’s not just the jails, as we mentioned. There are a myriad of 
possibilities of wrongful deaths, and certainly this is the reason 
why we have to be very accountable and very, very transparent 
in how all of these deaths in all of these places of custody are 
important that we monitor. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, of course a police officer while in the course 
of his duty or “. . . while detained by or in the custody of a 
peace officer, the peace officer shall immediately notify a 
coroner of the death.” So it goes both ways. To the public, they 
have a duty. To the peace officer, they obviously also have an 
added responsibility as these placements of some people in 
custody are wide-ranging and certainly in a number of locations 
throughout the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, other people that have to notify the coroner 
in the case of a death . . . This is really interesting, a very 
interesting bill because so many people are paying attention to 
this because it is something we need to pay a lot of close 
scrutiny of the details of some of the rules and regulations. 
 
Now a social worker also has a duty. And under section 10 it 
says: 
 

Where a minor dies while under the care, custody or 
supervision of the Minister of Community Resources and 
Employment, officers or employees of the Department of 
Community Resources and Employment or its designates 
or an agency that has entered into an agreement with the 
Minister of Community Resources . . . pursuant to section 
61 . . . an officer or employee of the Department of 
Community Resources and Employment, its designate or 
the agency who has knowledge of the death shall 
immediately notify a coroner of the death. 

 
So that’s also another important moving part, Mr. Speaker, is 
the fact that there are a number of institutions throughout our 
province that are also involved with the custody of minors. And 
I go back to the section . . . You have officers. You have 
different departments, Mr. Speaker. You have different agencies 
like the First Nations Child and Family Services. They also 
have a role to play, Mr. Speaker, in the deliberation, and 
certainly the delivery of the responsibility of ensuring that all 
deaths are properly reported. And I would certainly surmise, 
Mr. Speaker, with great confidence, that all the agencies that 
may have to . . . or the individuals or the officers or the groups 
that may come across this unfortunate circumstance in their life, 
well I think they will rise up to the occasion, as defined by law, 
that they have this obligation to report this, you know, to the 
coroner, especially a suspicious death. 
 
So they would assume that after they’ve done their legal duty, 
the next section is that they also have to make sure that the 
cause of death is known. I don’t want to say they don’t have to 

make sure, Mr. Speaker, but I think they would want to know 
that this cause of death is being investigated properly and that 
the proper family members are advised. And more so, all these 
agencies that are involved with this, I think, they want to learn 
from this. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s really, really important to point out that 
they want to be able to find out exactly how this individual died 
and what can we do to prevent it in the future and that the 
family knows what’s going on. Those are the three fundamental 
points that I would make as a result of this bill. It is really, 
really important that people focus on those three points. 
Number one is we have to know how the individual died; and 
number two, that we prevent that kind of death in the future; 
and number three, that the family is also advised so that they 
could have their closure on a very tragic event in their lifetime, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So to recap what I think is important, I’ve identified who has 
the responsibility to report a death or a suspicion of a death and 
what the responsibilities are, what the explanations are. I’ve 
also been very specific to the bill, Mr. Speaker, Bill 41, as to 
when the coroner’s office is engaged and who’s all involved 
with that, Mr. Speaker. Who has that responsibility more so 
than others? I’ve identified social workers have . . . Peace 
officers have that greater degree of responsibility. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we also talked about and identified what is 
meant by “in custody.” And I go back to my point. It’s not just 
the jails we’re talking about. We’re talking about foster homes. 
We’re talking about facilities that are identified under The 
Mental Health Services Act. We’re also talking about group 
homes, youth facilities, Mr. Speaker. There are a wide number 
of organizations and different facilities that are considered 
under the title of “in custody.” So when the bill talks about 
those in custody, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that people note it 
is not just for those that are incarcerated in jails or remand 
centres. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the part that’s really important is under 
section 4 where it talks about the investigations of the coroner. 
So this is the part that the bill really touches home, and here are 
some of the points that we want to make, Mr. Speaker. The 
coroner . . . And I want to read the bill in its entirety so people 
know out there exactly what the bill says because a lot of folks 
have a difficult time accessing this information. But I want to 
do just two sections of the bill that’s important, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Under Investigations, the part 4, under section 11.1: 
 

11(1) Where a coroner receives information that there has 
been a death in an area where the coroner ordinarily 
exercises his or her responsibilities and he or she has 
reason to believe that the death occurred under 
circumstances that require a coroner to be notified, he or 
she: [this is the coroner] 

 
(a) may issue a warrant in the prescribed form to take 
possession of the body, if the body is in Saskatchewan; 
and 
 



November 2, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1101 

(b) shall conduct any investigation that he or she 
considers necessary. 

 
And the second part of the Act, Mr. Speaker: 
 

(2) Where a coroner has begun an investigation pursuant to 
subsection (1), no other coroner shall become involved in 
the investigation unless otherwise directed by the chief 
coroner. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, those are some of the things that the 
coroner, the roles or the responsibility that the coroner has. 
Now the coroner has a lot of authority, Mr. Speaker, and has a 
lot of power that is certainly prescribed. And one of the things 
that they can do is that, “A coroner, for the purpose of any 
investigation [in a suspicious death, can] cordon off the area, 
for a period not exceeding 48 hours.” And I’m assuming, Mr. 
Speaker, that as you cordon off an area, that’s certainly to look 
for any particular evidence of foul play and to examine the 
body. And they have 48 hours in which the coroner would be 
able to secure an area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the other thing that’s really important is that the coroner 
can also “prohibit the removal of objects from an area that’s 
cordoned off,” and they can also “place peace officers in charge 
of the area to prevent disturbance of the area until the coroner 
has made . . . examination” of that area. 
 
Now those two parts are really important, Mr. Speaker. You see 
how the process works. The fact that the coroner becomes 
engaged. They have the power to cordon off land. The police 
officers have cordoned off areas that could be a facility or a 
piece of land, and the police officers could be requisitioned to 
guard that area and not have anything touch. And that’s all 
really important as part of the investigation for evidence, Mr. 
Speaker, against any particular party in the event that the 
coroner figures there is some particular disturbing evidence of 
foul play. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, there are some other areas 
that the coroner can certainly exercise their rights and 
responsibilities under the Act. They can, as I said, they can 
cordon off certain areas and they “may enter and inspect any 
place where a dead body is and any place in which the coroner 
has reasonable grounds for believing the body was removed.” 
They: 
 

may examine . . . any records relating to the deceased or 
his or her circumstances where the coroner believes on 
reasonable grounds that it is necessary to do so for the 
purposes of the investigation; 
 
[They] shall take charge of objects . . . or might be items of 
personal property of the deceased and are found . . . near 
[or at] the body of the deceased or in an area where the 
body of the deceased is found. 

 
And what that’s basically saying, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
coroner certainly has a lot of leeway in making sure that they 
can access records, that they can look for evidence, personal 
belongings included. And they can do a lot of the necessary 
investigative work on any area, and it’s fairly prescribed as to 
what they can do. Now: 

with the approval of the chief coroner, [they] may remove 
objects from the area that is cordoned off . . . whether or 
not the objects are items of personal property of the 
deceased [or not. They may also] seize bodily fluids 
obtained from the deceased before death. 

 
So these are some of the things that are really crucial in the 
discovery of how this particular individual may have passed 
away. 
 
Now I want to point that the section I think . . . or this particular 
section, why it’s so important to this bill. When we on the 
opposition talk about accountability and transparency, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s exactly the whole notion behind the premise on 
the justice system, that it’s got to be neutral. It’s got to be 
thorough. It’s got to be professional, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve 
got to hold those that are enforcing the law to a higher standard. 
And we cannot simply have the process where you’re going to 
trust everything that is being done within the justice system. It 
has to be constantly monitored, Mr. Speaker, and you have to 
have that oversight. And that’s why this Act is troubling 
because it removes the requirement for the coroner to do an 
inquest when a person dies in custody. 
 
You have all these factors out there, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
complex process. The coroner’s job is not easy. And I think 
what’s happening here, Mr. Speaker, is that there’s just going to 
be a lot less oversight as to how people are passing away in 
custody. And we’re not just talking about inmates. We’re 
talking about children in foster homes, people that may be in 
mental health institutions, you know, for reasons of their mental 
health. And these are the people that we’re talking about in 
dealing with this in this bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The coroner has a lot of responsibility. They have a lot of tools 
their way, and they certainly have a great degree of 
co-operation from the public, and it’s identified in the Act, and 
certainly from the police themselves. 
 
So I go back to my point is why it’s important we have 
oversight. It’s simply and primarily because you have all these 
complex challenges of knowing how a person has passed away 
in custody. The Act identifies the many rules and regulations 
that the public have to follow, that the police have to follow, 
that the coroner has to follow. And you throw on top of that the 
pressures and demands that the family want to know how this 
individual may have passed away in custody, whether it’s a 
child or a youth in a youth centre or an adult in our correctional 
system, whether it be provincial or federal. So it’s really, really 
important to note that these are the issues that many people in 
the province are quite concerned about when you talk about this 
particular bill. We have no idea why this bill is removing the 
requirement for a coroner’s inquest. Is it about saving money?  
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I go back to my earlier point, is that quite 
obviously the justice system has got to be thorough. As they 
collect evidence as identified in what the role of the coroner and 
the rules the coroner may have, as they collect those evidence, 
we expect them to be thorough. We expect them to be 
professional. We expect them to have the authority to conduct a 
review in how that death has occurred. 
 
And why? I go back to my earlier statements, Mr. Speaker, is 



1102 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2016 

that (a) the family needs to have that closure as to how this 
individual died. Secondly, we have to make sure that we don’t 
allow that to occur again. And the most important lesson, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s an integral part of our justice system where we 
hold police officers and coroners to a higher standard in 
ensuring that the public knows how an individual may have 
died in custody. That work has got to be done thoroughly and 
has involved as many people and organizations as possible to 
ensure that we show the people of Saskatchewan that this is 
how we treat all people, even those that are in custody, to make 
sure that standards of law are upheld. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, when a coroner gets involved with finding a 
dead body, a body of a deceased, they have a section under 
section 14. It’s titled “Post-mortem examination,” and I want 
to briefly explain to the people what happens when a deceased 
person is found, that: 
 

A coroner may, at any time during an investigation or 
inquest, issue a warrant for a post-mortem examination of 
the body, an analysis of the blood, urine or contents of the 
stomach or intestines or any other examination or analysis 
of the body that the coroner considers necessary. 

 
So again, they can do a lot of . . . They have a lot of power to do 
a number of post-mortem examinations on a body. Mr. Speaker: 
 

A post-mortem examination is to be performed by a 
pathologist approved by the chief coroner. 

 
So the pathologist of course has to look for a number of issues 
within the deceased’s body to make sure that, you know, there 
is as much information received, as much information received 
as to how this individual may have passed. 
 
So I’ll go back to my earlier point. If we’re making the effort 
and we are spending the resources and the time to get qualified 
medical people to find out exactly how this person died, we’re 
going through a stringent process of rules and regulation, then 
why compromise on the accountability and transparency piece 
later on in the Act by saying that the coroner doesn’t have to 
have a public disclosure process? 
 
We don’t think that it fits. We think that you’ve got to be 
thorough all throughout the bill. It should be thorough. And 
why be thorough in certain parts of the Act and not be 
completely thorough at the start of the Act in which we need to 
have a public inquiry? That really, I think, is the thrust of what 
my arguments are. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The pathologist who performs a post-mortem examination 
may remove . . . [or] retain any part of the body or object 
found in the body for the purpose of establishing the cause 
and manner of death. 

 
So you see the incredible power and authority that the 
pathologist would have and the coroner would have, and the 
role and responsibility of the public. So you have all those 
pieces that fit and that make sense. You’ve also identified, Mr. 
Speaker, what we mean by custody, being in custody. So you 
look at the moving parts of all this. And the public out there 

deserve to know that our justice system, when dealing with a 
deceased loved one, whether that person is in a youth centre or 
in a jail or a foster home, they have to know that the rules are 
spelled out vigorously for the pathologist, that the process 
allowed to the coroner to do his job is thorough. 
 
But now the minister, for some odd reason, has not agreed to 
have this become a process where an inquest will not be held as 
to how that person died. And I think that is not the proper 
process to undertake, Mr. Speaker, because again, number one, 
I think it’d compromise the integrity of the justice system by 
just having one individual as opposed to an inquest where a 
number of individuals are there to ask a myriad of questions. 
 
Number two, Mr. Speaker, I want to make sure it never happens 
again, which is quite, that’s quite crucial, that we learn from 
that death so it doesn’t happen again. 
 
And third, the most important part of this, Mr. Speaker, I 
believe, is that it gives closure to the family that may have lost a 
loved one in custody, whether it’s a child in a foster home or a 
youth . . . somebody in the youth detention centre, or somebody 
in one of our mental health institutions throughout the province, 
as well as those that are in jail. 
 
And finally I would say, Mr. Speaker, on the role of the chief 
coroner, they can provide any . . . They can request any 
assistance in their investigation. Obviously the police have to be 
part of that process. And they can also ask for a body to be, to 
use a phrase, that they can also ask the body to be . . . may order 
the disinterment of a body, which means that they can actually 
recover a body that has been laid to rest already to do further 
tests, Mr. Speaker. A coroner certainly has that responsibility or 
has the authority to do that if he or she feels that there is some 
evidence that they need to retrieve from a person that’s been 
buried a number of days, if not months earlier. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the other thing that’s important that the 
coroner may do is that they can exercise their right and 
responsibilities. They can issue a warrant. They can conduct 
any investigation that he or she feels necessary. And they can 
also, Mr. Speaker, as indicated, they can also cordon off certain 
areas. 
 
[15:30] 
 
Now I want to go to the section that’s quite important here as 
well, Mr. Speaker, is that around the section of inquests. Like 
when do you have an inquest? And this is the whole thrust of 
the bill. And I go back to the point that the bill removes the 
requirement for a coroner’s inquest when a person dies in 
custody. And I want to go to the section. So we’ve identified in 
this particular bill, Mr. Speaker, (a) what the role of the public 
is. We’ve identified what the coroner does. We spoke about the 
role of the pathologist. We’ve enhanced the role of the RCMP 
[Royal Canadian Mounted Police] or peace officers, what their 
role is. We’ve argued legitimately why that this bill is really a 
deterrent to the accountability and transparency required of our 
justice system to the public and to the families. 
 
And we also are going to point out that, you know, the three 
premises attached to that is: we need to make sure death won’t 
happen again; that we learn from this; and, Mr. Speaker, more 



November 2, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1103 

importantly, it gives closure to the family. 
 
So when does a coroner actually begin the process to have an 
inquest? And I’ll go to where section 19 of the Act is, Mr. 
Speaker, and I quote: 
 

A coroner, with the approval of the chief coroner, shall 
hold an inquest where, after conducting an investigation, 
the chief coroner is of the opinion that an inquest is 
necessary to: 
 

(a) ascertain the identity of the deceased and determine 
how, when, where and by what means he or she died; 
 
(b) inform the public of the circumstances surrounding a 
death; 
 
(c) bring dangerous practices or conditions to light and 
facilitate the making of recommendations to avoid 
preventable deaths . . . [and finally] 
 
(d) educate the public about dangerous practices or 
conditions to avoid preventable deaths, [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
So this is where I’ve identified when the coroner becomes 
engaged, as to when . . . These are some of the issues in which 
they would, you know, ask for an inquest. 
 
Now when a coroner dies, section 20 of the Act covers that 
particular aspect of it. Now don’t forget, inmate makes 
reference to those that are in jail cells, and whether they’re in 
remand or sentenced already, Mr. Speaker, but also involves a 
number of people that are in custody. 
 

A coroner shall hold an inquest into the death of a person 
who dies while an inmate in a place mentioned in 
subsection 8(1) . . . [and also section] (2), unless the 
coroner is satisfied that the person’s death was entirely due 
to natural causes and was not preventable. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, a coroner has that authority to hold an inquest. 
But this bill says that they don’t have to do that anymore. And 
we think it’s one of the fundamental principles behind the 
integrity of the law, is that you’ve got to have that transparency; 
you’ve got to have that accountability. And you can’t simply 
leave it in the hands of one particular Act or one individual to 
make that determination. We think that this is a good guiding 
principle to ensure that no matter which life is lost, that there’s 
thoroughness: and that’s determine the cause of death; who may 
have caused that death; and how we can avoid that into the 
future. So that’s one of the things that’s also important. 
 
But not just the coroner, Mr. Speaker, not just the coroner can 
direct an inquest. The minister, the Attorney General of 
Saskatchewan also have that opportunity to do so because quite 
frankly, being the Minister of Justice, you are in a sense the 
main individual in charge of caretaking our justice system 
overall. So, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that we are having 
a lot of issues around that particular aspect, and this is where I 
think it’s really important that people in Saskatchewan pay 
attention. 
 
So just to wrap up, Mr. Speaker, we understand the role of the 

public. We understand the role of the coroner. We understand 
the role of the police officer. We understand that “in custody” 
has a wide variety of definitions. It’s not just those that are 
incarcerated. We understand that the coroner has certain powers 
and responsibilities and rights to secure areas or do 
examinations of the body. They can disinter bodies overall and 
recover them from their burial sites if they so wish. 
 
We also know that there’s a myriad of agencies involved, 
whether it’s the department of community social services or 
whether it’s a foster parents organization or whether it’s the 
First Nations Child And Family Services agency. You can see 
the complexity to this particular file, Mr. Speaker. So my point 
being that if it’s a complex issue, why weaken the transparency 
and accountable component of this Act by simply putting in the 
condition under Bill 41 in which they remove the requirement 
for a coroner’s inquest when a person dies in custody. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, my final two comments I want to make, and 
I want to read this into the record. There are two things that I 
want to point out, Mr. Speaker. This is a newspaper article, and 
I’ll read this from the Regina Leader-Post. So these are all 
quotes, Mr. Speaker. I understand the rules around names, but 
these are quotes from an article of the Regina Leader-Post, 31 
October, 2016. And I quote: 
 

The Saskatchewan government’s decision to allow the 
coroner’s office to decide whether or not to hold an inquest 
into the death of anyone held in custody is surprising and 
disappointing. 
 
We believe that removing the legal obligation for inquests 
into in-custody deaths will undermine public confidence in 
the justice system and likely lead to more families 
demanding answers when a loved one dies while serving a 
sentence, being held on remand or even in police cells. 
 
If Justice Minister Gord Wyant doesn’t want to spend the 
next four years having to defend decisions on why an 
inquest was held into the death of Prisoner A but not 
Prisoner B, we suggest he [should] shelve the idea. 
 
We take the point that sometimes the circumstances don’t 
warrant a public inquest — for example when one inmate 
is murdered by another, resulting in a police investigation 
and trial of the alleged perpetrator. In such cases where 
there’s a thorough public airing of the circumstances, the 
coroner’s office would be justified in passing on the 
obvious duplication of an inquest. 
 
There’s an argument, too, for allowing the coroner’s office 
to pass on an inquest when an inmate dies of natural causes 
— so long as a thorough public report is made available 
and the families are satisfied with the result. 
 
However, for the government to suggest the coroner’s 
office also have the final word on whether there’s an 
inquest for those who die from “self-harm” while in 
custody is a step too far. A suicide could follow bullying 
and intimidation from other inmates or occur if staff 
neglect their duty to monitor vulnerable prisoners. 
 
We believe the circumstances behind all such deaths 



1104 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2016 

should be examined by a six-person inquest jury. Such 
inquests in the past have resulted in changes to custody 
procedures based on jury recommendations. 
 
Ironically, the proposed change to inquest requirements 
follows a review of the coroner’s office in the wake of a 
tragedy that had nothing to do with an in-custody death. 
 
The family of a Regina woman who died after falling 10 
storeys down a laundry chute in 2015 questioned the 
investigation process and the coroner’s finding of 
accidental death. 
 
That prompted Wyant to announce in June that an 
independent inquest would be held and a review launched 
into the coroner’s office. “I’m concerned that the 
confidence in the coroner’s office and the confidence in the 
administration of justice has been put into question.” 
 
We agree. 
 
So let’s ensure an inquest examining the deaths of those 
who are in custody is the norm, not the exception. 
 

And I’m going to end my point on this particular bill, Mr. 
Speaker, on what the minister has said. And I’m using his 
quote: “I’m concerned that the confidence in the coroner’s 
office and the confidence in the administration of justice has 
been put into question.” 
 
So why then, Mr. Speaker, are we having this bill come 
forward? Why are we then, Mr. Speaker, having this debate in 
this Assembly? 
 
As I pointed out, my learned colleagues will have their say on 
this particular bill. So on that note, I move that we adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 41, The Coroners Amendment Act, 2016. I so 
move. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 41, The Coroners 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 26 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 26 — The Patient 
Choice Medical Imaging Act be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince 
Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased to stand today and talk about Bill No. 26. It’s The 

Patient Choice Medical Imaging Act. And this was put forward 
by the minister, the previous minister of Health in our spring 
session, and now we get the opportunity to discuss a little bit of 
the things about what’s in this bill. 
 
And this is a new legislation because it’s kind of incorporating 
some other legislation from what I understand, and making this 
new one, this new piece of legislation. And this is a really 
important legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because health care 
in our provinces is important. And I think all residents in our 
province would believe that, and they would want to make sure 
that we really review this in all aspects. 
 
Personally, I’ve been fortunate enough that I always had 
publicly funded health care since I was born, so I don’t know 
anything different, you know. And I just hear stories about what 
it was like before and so I hear that, you know, people in 
Saskatchewan, some people couldn’t afford to pay for a doctor 
or go to the hospital and they relied on charity, or sometimes 
they went without care. 
 
And sometimes people, they would have to, you know, 
remortgage their house, sacrifice their homes, and use all their 
life savings in order to get the medical attention that they 
needed . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . That was previous. The 
members across are wondering what I’m talking about, but this 
was previous to having publicly funded health care. And so 
people would have to go without health care and they would 
oftentimes, you know, end up spending all their savings. And so 
I’m really happy that we do in Canada have publicly funded 
health care. And so we know that that’s not the case in some 
places like the United States, but here we really value that, you 
know, and I appreciate that. 
 
And like I said previous to that, I have never experienced that 
and I’m grateful for that and for my family. My family doesn’t 
come from much finances. We didn’t come from a lot of 
money. And so if we didn’t have publicly funded health care, I 
can’t imagine where we might be today. There’s things like 
ambulance fees. I come from a small town and my dad would 
always say to me, if I need an ambulance, don’t you dare call 
one; you throw me in the car and we get to the hospital. 
Because he didn’t want to have to pay for that bill. And so, 
thank God, we were able to get to the hospital and have fees 
covered there. 
 
And also as a previous health care worker, I know a lot of 
people who would come for our services who wouldn’t be able 
to afford private services. And there’s a lot of private 
counsellors that provide counselling services, but I was really 
grateful to work with the health region and be able to provide 
counselling to people who wouldn’t be able to afford that. So I 
think that’s really important when we’re talking about health 
care and we’re talking about issues with regards to this bill. 
And so I would like people to keep that in mind, and about the 
priorities of the residents in Saskatchewan. 
 
And a lot of people will say the reason why we might not 
completely support this legislation is because members on this 
side of the House don’t support privately owned businesses. 
And that’s not the case at all, Mr. Speaker. We definitely 
support privately owned businesses. And actually when I sit and 
think about health care in our province, a lot of the health care 



November 2, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1105 

that is provided to us are actually from privately owned 
businesses. 
 
Doctor’s offices. My doctor has his own private clinic, but it 
doesn’t cost me one penny to go see him because it’s billed to 
our health care. But it’s his private business. There’s walk-in 
clinics that we could go use now, and we walk in, we get 
whatever services we need with our health card, and that’s not 
costing us one cent. 
 
[15:45] 
 
And even I’ve gone for X-rays or CAT [computerized axial 
tomography] . . . not CAT scans, but other medical imaging 
services, and that was provided by private owned businesses but 
that was billed to our health. So I think that’s really important 
that these things are covered by our health care and that we 
keep it that way. And that’s why this does really concern me. 
 
First in 2015, there was legislation brought forward with 
regards to privatizing MRI [magnetic resonance imaging] 
services, and now this is with regards to CT [computerized 
tomography] scans. But this legislation makes it open to have 
all medical imaging services allowed, you know, to have as 
privatized services. And so I really am concerned that the 
language in this legislation is a bit too broad, and so I hope 
that’s discussed at committee and I’m sure that discussion will 
be had there. 
 
So I want to talk about some key factors with the Canada 
Health Act. There’s five main principles, Mr. Speaker, with 
regards to the Canada Health Act, and the first one is public 
administration. So all administration of provincial health 
insurance must be carried out by a public authority on a 
non-profit basis. So that’s the first one. 
 
The second key principle is comprehensiveness. So all 
necessary health services, including hospitals, physicians, and 
surgical dentists must be insured. Universality is all insured 
residents are entitled to the same level of health care. And 
portability, that’s a resident that moves to a different province 
or territory is entitled to coverage from their home province 
during a minimum waiting period. And that’s also if you leave 
the country. And accessibility, all insured persons have 
reasonable access to health care facilities. 
 
And so this is under the Canadian health act, and I hope this is 
discussed further in committees as well because it’s really 
important, especially under the provision of, all insured 
residents are entitled to the same level of health care. And I 
think that is really brought into effect here. 
 
Saskatchewan people, they place a high value on equitable 
access to high-quality health care, and they want it delivered on 
the basis of need and not the ability to pay. And I think when 
you talk to the majority of residents, they will say that. They 
believe that if a person needs the care, they should have it first. 
And I’ve seen this myself in walk-in clinics, and you’re waiting 
and someone comes in and you know they are in much worse 
need than you are. And I’ve seen it first-hand and I was actually 
. . . I had my two-year-old daughter and she was really . . . she 
broke her leg, and people said, go ahead. They saw how much 
pain she was in. And we’re just very good people in 

Saskatchewan and we believe that, you know, people who need 
the services should have that, not the ability to pay for services. 
 
And I feel that this legislation will create a two-tiered kind of 
system, Mr. Speaker, a two-tiered health care system. And so 
the problem with that is that you create winners and losers. And 
so the winners in a two-tiered system are the private investors 
and the insurance industry and the people who are the most 
wealthy and can buy their way to the front of the line. And the 
people who are the losers are people who will have to wait 
longer because other people are jumping the queue to get things 
like surgeries and such, and also having deteriorating standards. 
And I’ll explain that a little bit, Mr. Speaker, the deteriorating 
standards. 
 
Basically when you have a private system and a public system 
conflicting with each other, that they’re parallel, that oftentimes 
the private system will take a lot of human resources from the 
public system. And so then the public system, that we see 
already in our public system, that we’re struggling to find 
enough health care providers in our system. But when we have 
the private conflicting with that, they’re fighting for the same 
resources. And oftentimes private can pay a little bit more than 
what our public system can, or offer more for employees. So 
that provides an issue and could result in deteriorating standards 
of our health care. 
 
Also another issue is that when you have the private and the 
public parallel, that it also decreases the pressure from political 
influences. Because oftentimes the people who do come and 
speak forward about the issues that we have in our public health 
system are the more privileged residents in our province, 
because they have the means and resources and the ability to 
speak out about the issues that are happening. And so when the 
most privileged are getting private services, oftentimes we don’t 
hear what the issues are in our public system. And so I think 
that’s important to also look into when we’re talking about the 
two-tiered health care system. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, this causes a backlog for services, and does 
not help nor support the fact that we need to address . . . The 
actual issue here is we need to address surgical wait times in 
our province here. And I know the members across said that 
that was a priority for them, and they haven’t reached the levels 
that they promised to us, and I think this isn’t the way to go 
about that. This is just going to cause more extreme wait times 
and we need to still work on reducing that wait time. So this 
does not solve the problem in our province, and it just simply 
allows people who have the financial resources to receive health 
care services ahead of the most marginalized individuals in our 
province. And, again, I don’t believe, I truly don’t believe that’s 
what Saskatchewan residents want. 
 
So I’m going to quote here from my colleague, and this was 
when they were discussing Bill No. 179, The MRI Facilities 
Licensing Act. And the member that I’m going to quote here is 
the member for Saskatoon Riversdale and she’s the critic for 
Health. So when she was talking about the issues with regards 
to that bill, she said, like, are the things in this legislation? 
 

Is this evidence-based policy? I would argue that the 
evidence isn’t there. We can look at other jurisdictions. Or 
is this purely political in motive? And if it is purely 



1106 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2016 

political in motive, that is not the way public policy should 
be made, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That is not the way public 
policy should be made. 

 
And that was my fellow colleague, the critic for Health, and she 
said that on October 21, 2015 when we were talking about that 
bill. And she is so very right. Like we should be making 
policies that are evidence-based, not just based on what we 
think is going to win us the next election. And I wonder what 
the motives are with regards to this legislation, and I truly hope 
that the motives are pure in heart, you know. And I don’t 
believe they are because again, like I said, of all of the things 
that I find out about issues with parallel systems, I find that the 
evidence is not proving that. 
 
And when I do some research on how to reduce these wait 
times a lot of the things that I hear, you know, what could help 
is reducing the multiple tests that are required when you are 
seeing a lot of medical professionals. When I was door 
knocking, like all of us did around election time, I heard time 
and time again from people that they said that when they had a 
medical issue, they went and saw one doctor. They had to get 
their blood test; they had to get an X-ray; they had to do this. 
And then when they saw the specialist they had to get a blood 
test; they had to get the X-rays; they had to do this. And it could 
be even a matter of weeks, there was nothing that changed. 
They still had gallstones. Like nothing was different, you know, 
and so a lot of people question, why are we always getting these 
multiple tests? Maybe we need to make the health care system a 
little bit easier and make more sense. Maybe we need to look at 
some other options. 
 
And the members here like to bring back to when we were in 
power. Well that was well over eight years, and I like to, you 
know, solve problems that are happening today. That’s not an 
excuse to not solve problems that are happening today. And we 
know there’s an issue; let’s go solve it. You’ve got the mandate. 
Let’s go and talk to the front-line workers. Let’s go do some 
evidence-based research and find out what will help reduce wait 
times. 
 
And so with that, you know, Mr. Speaker, I know I have great 
faith in the critic of Health on our team here, and I know she’ll 
do her research with regards to this. This is near and dear to her 
heart and a lot of ours. And I know my colleagues have a lot 
more to add to this particular issue because this is one that I 
don’t think is being done with regards to doing all the research 
behind it. And so I really hope there’s more research — some 
evidence-based research — being provided and that discussion 
is being made in committees. 
 
So I’m sure my colleagues will have more information to add 
with regards to this discussion so, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to 
adjourn this debate. I’ll move to adjourn this debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 26, The Patient Choice 
Medical Imaging Act. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 

Bill No. 28 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Morgan that Bill No. 28 — The 
Extension of Compassionate Care Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And as I 
always like to say, I am honoured to be able to get up in this 
Assembly and enter into the debate on the bills as they’re being 
presented. 
 
And this bill is a little bit of an interesting bill, and I think 
there’s a couple really serious problems with it right off the 
hop. First of all, the name is completely misleading. And I think 
this is a government that’s trying to show clarity in its 
legislation, but this is another example of where they’ve 
completely missed the mark. Because although it’s called The 
Extension of Compassionate Care Act, 2016, that is really one 
small part of what this Act is doing. 
 
And it’s misleading in a number of ways because what the 
second problem with this bill is, is that it’s fixing the massive 
employment Act that they introduced a couple years ago, full of 
mistakes, the one that we started off by going to the Supreme 
Court on, and now we’re back at it again. So once again, it’s 
another example of these guys coming back to the drawing 
board because there were mistakes made in the drafting in the 
first place, and instructions weren’t clear to the drafters, so all 
of a sudden here we are back at it again. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s a habit with this government. We keep 
revisiting bills, and I suppose in some ways it at least keeps us a 
little bit busy because then we actually have bills on the 
legislative agenda. And if it weren’t for a lot of these correcting 
bills and revisiting bills, you know . . . There’s a small handful 
that I think we really have to pay a lot of attention to, Mr. 
Speaker. But this is another one where we see there’s an oops, 
and I did it again, Mr. Speaker. And so we’re back at it and 
revisiting a bill that was before us in the Assembly previously. 
 
So first of all, the name is wrong. For a government that’s 
trying to put clarity in, that’s what we have is the wrong name, 
Mr. Speaker. Of course we’re making fun of politicians south of 
the border now, but in this case there is no clarity. 
 
And if you look at the name of this bill, it’s called The 
Extension of Compassionate Care Act, and yet here we are 
selecting the adjudicators to hear an appeal rather than going 
through the Labour Relations Board. So somehow I don’t know 
how you can get from there with the title. 
 
And I think one of the problems we’re worried about here is, 
has the minister done his homework? Has he actually even 
talked to people in the labour community? Because we’re 
hearing that he hasn’t. You know, he’s formed this labour 
advisory committee and talks a lot about being able to consult 
with them and to be in touch with what’s going on with people 
in the labour movement and the workers of this province. But 
we’re worried that he hasn’t even brought this up with them, 



November 2, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1107 

and you have to wonder why. Why is it being named with such 
a weird name, and why hasn’t he consulted with the folks over 
in Labour about this? Because this is a big change. They’re 
giving much greater authority to the registrar of the Labour 
Relations Board, and they’re taking away that authority from 
the board itself. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Now the excuse the minister gave in his second reading 
comments was that when The Saskatchewan Employment Act 
was drafted, these provisions were not included, and it has 
resulted in some confusion. Hello, Mr. Speaker, here we are 
again. Confusion reigns and yet there’s always this claim that 
they’re trying to seek clarity. We see that with Bill 40 and The 
Interpretation Act where a weird definition of privatization is 
being inserted into The Interpretation Act, which is the wrong 
place for that kind of bill. But they don’t have the courage to 
actually come out and be bold and upfront with the people of 
Saskatchewan because they know how that worked for them in 
2003. So they’re hiding behind their privatization agenda and 
sliding it in in bills like Bill 40. 
 
So no clarity, and again with this bill you’ve got to wonder why 
it’s being called The Extension of Compassionate Care Act 
when it really does more than that. And it is changing the way 
adjudications are done with the Labour Relations Board. So one 
can only speculate, Mr. Speaker, on the thinking that went 
behind this. Now fair enough, and I will say that there are 
changes being made to the compassionate care, and that’s one 
of the changes in this bill, so I guess that is the justification for 
naming it thusly. But I think it’s a misleading name because 
that’s only part of it and there are some very disparate things 
going on here. 
 
And maybe it should’ve been an Act to fix The Saskatchewan 
Employment Act because we didn’t fix it in the first place. That 
might be a better name for this bill. Maybe it’s a bit too long, 
Mr. Speaker, and could be confusing, you know, when we 
know this government is keen to be clear on everything that it 
does and to the extent that it actually changes what the 
definitions are and makes them their own. 
 
We just heard about the medical imaging Act, and we keep 
hearing from this government, well that’s not privatization of 
the medical system. But, Mr. Speaker, we know indeed it is a 
form of privatization, and it’s clearly indicated in all the 
literature that relates to privatization. So that’s clarity from the 
Sask Party government, Mr. Speaker. That’s their forte, I guess. 
And I see it again in this bill. At any rate, Mr. Speaker, those 
are the two main changes to this bill. And I think, you know, in 
terms of extending the compassionate care, that’s in relation to 
changes made to federal legislation. So this was a necessary 
change, and as the minister noted, there are a lot of challenges. 
 
I have aging parents myself, and my dad’s going to be 90 in a 
few months and still living in his own home. But we know that, 
you know, as people age, compassionate care becomes a bigger 
and bigger issue. And we know families are important. So as far 
as compassionate care goes and extending it, I think that, you 
know, as long as we support the employers as they are 
responsible for these initiatives, that’s very helpful. 
 

But I think in terms of the changes to The Saskatchewan 
Employment Act to allow the registrar to select adjudicators for 
an appeal rather than the board, those are questions that need to 
be put to the labour community. I understand that hasn’t 
happened and that this minister is not keeping up his promise to 
consult. He talks big about it. He’s very good at that. But he’s 
not putting his money where his mouth is. And I think it’s 
important for him to continue those lines of communication 
with the people that this affects, and he needs to do his 
consultation. He needs to do his homework. 
 
So at that note, Mr. Speaker, I will . . . I think that’s the extent 
of my comments on this bill, so I would like to move that we 
adjourn the debate on Bill No. 28, An Act to amend The 
Saskatchewan Employment Act or The Extension of 
Compassionate Care Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana, if I 
heard correctly, is adjourning debate on Bill No. 28, The 
Extension of Compassionate Care Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 

 
Bill No. 29 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 29 — The Justices 
of the Peace Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 
sur les juges de paix be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A 
pleasure to join debate this afternoon on Bill No. 29, The 
Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2016 and of course the 
accompanying legislation in French, Loi modificative de 2016 
sur les juges de paix. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting watching what’s going on in the 
justice system these days, and certainly the developments keep 
rolling in even on this very day in terms of different stresses 
and problems that this government is imposing and posing for 
the system, Mr. Speaker. And you know, so we sit here today 
debating The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act and you 
know, there’s trouble raging all around. 
 
But in terms of this particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s about creating a regime, an extrajudicial regime, 
interestingly enough, where traffic safety issues can be resolved 
without engaging the courts. 
 
The bill itself allows for the creation of an assistant supervising 
Justice of the Peace who will be able to take over for the 
supervising Justice of the Peace in his or her absence and assist 
him or her with his or her duties. And it also creates a new 
category for justices of the peace, senior justices of the peace, 
senior justices of the peace being able to impose fines or order a 
driver to take driver’s training for traffic offences, and also 
provisions around the payment of senior justices of the peace. 
 



1108 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2016 

So, Mr. Speaker, this bill would seem to build out the capacity 
as regards the justices of the peace component of our justice 
system, and again that’s fair enough in and of itself. The 
minister in his second reading speech states that “The 
Saskatchewan Justice of the Peace Association has been 
consulted on an ongoing basis during the development of this 
bill and is supportive of these amendments,” to quote from June 
14th’s Hansard, page 522. And again, Mr. Speaker, we’ll take 
him at his word on that, but certainly we’ll do our own due 
diligence on this piece of legislation to ensure that those things 
which are proclaimed are what they are proclaimed to be. 
 
But with that, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know that there’s much 
more to add on this particular piece of legislation. I know that 
other of my colleagues, and certainly my learned colleagues, 
will have I think a more informed perspective to bring to bear in 
this debate, and I certainly await that with interest. But for the 
time being, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 29, The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 29, The Justices of the Peace 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the . . . Order. The 
Opposition House Leader has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 29, The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2016. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 30 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 30 — The 
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy 
Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Again 
good to join debate this afternoon on Bill No. 30, The Freedom 
of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016. 
In the minister’s second reading speech on June 14th of this 
year, a number of things were talked about, certainly the way 
that this is a companion piece with the bill updating the freedom 
of information and protection of privacy, and also the local 
authority piece of legislation which I believe my colleague from 
Prince Albert will be speaking to in the not too distant future, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But certainly changes to the freedom of information regime in 
the province of Saskatchewan, there’s a lot of work that has 
been done over the years by different information and privacy 
commissioners. Certainly we are well served in the province by 
the good work of the Privacy Commissioner Kruzeniski, and 
certainly there were some individuals that preceded in that role 
that have set out some definite calls for improvements to the 
freedom of information and privacy landscape in Saskatchewan. 
 
When various of these pieces of legislation were introduced in 
the early 1990s, Mr. Speaker, they led the nation. That was of 
course then; this is of course now. And it’s I think fair comment 

that Saskatchewan has fallen behind in terms of the adequacy of 
its freedom of information and protection of privacy legislation. 
So we’ve had calls from people such as the Information and 
Privacy Commissioner over years now for updates to the 
information, the freedom of information and protection of 
privacy regime in this province. 
 
So one of the landmark works in that regard, Mr. Speaker, was 
the Information and Privacy Commissioner’s 2015 report, It’s 
Time to Update, calling for a number of changes to information 
and privacy protection in Saskatchewan. And certainly this bill 
contains certain of those measures that were called for, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In terms of the creation of a new offence for snooping on a 
person’s personal information, again, Mr. Speaker, in this age 
of connectivity and this age of a lot of information that is 
sensitive to individuals being accessible, rightly or not, in a 
variety of ways, this is an offence that is long overdue in fact. 
 
And again it goes to that trust relationship, that people who are 
charged with the oversight of these records, that that need be 
enforced, that it shouldn’t be left to the honour system, Mr. 
Speaker, because we’ve seen too many examples of that trust 
being abused and that responsibility not being shouldered by 
people that are in a position to take advantage of personal 
information that ought not be traded or trafficked in. And then 
certainly, Mr. Speaker, the . . . So we welcome those changes. 
 
We’re also interested to see how the impact of the extension of 
the rules for personal information protection to MLA [Member 
of the Legislative Assembly] offices and cabinet ministers’ 
offices, how that works out, Mr. Speaker. Certainly the work 
that has been done around the release forms in terms of people 
being able to bring cases forward, I know certainly the kind of 
advocacy work that goes on in the office in Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre and the great work that Tim, who I have the 
privilege of working with, and the role that making sure that the 
information is being properly accessed, that it’s properly 
authorized, that has been an interesting adjustment in the office, 
Mr. Speaker. And certainly we’ll be interested to see how that is 
further impacted by the change in the legislation and how this 
work goes. 
 
[16:15] 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, as we seek to provide greater freedom 
of information and as well greater protection of private 
information, that should not, it ought not result in a situation 
where process is used as an excuse or as a dodge not to help 
people, Mr. Speaker. But certainly that balance must be 
undertaken where people are authorizing access to their 
information and that is made clear and that is respected. But it 
ought not be used as an excuse for not helping people when 
they come forward asking for that help at their MLA office or 
in contact with different of the cabinet offices or indeed with 
the Premier’s office, Mr. Speaker. But it also provides that 
protection against that information being used inappropriately. 
And again we’ll be interested to see how that carries forward. 
 
One thing, or a couple of things that the bill does not include, 
there was certainly other recommendations that await action 
that came from the Information and Privacy Commissioner. I’m 



November 2, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1109 

talking about the change of a maximum time for a response 
from 30 days to 20 days. That is something that as yet has not 
been acted upon by this government. 
 
And in terms of an automatic update that should be included in 
terms of freedom of information and privacy protection 
legislation, there’s a good recommendation made by the 
Information and Privacy Commissioner that an automatic 
update be undertaken, an automatic review be undertaken every 
five years. And certainly that would keep it up to date, and it 
would keep it at the cutting edge. And again, Mr. Speaker, in 
the grander scheme of things, where Saskatchewan went from 
leading in Canada in terms of its freedom of information and 
privacy protection regime in the early ’90s to now where 
significant action must be undertaken to get to the middle of the 
pack, that five-year update provision would guard against that. 
 
I know that other of my colleagues will have, I’d imagine, much 
more informed and thoughtful interventions on this score than 
myself, and I look forward to that, Mr. Speaker. But for the 
time being, I’d move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 30, The 
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment 
Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 30, The Freedom of Information and 
Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 31 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 31 — The Local 
Authority Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy 
Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to stand 
here today to discuss Bill No. 31, The Local Authority Freedom 
of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016. 
This was presented by the Minister of Justice in the spring 
session and so now we’re having some time to discuss it and 
review it. 
 
It appears that a lot of the information that’s in here, the 
changes that are being made were based on recommendations 
from the Information and Privacy Commissioner in his report 
from 2015, It’s Time To Update. And so it’s nice to see that the 
information that he’s brought forward, that some of that’s being 
discussed and being implemented into changes to this bill. 
 
I know a lot of the changes are quite parallel to changes being 
made to The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy 
Amendment Act, 2016, Bill No. 30, and so there’ll be some of 
the same changes within the two bills. But some of the changes 
that are going to be reflective of this bill, the Minister of Justice 
said, like that based on some of the recommendations from the 

commissioner that: 
 

These [will] include: a duty to assist applicants for 
information, a duty to protect personal information, 
extension of the definition of the local authority to include 
police services, and creation of a new offence for 
snooping. 

 
And so definitely we’ve been hearing, especially in the media, 
that there’s been more and more documentations of people who 
are accessing files that they shouldn’t, information that they 
shouldn’t. I think with technology that it’s been more accessible 
to get information and people, like they’re so used to having all 
the information at their fingertips that it really is tempting for 
people to look for information that they shouldn’t. And so I’m 
glad that the Privacy Commissioner is looking into this, you 
know, and trying to find ways that we can stop any further 
breaches of this. 
 
So one of the recommendations that they have here is that they 
want to make sure that there is a “mandatory breach notification 
when personal information has been leaked that places an 
individual at serious personal risk.” And that’s what the 
Minister of Justice says when he presented this bill. 
 
And so they also want to increase the penalties for offences. 
And we know that’s really important, that when information is 
breached like this, and especially when it . . . Like, any 
information that’s breached is troubling, but people want to 
ensure that all of our personal information is protected. And so 
if people are compromising that, there should be the penalties in 
place for that. 
 
So another big change with regards to this bill is that it’s 
including police forces under The Local Authority Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act so that 
police forces can now be subject to freedom of information 
requests. And so this will be an important amendment with 
regards to this bill. 
 
And so I think it will require a lot of discussion, and I know the 
critic for Justice will work hard at scrutinizing this. I think there 
will be a lot of discussion in committee with regards to this 
because there are some of the recommendations that was in the 
Information and Privacy Commissioner’s report in 2015 that 
aren’t being implemented in this Act. And they’re simple 
recommendations, so I don’t understand why they’re not 
included in there. And I’m hoping that there will be some 
discussion at committee with regards to that. 
 
But one of them is changing the maximum time for response 
from 30 days to 20 days. So it seems like the Privacy 
Commissioner believes that, you know, it’s important to ensure 
that things are reported within 20 days. And that seems like a 
reasonable request and should be discussed at committee. 
 
And another information that the Privacy Commissioner 
indicated was that The Local Authority Freedom of Information 
and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act include a 
requirement that it’s updated every five years to respond to the 
modern technology. And you know, Mr. Speaker, I think that’s 
really reasonable. 
 



1110 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2016 

When we sit and think about what has maybe advanced in the 
past five years with regards to technology and just all the 
changes that happen, like, so I think having to review these on a 
regular basis, five years seems to be a reasonable time frame to 
have this reviewed and ensure that it meets the technology of 
the times. So I think that’s a reasonable request, and so I think 
that could be something that’s considered to be added to this 
legislation. And hopefully that’s again discussed at committee, 
and the critic I’m sure will have that discussion.  
 
So I know my colleagues will have more information that they 
will want to add with regards to this discussion, and so at this 
time, I’m going to move to adjourn this debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 
has adjourned debate on Bill No. 31, The Local Authority 
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment 
Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 1 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 1 — The 
Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 2016 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As always, it’s a 
pleasure to rise in the Assembly and wade into the discussion 
on the bills before us. Today I have an opportunity to speak to 
Bill No. 1, An Act to amend The Crown Corporations Public 
Ownership Act. 
 
I think though a few things to note here just in broad-brush 
strokes, Mr. Speaker, that Bill No. 1, this particular bill removes 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority from The Crown 
Corporations Public Ownership Act and allows the government 
to sell 40 liquor stores. 
 
Obviously that was something that came up before the election 
and was obviously something that the government laid bare and 
made clear what they were going to do around these 40 liquor 
stores. But what this bill does, it also takes all of SLGA 
[Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] stores out of The 
Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act — which was not 
part of this government’s election conversation, Mr. Speaker, 
with the people of Saskatchewan — which will mean that there 
is no protection for every other SLGA store in Saskatchewan. 
 
I just want to point . . . I had an opportunity, I guess it was in 
the spring, everybody . . . that the Crown Investments 
Corporation had some committee action. Our new member from 
Saskatoon Lakeview sits on that committee and had the 
opportunity to hear from many stakeholders, many who were 
supportive of this change and others who weren’t, Mr. Speaker. 
 

It was interesting sitting in my office listening to all the 
different perspectives. I was watching it on live-stream. It’s 
always good to be able to watch the legislative channels and 
hear what exactly is going on. And I took with great interest 
what many citizens were saying, Mr. Speaker. There were 
business people. There were a good variety of people who were 
speaking, Mr. Speaker, to that public input is really important 
when it comes to shaping legislation. 
 
I actually want to focus a little bit on what my colleague from 
Regina Lakeview — I think I may have said Saskatoon 
Lakeview earlier, Mr. Speaker — from Regina Lakeview who 
has already waded into this discussion. She makes some very 
good points. I think one of the things . . . I’ll talk a little bit 
about what she had to say, but I do know one of the concerns 
that she flagged that: 
 

In communities of less than 2,000 people, as was noted 
with some of the submissions [that came before that 
particular committee], new private retailers will be allowed 
to sell liquor from existing businesses, and this can be done 
with the staff that they already have. 

 
So she pointed out that there’s concern about the potential for 
job growth or job losses. We also heard about the potential 
impacts, she goes on to say, “. . . to employment for those under 
19 who are currently working in establishments that might opt 
to sell liquor in the future.” 
 
I had an opportunity just a short while ago, I ran into a 
constituent of mine whose partner actually owns some small 
rural hotels with off-sales. And he actually was very concerned 
about this bill and what this will mean to some of his own 
business within his community that his family’s been running, 
frankly for many, many years. He’s a second generation 
business person running some of these hotels, Mr. Speaker. So I 
think that was an issue that was flagged loud and clear to me 
from a constituent of mine. 
 
I think another issue that always comes up is training and 
support for people who are selling liquor, Mr. Speaker. And I 
know I’ve never worked in a liquor store, but I have worked as 
a waitress. And I can tell you, working as a waitress, that I’ve 
worked in many different establishments, and one of the 
opportunities I had was working at Louis’ at the campus pub. 
And one of the things that Louis’ did very well was make sure 
that staff had the proper training, had server training to ensure 
that we knew how to identify people who were underage. We 
knew how to ensure that people weren’t over-imbibing, how to 
talk to people about their over-consumption of alcohol, and how 
to cut them off if need be, Mr. Speaker.  
 
That training was incredibly important, and I know that that’s 
been flagged as a concern too, that just making sure that . . . I 
know SLGA workers have the training and support and are very 
good at ensuring that people under age are not accessing 
alcohol. And I think it’s important to ensure that any new 
retailers that open up, we need to ensure that the appropriate 
supports are in place to ensure that those who are purchasing 
alcohol are in fact of age, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:30] 
 



November 2, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1111 

I know the member from Saskatoon . . . pardon me, Regina 
Lakeview. I want, pardon me, I want the member to move to 
Saskatoon, I think, from my comments here. I know that she 
also pointed out that during the presentations, there were some 
serious concerns expressed over . . . that this move would be 
revenue neutral. And the member from Regina Lakeview points 
out that there were some presentations that saw that that wasn’t 
the case, that people didn’t necessarily believe that to be true, 
that the money that flows, obviously the money that flows into 
the General Revenue Fund from Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming stores helps fund schools and helps fund health care 
and highways — all those kinds of things that we count on, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I know the members opposite, there’s a liquor store in my 
community actually which is closing, and I know members 
opposite have said that this isn’t necessarily about . . . Sorry, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a little bit late in a Wednesday afternoon. The 
liquor store in Riversdale that’s closing, Mr. Speaker, there is 
some concerns that there will be an ability for a new permit in 
Riversdale. 
 
And the businesses in Riversdale, my community has 
undergone some serious revitalization in the last years. There’s 
been many people committed to that revitalization for many 
years, businesses very committed who, even when things were 
tough in Riversdale, they stuck by that community and knew 
that good things could happen. And obviously gentrification is 
an issue, and always striking that balance between ensuring that 
those who’ve lived in the community for a very long time have 
an opportunity to stay there, but that others can move in and 
help foster growth and jobs and new housing as well. 
 
But one of the challenges in Riversdale, Mr. Speaker, is there 
was a liquor store on 20th Street, and it’s one of the ones slated 
for closure. That liquor store . . . Some of the most positive 
things to happen have been off-sales, Mr. Speaker, moving 
from our community. Unfortunately when off-sales move, 
they’ve moved into other neighbourhoods, not in Riversdale. 
And that hasn’t gotten rid of overconsumption; it’s just moved 
it actually. Mr. Speaker, that consumption that used to happen 
on 20th Street at hotels like The Albany and The Barry has 
gone from those particular establishments but has moved down 
the road on 22nd Street or down 33rd Street.  
 
So that’s, I think, I know from conversations with the 
Riversdale BID [business improvement district] that there’s big 
concerns around private retailers opening up, and they actually 
have some requests in front of the government around permits 
and what that should look like, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I do know that, again it’s important to point out that, yes the 
government did bring the privatization of 40 liquor stores to the 
people of Saskatchewan. And obviously they won a very strong 
mandate, Mr. Speaker, but the big piece to remember is that this 
removes all SLGA stores out of The Crown Corporations 
Public Ownership Act, which is not something the government 
talked about. There’s actually lots of things that the government 
didn’t talk about before the election that have now come to 
fruition in the months to follow, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re still waiting for straight talk actually around the budget 
and the first quarter report, Mr. Speaker, finding out exactly 

where we are financially. There were many things that this 
government didn’t talk about before the election that they are 
doing now, Mr. Speaker. But again this should have been 
something that they brought for people to judge on its merits, 
Mr. Speaker, and I think that there are still many people who 
appreciate that SLGA returns many dividends to Saskatchewan 
people who fund important services and these will be lost, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But with that, I know I have other colleagues who will be 
wading into the debate on Bill No. 1, The Crown Corporations 
Public Ownership Amendment Act, and I know there’ll be 
further questions as well when this bill eventually makes it to 
committee. So with that, I would like to move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 1, The Crown 
Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 32 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 32 — The 
Automobile Accident Insurance (Benefits) Amendment Act, 
2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 
pleased to rise to enter into the debate on this Bill No. 32, The 
Automobile Accident Insurance (Benefits) Amendment Act, 
2016. This was introduced in June from the former minister for 
SGI [Saskatchewan Government Insurance], and he indicated 
that there were a number of changes being introduced here, 
more than 30, Mr. Speaker. And I certainly don’t intend to 
speak to all of those changes here today. I know that we can 
have a very close look at all of them when this bill is eventually 
moved into the committee debate. 
 
I think one of the interesting changes we see here is the impact 
on a bereaved family when one of their family members is an 
impaired driver and ends up being killed in an accident. And 
now there’s an ability for the family, who are victims of that 
accident as much as the driver, even though they will now sue 
the estate of their own loved one, but they will be able to have 
an opportunity to do that, for pain and suffering and 
bereavement damages. And he indicates that the list of offences 
that trigger the ability for an innocent party to sue has also been 
expanded to cover criminal negligence causing death or bodily 
harm, criminal negligence causing bodily injury, flight from a 
peace officer, and dangerous operation while street racing. 
 
And I just want to raise one issue on this bill, Mr. Speaker, and 
it’s how we, in a car culture, sometimes overlook other innocent 
victims of crime. And I’m always reminded of a young man 
named Kutler, who was viciously beaten and an innocent victim 



1112 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2016 

in a fight in a home in Saskatoon quite a few years ago now. 
Kutler — his mom is Sharlene Lange — and Kutler Lange was 
actually hiding from these assailants. He had no personal 
connection with them whatsoever; he just happened to be at the 
wrong house at the wrong time. And these gentlemen came in 
and — well they weren’t gentlemen; they were thugs — and 
they came in and beat him so badly that he was in a coma for a 
while and suffered extensive brain damage. And so it changed 
his life forever. It changed his mother’s life forever. Sharlene 
has had to stop working to look after Kutler. 
 
And under The Victims of Crime Act — and I’ve talked about 
this with the Minister of Justice — there is no provision beyond 
the immediate $25,000 that deals with the initial round of going 
through court. But if you are injured by an impaired driver, you 
can sue and get up to $6 million through the government 
insurance program for automobiles. 
 
And one of the things Sharlene did was she worked with a 
sociologist who indicated that for people in the victims of crime 
sphere, it’s often people that are at the beginning of their lives, 
young people. So Kutler was still in high school. He was just 
getting ready to commence his life in the workforce. And that 
was all taken away from him — having a family, all those 
things have been taken away from him. 
 
The guy who beat him up, the thug who beat him up, went to 
court. He was found guilty, and he actually did some time in the 
correctional system. But he was released, and he has now taken 
over his dad’s business. He has a wife and kids — I see them on 
Facebook — and he’s living a really good life right now. And 
certainly he did time for his crime, but Kutler remains 
permanently damaged by this. And there’s no coverage. There’s 
no ability . . . And there’s a number of legal reasons why he 
wasn’t able to sue at the time, but mostly because his mom 
didn’t have the resources to be able to carry out the legal fight. 
So there’s nothing for victims of crime like that. 
 
But in this kind of bill where we see extensions for people hurt 
in a dangerous operation while street racing, that these people 
are able to access the provisions of The Automobile Accident 
Insurance (Benefits) Amendment Act, and that’s part of the 
problem, is that accidents and automobiles get a lot more 
attention in our society because we are such an 
automobile-based society. And that’s been borne out by 
sociological studies. So I always want to take the opportunity to 
remind this legislature and this Assembly that the people that 
are victims of crime who aren’t injured by automobiles but by 
somebody’s boot get much different treatment in our society. 
And I think it’s considerably unfair. And Sharlene has taken 
this to the federal government. She’s taken it to this government 
in every which way she can. And I really want to commend her 
for her courage and the work that she does. 
 
She just posted a picture on Facebook the other day of when 
Kutler was in the hospital in a coma. I think it’s 10 years ago, I 
think she said, and it has changed their life forever. And it’s 
really unfortunate that we can’t extend the same kind of ability 
for people that are victims in that way than people that are 
victims of street racing or flight from a peace officer or all of 
the other things that are being expanded here in this particular 
bill. 
 

As I said earlier, there’s 30 different changes. Obviously the 
minister got up and said he wasn’t able to introduce all of the 
changes that have been asked for. I suspect because of the 
desperate state of finances that this government finds 
themselves in, and as you know, Mr. Speaker, they blew 
through the rainy day fund in the best years this government 
ever had. They have increased our debt to beyond the amount it 
was 10 years ago, and again in the most incredibly prosperous 
times through our resource revenue sector that we’ve ever, ever 
had. And now they aren’t able to implement programs like this 
because of the shortfall in their budgetary management. 
 
So this is unfortunate, and I know the minister seemed 
disappointed that he wasn’t able to bring on the changes for 
living expenses in the CPP [Canadian Pension Plan] benefits. 
And he seemed to be genuinely wanting to be able to do that, 
but given the fact that we’re in the financial mess that we’re in 
right now, these kinds of programs are suffering. And of course 
as we’ve raised many times here in the House, there are a 
number of other programs that are being cut or people are 
suffering because of that. 
 
So at any rate, Mr. Speaker, I know other of my colleagues are 
going to want to weigh in on this and I would move at this point 
that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 32, The Automobile Accident 
Insurance (Benefits) Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 
adjourned debate on Bill No. 32, The Automobile Accident 
Insurance (Benefits) Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 33 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Harpauer that Bill No. 33 — The Child 
and Family Services Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s me again and I am going to speak now to Bill No. 
33. Extensive changes are being proposed for child welfare 
provisions. As you know, Mr. Speaker, much of the work that’s 
done with child welfare agreements is through the First Nations 
arrangements that are entered into with First Nations Child and 
Family Services. These have been around for decades, Mr. 
Speaker. And I know there’s a constant back and forth between 
the different regulatory authorities in terms of the children that 
fall under these agreements. 
 
The minister is saying part of the transformation strategy of this 
government is to renew the province’s child welfare legislation, 
and this is this province’s attempt at doing just that. 
 
I know that relationships with First Nations are paramount as 
we move forward in our province, and I would really encourage 



November 2, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1113 

the government to consider how this fits into the 
recommendations in the truth and reconciliation committee, the 
good work that was done there. And we know that that work is 
critical to us moving forward. When we see the tragedies that 
we see happening in the North when young girls are taking their 
lives, Mr. Speaker, in desperation and hopelessness and how . . . 
One of my colleagues is going to a wake tonight and a funeral 
tomorrow for another young girl who’s taken her life. 
 
So the importance of getting this right, of making this better 
with the First Nations, our partners in this province . . . And I 
think the TRC [Truth and Reconciliation Commission] 
recommendations go a long way to sort of righting the ship 
which has been listing for decades, indeed, since the treaty 
relationship was entered into and perhaps even before that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
If you look at some of the history of this province and the 
colonial dominance, I guess, in terms of all the strength of the 
settler communities, in terms of our laws and our abilities to 
take over, I guess that’s what colonialism is. So these 
relationships with First Nations in terms of the welfare of 
children and families is critical. And it’s important that we get it 
right. 
 
So I know again we have some very talented critics here on this 
side. And I know that they’re consulting with the communities 
to make sure that these bills, that people have been properly 
consulted with, that the bill achieves what it sets out to achieve, 
and that First Nations have been, definitely in this case, First 
Nations have been properly consulted with. 
 
[16:45] 
 
So the minister gave some indications to some of the changes. 
And there’s different things about information sharing and 
regulation making and how they’re trying to align the Act with 
amendments being proposed for other provincial 
information-sharing legislation. So it’s a constant process, and I 
anticipate that the attempt here will hopefully make some 
changes to increasing and enhancing the relationship with the 
First Nations Child and Family Services agencies. 
 
So at this point, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have a lot more to add to 
the debate, and I would move that we adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 33, The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 33, The Child and Family 
Services Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 34 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No. 34 — The 
Provincial Lands Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 

Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today and speak to this piece of legislation, Bill No. 34, The 
Provincial Lands Act of 2016. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a proposed . . . entirely a new piece of 
legislation, Mr. Speaker, that would replace the previous 
provincial lands Act with this new bill in that it is repealing that 
legislation. There weren’t a lot of . . . Well there weren’t any 
explanatory notes, Mr. Speaker, provided. But I do have some 
comments to make while I’m up to speak to this legislation. 
 
The Provincial Lands Act, it deals with the over 160 million 
acres in this province that make up a large portion of the vast 
and beautiful province that is Saskatchewan. Of the 160 million 
acres, rather, Mr. Speaker, that is Saskatchewan, over 100 
million of those acres are held as Crown lands or held by the 
Ministry of Environment. So that’s a huge portion, Mr. Speaker, 
well over half of the land in Saskatchewan. And so any time we 
are proposing to deal with those lands, I think it does certainly 
justify some careful attention when we’re looking at anything 
that will impact those lands. 
 
As was noted through much of the press releases and the 
reporting out on this piece of legislation, that substantively the 
Act hasn’t been changed since the 1970s, the late 1970s. 
However, it got misrepresented somewhere along the way, I 
think a little bit of a whisper campaign. We all played that game 
in school where you whisper in the next ear, Mr. Speaker. There 
have been actually a number of updates to this legislation, in 
’78, ’80, ’83, ’84, quite a list, going right up to 2015, Mr. 
Speaker. So there have been some changes, but what this 
proposes to do is replace the whole piece of legislation with 
new legislation. 
 
The minister asserted that this is an Act to modernize, Mr. 
Speaker. And certainly modernizing is important but it’s one of 
those words that can obscure other intentions or can be used as 
a broad cloak when there may be other objectives in the 
legislation. In his remarks, Mr. Speaker, the minister noted that 
by modernizing this legislation, we will allow the province to 
benefit from certainly an improved investment climate, was one 
of the things he mentioned, but also proposed that it would help 
things like wind farms and potash mining. 
 
Mr. Speaker, interestingly, I was speaking last night to a 
SaskPower bill, talking about in that case the need for a 2 
billion increase in borrowing capacity was to enable investment 
also in wind power. So there’s a lot of talk about wind power 
over there, Mr. Speaker, and I hope that we do soon see a bit of 
a plan to actually ensure that some of those projects go forward. 
 
Some of the other impacts of this legislation would increase the 
potential term of some of the leases. It would also allow for 
breaking up of parcels of land, Mr. Speaker, and enabling, for 
example, a portion of the land to be used for purposes such as 
camping or quadding is one of the . . . I believe quadding and 
snowmobile rallies, Mr. Speaker, and also proposes to share 
that with the caribou which I . . . I’m not an environmentalist or 
a quadder, Mr. Speaker, but I think it would be interesting to 
see how the caribou would react to the quadding and that kind 
of activity. So I think that certainly requires a little bit of further 



1114 Saskatchewan Hansard November 2, 2016 

thought and input from others. 
 
I know that there were some concerns expressed about the level 
of consultation around this legislation. There were some 
consultations back in 2013. There were three meetings held 
across the province, as well as meetings with First Nations 
groups, Mr. Speaker. I don’t have a list of all of those who were 
consulted. I understand there were about 3,000 individuals or 
groups. So that certainly does sound like there were a number 
of people interested but I don’t have any information about 
what was said. And so I think my colleague from Nutana will 
have some questions, certainly, in this legislature and perhaps in 
committee about that. 
 
It did note that the subject of this legislation did trigger the 
obligation to meet with First Nations and Métis groups. I’m not 
sure what the substance of those consultations were, Mr. 
Speaker, but I do hope that they were robust. 
 
I know a lot of the reporting talked about the stock growers, 
Chad MacPherson with the stock growers and their . . . They 
had expressed some concern back in 2013 but it was difficult to 
find information about just what those other consultations had 
expressed. 
 
So I do know that my colleague will want to speak further and 
perhaps learn more about what exactly happened in those 
consultations, and ensure that we do have this piece of 
legislation right when we’re talking about such a huge portion 
of the land mass in Saskatchewan. But I think with that I will 
conclude my comments and move a motion to adjourn debate 
on Bill No. 34. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 34, The Provincial Lands 
Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 35 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 35 — The Small 
Claims Act, 2016/Loi de 2016 sur les petites créances be now 
read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Good to 
join debate this fine afternoon on Bill No. 35, The Small Claims 
Act, 2016 and of course the accompanying legislation in the 
French language. 
 
This is an interesting bill, Mr. Speaker, inasmuch as it both 
repeals and replaces the existing small claims legislation and 
makes a number of changes to enhance and modernize 
processes and procedures at the small claims court. 
 
It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, wherein the minister refers to a 
review that was conducted by the Ministry of Justice and the 

work that has come forward. Certainly the first recommendation 
of note is that the regulatory amendments in this past February 
increased the small claims monetary limit from $20,000 to 
$30,000. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, it would be interesting to 
note when the last time the amount limit was increased and 
thoughts around the adequacy on the 30,000, the new 30,000 
limit. 
 
The further change enables the court’s abilities or will expand 
on the court’s authority to award costs to be paid from one party 
to another, awarding costs where a party fails to attend or 
purposely delays any step in the proceedings — again, Mr. 
Speaker, keeping up with the practice. 
 
And there are certainly a number of other changes around the 
authority of the small claims courts and around the awarding of 
default judgments and as well with the ability to cite certain 
individuals for contempt where situations warrant. 
 
Otherwise there are other housekeeping amendments that are in 
keeping with this kind of legislation. But again, Mr. Speaker, in 
terms of both repealing and replacing all in the same go, we’ll 
be interested to hear more from our colleagues with the kind of 
legal expertise and the experience with the system. 
 
But with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d move to adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 35, The Small Claims Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 35, The Small Claims Act, 2016. Is it 
the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 36 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 36 — The Small 
Claims Consequential Amendments Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Again, Mr. Speaker, as per the remarks 
previous, these are flowing from the changes made in Bill No. 
35 and need not much more consideration at this time. But 
again they are consequential to the changes brought forward in 
Bill No. 35. And with that I would move to adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 36. 
 
The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 36, The Small Claims Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

Bill No. 37 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 37 — The 



November 2, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1115 

Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
certainly in terms of the context, this bill has come forward with 
a significant amount of attention paid to what’s happening in 
the world of traffic safety. I’ve got some more extensive 
comments to make on this piece of legislation. And certainly 
this comes as part of a suite of legislation that we’ve seen just 
this very week be passed in an expedited fashion in terms of 
updating the traffic safety legislation in this province. 
 
And I will look to reserve my opportunity to participate in 
further debate on The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, but for the 
moment, Mr. Speaker, noting the hour of the day, I would move 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 37, The Traffic Safety Amendment 
Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 37, The Traffic Safety Amendment 
Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. It now being 5 p.m., this Assembly 
stands adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................. 1085 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1085 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1086 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1086 
  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1087 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1087 
  Hart .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1087 
  Steele ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1087 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1087 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1087 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1087 
MOTIONS 
 Motion to Authorize Interpretation From the Chamber Floor 
  Merriman ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1085 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1088 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1088 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1088 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1088 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1089 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1089 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1089 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1089 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1090 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1090 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Disc Golf Gains Popularity in Regina 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1090 
 Welcome to Syrian Refugees 
  Docherty .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1090 
 Prince Albert Powwow Contributes to Inclusive Community 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1091 
 Funding Requirements for Refugee Students 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1091 
 Children’s Hospital Radiothon 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 1091 
 Movember 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1091 
 Protecting Saskatchewan Jobs 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1092 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transaction 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1092 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1092 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1093 
 Donations to Saskatchewan Party 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1094 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1094 
 Provisions of The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1094 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1095 
 Funding for Lighthouse Emergency Shelter 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1095 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1095 
 Provision of Long-Term Care 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1095 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1095 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1096 
 



 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 41 — The Coroners Amendment Act, 2016 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1097 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1097 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 26 — The Patient Choice Medical Imaging Act  
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1104 
 Bill No. 28 — The Extension of Compassionate Care Act, 2016  
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1106 
 Bill No. 29 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur les juges de paix  
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1107 
 Bill No. 30 — The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016  
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1108 
 Bill No. 31 — The Local Authority Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016  
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1109 
 Bill No. 1 — The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 2016  
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1110 
 Bill No. 32 — The Automobile Accident Insurance (Benefits) Amendment Act, 2016  
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1111 
 Bill No. 33 — The Child and Family Services Amendment Act, 2016  
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1112 
 Bill No. 34 — The Provincial Lands Act, 2016  
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1113 
 Bill No. 35 — The Small Claims Act, 2016/Loi de 2016 sur les petites créances  
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1114 
 Bill No. 36 — The Small Claims Consequential Amendments Act, 2016  
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1114 
 Bill No. 37 — The Traffic Safety Amendment Act, 2016  
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1115 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 




