






















































Hansard: October 19, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 27A  WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 19, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (Ind.) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10; Independent (Ind.) — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 731 
 October 19, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave to 
make a personal statement. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has asked for leave to make a 
statement. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Apology 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
August the 5th I was charged with impaired driving. On 
September the 7th I pleaded guilty to that charge. At that time I 
spoke to the media. I apologized and wanted to apologize to my 
colleagues through the media. This is my first opportunity to do 
it in person. My actions, there is no rationale and no excuses, 
absolutely none for it. So with that I apologize to the members 
of this House. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Sergeant-at-Arms 
 

The Speaker: — I would like to present to the Assembly our 
new Sergeant-at-Arms, Terry Quinn. 
 

Introduction of Pages 
 

The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that the Pages 
for this session will be Hannah Dove — if she would please rise 
— Chase Drydale, Tina Knowles, Linnea McLellan, Nicolette 
Merasty, and Emma Walter. Welcome to your Legislative 
Assembly. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

The Speaker: — Also today, joining us in the Speaker’s gallery 
are several members of the officers of the Assembly: Ms. Mary 
McFadyen, Ombudsman, if she would quickly give us a wave; 
Mr. Ron Barclay, Conflict of Interest Commissioner; Mr. 
Michael Boda, Chief Electoral Officer. Please join me in 
welcoming them to their Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you to my colleagues in the legislature, I’d 
like to bring to your attention a group sitting up in the Speaker’s 

gallery joining us here today. Several of my colleagues and I 
had the opportunity to meet with them while in town the last 
couple of days for their government relations days, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Advocis, the Financial Advisors Association of Canada, is the 
association of choice for financial advisers and planners. With 
more than 11,000 members across the country and 500 here in 
Saskatchewan, Advocis is the definitive voice of the profession 
advocating for professionalism and consumer protection. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and to colleagues, and 
if they’ll just give us a wave as I read out their name: Dean 
Owen; Abe Toews; Brian Mallard; John Dean . . . John’s not 
here. Okay. Edward Ortiz; Greg Pollock, who’s the president of 
the association; Andrew Kimber; Wade Baldwin; Walter 
Klassen; and Curtis Kimpton, Mr. Speaker, from Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming these 
members of Advocis to the Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I too 
rise to welcome individuals from Advocis here to their 
Assembly today. We had a fruitful meeting with them this 
morning and actually suggested they might want to give the 
Minister of Finance a little bit of help as well because we know 
he needs it. But we certainly had a fruitful meeting and we 
really appreciate the work that this group is doing and we really 
appreciate that you are advocating for the people of 
Saskatchewan and ensuring that we’re protected when we are 
getting advice from financial advisers. 
 
So thank you very much. Look forward to more fruitful 
discussions with you, and good luck and keep up the good 
work. So I’d like to welcome you all to your Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
introduce a number of NORTEP [northern teacher education 
program] students who have made the drive from La Ronge to 
visit their legislature today. I’ve met a few of them before. 
When I was in La Ronge last month on a beautiful sunny day 
we had a cordial meeting. These are students who are engaged 
in their future and in the sustainability of post-secondary 
education in the North. And I would ask all members to join me 
and welcome this group to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave to make 
an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Opposition House 



732 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 2016 

Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — With thanks to my colleagues for that leave, 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce the group that was just 
referenced. Seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, are a group of 
students that have come a long way to be here today from 
NORTEP and NORPAC [Northern Professional Access 
College], headquartered in La Ronge of course. I’d like to 
introduce to the Assembly Rod Hansen, Alicia Maurice, Rielle 
Desjarlais — right on, two hands — Alex Mercredi, Scott 
Young, Jerilyn McKay, Elizabeth Fosseneuve, Jocelyn 
Daigneault, Amie Bell, and April Chiefcalf. 
 
They are joined as well, Mr. Speaker, by two individuals from 
the Canadian Federation of Students. I am speaking of Carolyn 
Gaspar, who is at the University of Saskatchewan, who is the 
Graduate Students’ Association vice-president, and Daniel 
Woloshin, a student here at the University of Regina and field 
organizer for the Canadian Federation of Students in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Like I say, Mr. Speaker, these are individuals that have come a 
long way to be here today at their Legislative Assembly, and 
they are here because they are concerned about the future of 
their very important organization, NORTEP and NORPAC. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to join me in 
saying tawāw, welcome to your Assembly. And thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Biggar-Sask 
Valley. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, in the west gallery I’d like to introduce two friends of 
mine, Rick and James Dempsey. Rick and I go back a long 
ways. We went to university, well, back in the ’70s — I don’t 
know if I should say that — at the U of S [University of 
Saskatchewan] and we both took the same diploma course in 
agriculture. And so it’s been a long time since I’ve seen Rick. 
Rick and his son James are financial planners. They live in 
Lethbridge, Alberta and they are considering moving back to 
Saskatchewan, so I hope they do. So please join me in 
welcoming them to our Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, to my colleagues in the 
legislature, I’d like to also join the minister and my colleague 
on this side, the critic for post-secondary education, to welcome 
the NORTEP students. I want to welcome them to the 
Legislative Assembly. It’s important what you’re doing, you 
know, and I want to make sure that you understand this is your 
Legislative Assembly. You have a voice and we are going to 
welcome you here. Be proud of what you’re doing. 
 
I want to take time and just announce two of these graduates 
and students that are from NORTEP but they’re from my home 
community, you know, when I think about that and I just want 
to . . . There’s three of them that are here: a young lady, Ms. 
Bell; and April, I would like to welcome you to your 
Legislative Assembly; and Elizabeth as well, I would like to 
welcome you here. But to all students I’d like to . . . but these 

members I see around my community lots so I’d like to 
welcome. But the rest from all over the North, keep up what 
you’re doing. Welcome to your Legislative Assembly, and 
again it is an honour to welcome you to your Legislative 
Assembly. I ask all colleagues to please join me in welcoming 
them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, it’s with great pleasure I 
introduce to you, through you to all members of the Assembly a 
nice young friend of mine, 15-year-old Ethan Thomson up in 
your gallery. Can you give us a wave, Ethan? 
 
Ethan just moved from Yorkton with his parents Pat and 
Andrea Thomson, who are great friends of ours. They just took 
over a church in Taber so, you know, more friends from 
Alberta. Great people that were in our community, again taking 
over that church. 
 
Ethan is visiting with me here today and tomorrow for a while. 
Ethan’s again a great young student. We have a similar love of 
aviation. He’s been very involved in Air Cadets before he left 
Yorkton. He’s looking forward to a career in the military as a 
fighter pilot so, you know, I just thank him for his service in the 
future, and ask all members to welcome him to this Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
want to join in welcoming all the students, these students of 
power from northern Saskatchewan. I’m so glad that they’re 
here. I’m so pleased that they’ve decided to exercise their 
democratic right to come forward to speak about an injustice 
served to northern Saskatchewan and NORTEP-NORPAC 
program. 
 
And I want to say in my own language, in my own Cree 
language: 
 
[The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.] 
 
And in Cree it says, I’m so glad you’re here, and do not let fear 
guide you of this place, because this place is yours. So once 
again, Mr. Speaker, I welcome all those students from 
NORTEP-NORPAC. Way to go. You’re the best. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, seated in 
the west gallery are 17 students from the Punnichy Community 
High School. They are, I’m told, mostly grade 12 students with 
one or two grade 11 students. But they are the students that are 
in the law 30 and native studies 30 classes. I had an opportunity 
to visit with the students and their teachers, Mr. Matthew 
McMillan and Mr. Perry Fehr, earlier. 
 
I understand they were out at RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police] Depot this morning. And they are here visiting with us 
today and will be observing the proceedings of the legislature, 



October 19, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 733 

Mr. Speaker. I know they will have probably a lot more 
questions after they’ve seen what happens in the Chamber. 
Unfortunately I think they have to get back fairly quickly. But, 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members of the Assembly to welcome 
these students to their legislature. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 
and through you to the rest of the House, I’d like to introduce 
six very special guests in your gallery. These are members of 
the Service Employees International Union, SEIU here. You 
know, these folks work so hard for their members, talking about 
working conditions, wages, and that, but they also have a much 
bigger view of the world, talking about global issues such as 
climate change, living wages, that type of thing. 
 
I’d like to introduce to you Sharon Cameron — if you could 
give a wave, Sharon — Catherine Anderson, Denise 
McConnell, Karen Purdy, Shelly Johnson, and Neil Colmin. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the member opposite in welcoming the members of SEIU 
to the legislature today. We’re always pleased when members 
of organized labour come. The people that work in our province 
provide incredible value and services to our province, and 
they’re a voice that should be respected, listened to. And we 
thank them for being here today and we welcome them to their 
legislature. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. To you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, 
I’d like to introduce a person seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker: Ms. Barb Wright. Barb is a constituency assistant for 
the constituency of Saskatoon Willowgrove. And talking to her 
earlier today, she said she estimates she’s been in the legislature 
here 25 to 30 times when she was a teacher bringing classes 
year after year. 
 
Barb’s made a great contribution to education in Saskatchewan, 
as well as arts and sports, and she certainly has made her 
province a better place. So I’d ask you, Mr. Speaker, and all 
members to help welcome Barb to the Legislative Assembly 
this afternoon. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, it is my honour today to introduce two special guests 
seated in your gallery. I’d like to welcome Tim and Pamela 
Guest here to their Legislative Assembly. In addition to being 
the parents of two busy young boys, they have also, particularly 
Pamela has been a tireless and passionate advocate for children 
in our province. 
 

This summer she has spent her time with her supporters 
collecting over 400 signatures on a petition in support of sexual 
abuse prevention curriculum in our province. And I’d like to 
have all members join me in welcoming them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you and to 
all members of the Assembly, I would like to introduce Bill 
Gowen, seated in the west gallery. Bill is a good and trusted 
friend, and he was my campaign manager during the provincial 
election campaign. He performed admirably, and I am most 
grateful for his efforts. In his day job Bill is a manager with 
Sanofi Canada. I ask all members to join me in welcoming him 
to his Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s a pleasure today to introduce a very good friend of mine, 
Mr. Tigger Johnson, located in the west gallery. Tigger, I think 
is very familiar with many members on both sides of the House: 
a political activist, and I’m proud to say a fellow Meadow 
Laker who I have known since I’ve been quite young. So it’s 
great to see you here, Tigger, and I’d ask all members to 
welcome Tigger to his Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I too would like to welcome all the guests 
today to their Assembly. And I would like to also remind them 
that they are not to take part in debate, which includes applause. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
again to present a petition to improve PTSD [post-traumatic 
stress disorder] coverage for Saskatchewan workers. The 
petitioners point out that delaying in diagnosis and treatment for 
PTSD can be detrimental to recovery and that PTSD is not on 
the list of workers’ compensation illnesses presumed to be work 
related. And they also point out that many workers suffering 
from work-related PTSD are burdened by lengthy investigations 
and approval processes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Saskatchewan government to 
make the necessary changes to ensure that if Saskatchewan 
workers are exposed to traumatic events on the job and are 
then diagnosed with PTSD, it is presumed to be caused by 
the worker’s employment, and the worker will 
subsequently be covered under workers’ compensation and 
receive the same benefits as others with work-related 
injuries. 

 



734 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 2016 

Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by folks from 
Shaunavon, Maple Creek, Saskatoon, and Eastend. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 
Ms. Carr: — I’m pleased to rise today to present a petition 
from the citizens who are opposed to the federal government’s 
decision to impose a carbon tax on the province of 
Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Estevan, 
Torquay, Kenosee Lake, Bienfait, Lampman, Benson, Macoun, 
North Portal, Stoughton, Oxbow, and Weyburn. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
proud to stand in my place to present a petition for a second 
bridge for Prince Albert. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

To ask the Saskatchewan Party government to stop 
stalling, hiding behind rhetoric and refusing to listen to the 
people calling for action, and to begin immediately to plan 
and then quickly commence the construction of a second 
bridge for Prince Albert using federal and provincial 
dollars. 

 
And the people that have signed this petition, Mr. Speaker, are 
primarily from Prince Albert and area. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too am 
proud to rise in my seat to present the following petition. The 
people that have signed this want to bring to our attention the 
following. Wetlands serve a very vital function in our 
ecosystem, and they take the form of marshes, bogs, fens, 
swamps, and open water. They are home to wildlife, including 
waterfowl, and they clean the water running off of agricultural 
fields. They protect us from flooding and drought. There is 
more comments here, Mr. Speaker, but the petition itself is 
quite long, so I’ll start with that: 
 

We, in the petition that reads as follows, respectfully 
request the Government of Saskatchewan to: 
 
Increase funding to do the proper inventory work, putting 
Saskatchewan in a better position to manage the water 
resource. 
 
Speed up the evaluation of high-risk watersheds where 
there is significant damage annually from flooding. This 
evaluation must include a recognition of drainage works 
that could be closed or restored that will alleviate some of 

the issues downstream with respect to flooding and nutrient 
loading. 
 
Create a sound and transparent mitigation process that 
adequately addresses sustainable development. 
 
The sequence should first focus on avoiding the 
environmental harm whenever possible before a secondary 
focus on minimizing the harm, with compensation being 
sought only when the development is deemed essential and 
the first two stages cannot be met. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by individuals 
from Regina, Saskatoon, and Dundurn. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition in support of Wakamow Valley Authority. And we 
know that as a result of the passage of The Wakamow Valley 
Authority Amendment Act, 2016 on June 30th, the Wakamow 
Valley Authority lost statutory funding of $127,000 from the 
Saskatchewan government, in addition to $30,000 in 
supplementary funding. But this loss of annual funding 
negatively affects the ability of Wakamow to maintain and 
repair its lands and buildings and provide services to its 
community. It’s a well-known fact this will negatively impact 
the Moose Jaw economy through job loss and negatively 
impacts Moose Jaw tourism and businesses. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action:  
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately repeal The Wakamow Valley Authority 
Amendment Act, 2016 and reinstate statutory funding to the 
Wakamow Valley Authority. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from Moose 
Jaw and Regina. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present to you a petition condemning the Sask Party cuts to the 
SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for disability] program. 
After nearly a decade of wasting the economic boom and 
blowing through the savings, the government is now forcing the 
province’s most vulnerable people to pay for the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement. 
 
The Sask Party’s latest cold-hearted cut will take money away 
from people who aren’t able to work due to disability. The 
many people who are being hurt by the Sask Party cuts live 
with very serious illnesses such as multiple sclerosis, cancer, 



October 19, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 735 

autism, among other illnesses. And that contrary to the Minister 
of Social Services’ claims, the government underfunds clients 
in regards to shelter allowance, and that shelter allowance 
should be reflective of the current rental costs, not availability. 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to stop their plan to cut 
the SAID funding and immediately restore funding for 
those living with a disability; that shelter allowance is 
reflective of the current rental costs; and that the 
Saskatchewan Party government implement the 
recommendations of the advisory group on poverty 
reduction. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the residents who signed this petition are from 
Saskatoon, Regina, Weyburn, Cumberland House, and 
Dalmeny. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition in support of a sexual abuse prevention curriculum in 
Saskatchewan. Those signing this petition would like to bring 
the following to our attention. Saskatchewan has the second 
highest rate of sexual child abuse in Canada. Impacts of this 
abuse include decreased school attendance and achievement, 
decreased productivity throughout the lifespan. Other impacts 
include that those experiencing childhood sexual abuse are four 
times more likely to commit suicide. 
 
Currently there is no comprehensive elementary or secondary 
curriculum regarding prevention and reporting of sexual child 
abuse in Saskatchewan and, as a province, it is our shared 
responsibility to protect children and youth to educate them, as 
every child has the right to be protected and safe. I’ll read the 
prayer: 
 

Requesting that the Government of Saskatchewan Ministry 
of Education take immediate concrete action to develop 
and implement Erin’s law; and that such legislation would 
ensure that a comprehensive health education program be 
developed and implemented which would require 
age-appropriate sexual abuse and assault awareness and 
prevention education in grades pre-kindergarten through 
grade 12, along with training school staff on the prevention 
of sexual child abuse. 

 
Those signing the petition are residents of Yellow Grass and 
Weyburn. I do submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition concerned with the sell-off of SaskTel. The 
petitioners point out that in the last five years alone, SaskTel’s 
returned $497 million to support government programs and 
services like education and health care. They point out that once 
SaskTel is gone, there’s no getting it back. And there’s no 
telling what else the Sask Party government will sell off. Mr. 
Speaker, in the prayer that reads as follows: 
 

The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the Saskatchewan Party 
government to keep their promise, stop their plan to sell off 
SaskTel, and keep our valued Crown corporation in the 
hands of Saskatchewan people. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by people from 
Moose Jaw and Swift Current. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
to stop the redirection of funding of the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, Inc. A recent report shows that 94 
per cent of NORTEP grads found employment in the North. 
NORTEP has improved teacher retention rates in the North. 
NORTEP has a positive economic impact in northern 
Saskatchewan. NORTEP provides highly qualified face-to-face 
instruction and services to students. The province’s financial 
deficit cannot be fixed by cutting indigenous education in the 
North and a program that has served the North for over 40 
years. The prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to immediately restore 
their five-year agreement to fund the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, Inc. and continue to fund 
NORTEP-NORPAC programs in La Ronge. 

 
This petition is signed by many good people of northern 
Saskatchewan. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Northern Teacher Education Program 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. For 40 
years the NORTEP-NORPAC program has been working for 
northern communities to provide teacher education in the North 
with the focus on treaties, northern knowledge, elders, and 
languages. This valuable program has nurtured generations of 
teachers in communities across the North. It’s no secret that this 
is where we need to continue to focus. The Royal Commission 
on Aboriginal Peoples, the TRC [Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission] commission, and this government’s own task 
force talked about and points out the type of work going on at 
NORTEP and NORPAC as the best way forward to improve the 
lives of indigenous people in the North. 
 
Amie Bell, the NORTEP student president, says, and I quote: 
 

In the past week there have been four youth suicides in our 
northern communities. In light of this tragedy, it’s a shame 
that our government is threatening to close down a 
program that plays a crucial role in providing education 
and hope to northern indigenous youth. 

 
This program has been a success for so many years because it’s 
run by and for northerners. Northerners’ control over northern 
education is so important to improving northern communities. 



736 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 2016 

And the last thing that the North needs is this problem from the 
Sask Party government imposed upon them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in condemning this 
callous cut to the NORTEP-NORPAC program, a cut that 
attacks northern education, northern jobs, and northern 
communities. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 

There is Help and There is Hope 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Our province is 
in mourning. We have lost the lives of four young children far 
before their time. Tragically these children took their own lives. 
Our most heartfelt condolences go to the families and to the 
communities during this difficult time. As a parent and 
grandparent, that is our biggest fear. I can’t imagine the loss 
that you feel. 
 
Mental health continues to be a prominent issue in northern, 
rural, and remote communities across Canada, and despite all 
efforts, the situation has become increasingly tragic in northern 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we have worked with all levels of 
government to ensure supports are available in any community 
that has experienced tragedy and loss, and it’s important that we 
continue to do so. 
 
We know that this devastating situation requires attention and 
effort from every level of government. We can and we must do 
better. The professionals who have provided support during this 
time deserve our unwavering support and our gratitude. The 
communities affected need to know that we are here now and in 
the days to come. We want everyone to know that there is help 
and that there is hope. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
[14:00] 
 

Middle Years Classroom Chat 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to recognize 
Vice-Principal Farrah Graham and the 7-8 and 8-9 classes at 
Milestone School. Today these 50 students from Milestone will 
be moderating a live online discussion at #myclasschat. This 
Twitter chat occurs every six to eight weeks and the hashtag 
stands for middle years classroom chat. Involving students from 
grades 5 to 9, this is a student-run chat led by the moderating 
class which chooses the theme and questions, then promotes 
and manages the live event. In addition to classes from around 
Saskatchewan, previous chats have welcomed participant 
classes from Ontario, Alberta, California, and even Africa. 
 
While meeting the middle years English language arts 
outcomes, this forum also provides real-world opportunities for 
students to participate in positive online interactions and 
promotes sharing and networking between students in varying 
communities. 
 
Today students will be chatting on the Education Week theme: 
Celebrating Today, Preparing for Tomorrow. They expect at 

least 200 participating students from schools such as Ruth 
Pawson School here in Regina, Emerald Ridge School in White 
City, Aberdeen School, Luseland School, St. Dominic School, 
three classes from École St. Margaret School in Moose Jaw, 
Pilot Butte School in Pilot Butte. 
 
I would ask that all members join me in acknowledging the 
good work of Ms. Graham, her students, and all of those 
preparing for the future in our schools across the province, this 
week and every week. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 

Saskatchewan Physicist Selected for 
Prestigious Fellowship 

 
Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to recognize a Saskatchewan physicist who was recently 
selected for a fellowship at the prestigious Perimeter Institute in 
Waterloo, Ontario. 
 
Percy Paul, who hails from the English River First Nation in 
northern Saskatchewan, was awarded one of the only 20 spots 
in the visiting graduate fellows program to study and research 
alongside some of the world’s brightest scientific minds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, his story was recently featured in a StarPhoenix 
article which told of Mr. Paul’s struggle with bipolar disorder, 
his sometimes difficult childhood, but more importantly his 
exceptional passion and gift for understanding science. At a 
young age, Mr. Paul pursued his interest by spending much of 
his time reading as many scientific publications as he could get 
his hands on. 
 
While he continued to face hardship throughout his university 
life, that didn’t stop him from winning a gold medal at the 
North American Indigenous Games and eventually attain a 
master’s degree in physics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, despite all the obstacles and adversity Mr. Paul 
faced, his story is one of encouragement and tenacity. I ask all 
members to join me in congratulating him on his remarkable 
academic achievement, and for being an inspiration to First 
Nations youth and young scientists throughout the province. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Northwest. 
 

Remembering Shirley Ryan 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
earlier this month the Saskatoon business community lost a 
pioneer, Shirley Ryan. 
 
Shirley proudly occupied the role as the head of the North 
Saskatoon Business Association for 19 years. And throughout 
those years, Mr. Speaker, Shirley was a major driving force 
behind membership growth and business advocacy. 
 
Shirley was recognized for her involvement, and received many 
awards and recognitions. In 2010 the NSBA [North Saskatoon 



October 19, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 737 

Business Association] honoured her with the first-ever Shirley 
Ryan Lifetime Achievement Award, an annual award which 
continues to bear her name out of respect and honour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Shirley impacted the community in many ways. 
As much as she was a strong businesswoman, she was also a 
mentor, a friend to many people across Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, 
she was my friend and a friend to many on this side of the 
House. 
 
At her retirement party — she had over 600 people in 
attendance — Shirley proudly declared that the formation of the 
Saskatchewan Party took place in her very own living room. 
Whether it was business, politics, or friendship, Shirley could 
be counted on to do the best that she could. Her tenacity, 
passion, quick wit, and sharp tongue will be greatly missed. 
 
I last spoke to her, Mr. Speaker, three weeks ago when I heard 
her sharp-tongued criticism of something that I had suggested. 
And I will miss that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it is without question, Mr. Speaker, that Shirley made 
Saskatchewan a better place. She will be truly missed. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 

Domestic Violence Shelter Opens in Melfort 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise in the House today to inform members about the 
opening of the North East Domestic Violence Shelter in Melfort 
on October 13th. This emergency shelter will help up to 16 
women and their children who are fleeing domestic violence 
and serve the northeast area for many years to come. 
 
This project was undertaken by North East Outreach with 
community and government involvement. And, Mr. Speaker, 
construction started on this in the spring of 2014 and 
unfortunately that November it was completely destroyed by 
fire. But this community didn’t give up. Instead it strengthened 
its resolve to help women and children escape domestic 
violence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government and the Government of Canada 
have jointly contributed over $1.6 million under the Investment 
in Affordable Housing Agreement. Further annual funding is 
provided through the Ministry of Justice’s residential crisis 
services program and family violence outreach program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this story is about more than a building. It’s about 
recognizing a community coming together to address a need. 
Mr. Speaker, our government is proud of what has been 
accomplished in Melfort and I would like to invite all members 
of the House to join me in acknowledging everyone involved in 
completing this project. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Martensville-Warman. 
 

Election Spending 
 
Ms. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, for 

years we have heard the NDP [New Democratic Party] angrily 
denouncing the use of out-of-province consultants. They 
actually even campaigned on it in the last election. But of 
course, like most things with the NDP, they say one thing and 
do the complete opposite. 
 
The NDP just filed its provincial election return, and guess 
what? Almost three-quarters of their election spending went to 
out-of-province consultants and staffers: 236,000 to a company 
out of Vancouver; 118,000 to a company out of Toronto; 
$84,000 to cStreet Campaigns of Toronto for their website and 
social media. How did that work out for them? 61,000 to 
Strategic Communications of Vancouver for election 
consulting, whatever that means; $7,000 to Paper Chase 
Communications of Mississauga to do their tour planning. They 
even brought in a company from Ottawa, Project X 
Productions, and paid them $33,000 to do their sound and 
lighting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on top of that, they paid a total of $71,000 to 19 
campaign staffers. Apparently they couldn’t find any talent in 
the province. They brought them in from Toronto, Ottawa, 
Montreal, Vancouver, Burnaby, London, Kitchener, Saanich, 
Nepean, and Mississauga. In total, Mr. Speaker, over 630,000 
of their $870,000 that they spent on their provincial campaign 
went to out-of-province consultants and staffers. And, Mr. 
Speaker, considering the result of the last election was 10 seats 
and the worst showing that the NDP have seen when it comes to 
popular vote, the question is, are they going to be asking for a 
refund or at least a value-for-money audit, Mr. Speaker? 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Youth Suicides in the North 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, in politics the words 
tragedy and crisis are sometimes used so much that we can 
almost lose sight of what they actually mean. Yesterday we 
heard of a 10-year-old who ended her own life in our province. 
She was the fourth child in the North in less than two weeks to 
decide that she had so little hope, so much darkness and despair, 
that suicide was her answer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this crisis is playing out in the North, but it affects 
all the people of Saskatchewan in every corner of our province. 
To the Premier: what steps is his government taking to address 
this horribly tragic crisis that none of us can accept? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the Leader of 
the Opposition for leading off the first question period of the 
fall session as he has just done. There really are no words that 
we have to express our sorrow at the tragedy that has happened. 
Neither are there words to properly express our concern for 
what might lead young people to this conclusion in the numbers 
that we have seen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that as a result of and prior to these 
particular examples, these tragedies, this loss of life, there have 
been actions taken by local leadership and also by the 



738 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 2016 

provincial government and provincial agencies. The health 
region is connected with the Lac La Ronge Indian Band health 
and Stanley Mission Health Centre to initiate the local 
emergency operations centre. Health regions, First Nations, 
community and government partners participate in the daily 
emergency call. And there was an ops [operations] call this 
morning to discuss a plan to provide specific support for the 
Deschambault area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the issue of suicides in the North has been a top 
concern for local leaders and for the provincial government for 
some number of years. We have moved through the health 
region and through the ministries proper to provide better 
support, improved support. Clearly more needs to be done, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ll continue to respond to these suicides and work 
very, very hard with local leadership to ensure that they stop. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education has confirmed that their 
ministry works with, will continue working with Lac La Ronge 
Band and that there will be, through the Northern Lights School 
District, a meeting upcoming here later this month on this 
particular issue. That’s just one example of work that we need 
to do with respect to the North and with respect to our young 
people there. We can afford to lose no more. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Role of Global Transportation Hub 
in Land Acquisitions 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, thanks for the response. I 
just need to let the Premier know that we’re here as an 
opposition to stand with those communities and these people, 
the government, on any constructive measures, meaningful 
efforts that will reach out and respond to this crisis in 
meaningful ways, short term and long term, and we’re here as 
partners. 
 
Now we’re back into the Legislative Assembly, and I am 
shifting gears a bit. There’s question after question on so many 
fronts for this Sask Party government, so many areas that 
Saskatchewan people deserve answers from this Sask Party 
government.  
 
And when it comes to the GTH [Global Transportation Hub] 
land scandal of this government, there are so many serious 
questions lingering. So let me start with a very simple one: why 
was the GTH used to buy the parcel of land instead of the 
normal practice of Highways acquiring it for far less, as they 
were planning to do? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Just as a follow-up to the Leader of the 
Opposition’s first question, I do want to put on the record and 
point out for anybody watching the proceedings that there is a 
number to call for help. It’s 811, and we’re going to work hard 
to make sure that number is well known. And the suicide 
intervention workshops that I was referencing in the North are 
slated for October 24 through 27. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the GTH issue, I want to again 
share with members that when concerns were first raised about 

the issue, the minister, then minister responsible went to the 
Conflict of Interest Commissioner. The Conflict of Interest 
Commissioner indicated he was not in any conflict at all. 
 
When the issues continued, it was the cabinet and the 
Government of Saskatchewan that referred the matter to the 
Provincial Auditor to ask questions as per what the Leader of 
the Opposition has just asked in the House. And the order in 
council, the minute of the order in council I think reflects the 
fact that the government wanted the Provincial Auditor to look 
at everything and anything related to the deal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minute of that cabinet meeting and the order in 
council references the land purchases, references the Global 
Transportation Hub, and asks that the Provincial Auditor 
undertake an investigation and a review, including examination 
of any transaction leading up to and following the said 
acquisition. 
 
So there were no limitations placed on the auditor. Moreover, 
we made sure that all of the cabinet documents, which isn’t 
always the case, were shared with the auditor — anything the 
auditor wanted. She’s made her recommendations, which I 
expect we’ll get into in a subsequent question. We’re prepared 
to stand by her recommendations, to implement them, and we 
hope the opposition will as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, not a single answer from 
the Premier. The question’s simple: why were these lands not 
acquired by Highways as they were planning to do, and 
something that would have saved millions of dollars instead of, 
as happened, the GTH acquiring these lands? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, these questions have been 
asked in the past. In fact the Provincial Auditor would have had 
the chance to ask these questions as well, and the auditor did 
find that the government could have proceeded better in terms 
of the acquisition itself. In fact I’ll quote her from page 19. The 
auditor’s report said, delayed decisions on buying the land 
during a period of rapidly escalating land values contributed to 
buying this land at a significantly higher price.  

 
She also did talk about the need for better communication 
between the government agencies involved, whether it was the 
Ministry of Highways or whether it was the GTH, Mr. Speaker. 
But she went on to say other things in her report and in the 
press release that accompanied the report, including the 
following: “The audit did not find evidence of conflicts of 
interest, or indications of fraud or wrongdoing by the GTH 
management or Board of Directors.” 

 
The chairman of the board of directors was the minister 
responsible, Mr. Speaker. She went on to say during an 
interview on the 4th of July, 2016: 
 

We’re always looking for red flags, and because this is a 
land transaction, we did look for conflicts of interest. And 
we didn’t find evidence of conflict of interest or 
indications of fraud or wrongdoing in the course of our 



October 19, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 739 

work, so there were no red flags there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we accept the fact that government should have 
proceeded differently with respect to the acquisition, but on the 
matter of the allegations that that member makes, that others 
perhaps are making with respect of conflict of interest, the 
Conflict of Interest Commissioner has said there are none. The 
Provincial Auditor has said there are none. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — No one, no one in Saskatchewan 
believes that that Premier doesn’t know what’s going on in his 
own cabinet. A very simple question for the Premier that hasn’t 
been answered: why was Highways used to acquire those lands? 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
The fact of the matter is the auditor had full authority. The 
cabinet referred the matter to the Provincial Auditor. The Public 
Accounts Committee also made reference to the Provincial 
Auditor that gave the Provincial Auditor full authority to 
examine any of the transactions leading up to and following the 
said acquisition. 
 
The Provincial Auditor embarked on an audit of her own 
choosing, doing so in a way she felt would be most productive, 
and a team of experts to which she recruited to conduct that 
audit. She had full access to all the documentation and all the 
individuals that she needed in order to conduct that audit. She 
did so, and her conclusion was the audit did not find evidence 
of conflicts of interest, of indications of fraud or wrongdoing by 
the GTH management or board of directors, and that includes 
the former minister, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Questions, not a single answer. We’re 
not here to meet face to face just to say that we did. We’re here 
to demand answers for Saskatchewan people, answers that they 
are owed. 
 
As it relates to what’s been exposed through investigation, a 
phone call to the minister, then-minister in April of 2012 is an 
important question to the Premier. Who was it that called the 
minister? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
The Provincial Auditor identified challenges. She made a 
number of recommendations in the context of her report, two of 
which related to the Global Transportation Hub, eight of which 
related to the Ministry of Highways. We’ve accepted those 
recommendations. We are moving forward on them. 
 
One of the other challenges that were identified by the 
Provincial Auditor, not a recommendation enumerated in the 
report, but was around governance and how governance could 
be strengthened at the GTH. And she referred to their unique 

relationship as the minister being a member of the board and 
also the chairman. 
 
To that end, Mr. Speaker, I informed yesterday the board of the 
Global Transportation Hub that I would be stepping back from 
the role as being a member of the board and of being the 
chairman of the board. Mr. Gordon Houston has agreed to serve 
as the chairman of the board on an interim basis. And we’re 
going to be moving forward, working with the board in order to 
address the government’s challenge and make sure that 
governance is even stronger at the GTH going forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — This is pathetic. The question was for 
the Premier as well. Not a single answer from the government 
here today. The question is simple: who called the minister, and 
did they have any relationship to the Sask Party-supporting 
Alberta land baron that rented land to the then minister? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I think what the Leader of the 
Opposition may be insinuating is that the call was from this Mr. 
Tappauf to the minister. Both Mr. Tappauf and the minister 
have indicated they have never met or spoken before, Mr. 
Speaker. So that matter has been addressed publicly by both 
Mr. Tappauf and by the minister. 
 
As I said, we’re focused on moving the GTH forward, Mr. 
Speaker. The Provincial Auditor looked into all of these 
matters, had full authority to look into all of these matters, to 
address all of these questions, which she did in a very thorough 
way. The Conflict of Interest Commissioner also took a look at 
these matters and also addressed them. The Provincial Auditor 
found that there were no conflicts of interest, no indications of 
fraud or wrongdoing by the GTH management or board. 
 
What we are focused on right now is implementing the 
recommendations that were made by the auditor to ensure that 
the GTH succeeds going forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, weak and inexcusable. Not 
a single answer. And the question again, put to the Premier of 
Saskatchewan: it’s been exposed through investigation that a 
confidential cabinet decision was leaked to the land speculator 
that government purchased land from. Who leaked this 
information? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — No, as I said, Mr. Speaker, the 
Provincial Auditor had full scope and authority to look into this 
matter, which was something that was called for by the 
members opposite, something that this government and this 
Premier reacted to. 
 
We asked the Provincial Auditor, we invited the Provincial 
Auditor to take a wide-ranging review of the matter. The 
Provincial Auditor did so. She had full authority and full access 
to every document to which she requested access to. She 



740 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 2016 

interviewed all of the parties whom she felt necessary to 
interview in order to come to a conclusion. She found that there 
was no wrongdoing and there was no conflict of interest. That 
was the Provincial Auditor’s conclusion, given full authority to 
look into the matter in any way in which she felt necessary, Mr. 
Speaker. As a matter of fact, she said there were no red flags, 
not even red flags, Mr. Speaker, not to mention no conflicts or 
no wrongdoing.  
 
So I will take the Provincial Auditor’s word for that, Mr. 
Speaker. I will take the Conflict of Interest Commissioner’s 
word for that, not the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, these are simple questions 
to the Premier of Saskatchewan. In a deal that’s wasted tens of 
millions of dollars of hard-earned dollars of Saskatchewan 
people, they deserve some answers. No answer to why 
Highways didn’t acquire, and GTH, and the political operation 
was directing the traffic here. No answer about who called the 
then minister in April of 2012. And no answer about who 
leaked the information to the land speculator that government 
bought the land from and paid way too much. What did the 
Premier do when he learned that that information was leaked? 
What did he do to investigate that leak? Who has he held 
accountable? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — I’m honestly not sure what the Leader 
of the Opposition is referring to. There was no reference in the 
Provincial Auditor’s report that I can recall indicating that there 
was a cabinet leak with respect to any of these matters. If that 
member has information with respect to that, he should bring 
that forward and explain that in more detail. 
 
But you know, once again, Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor 
identified challenges. She did. She made 10 recommendations. 
We’re moving forward on those recommendations. The GTH 
board, for instance, dealt with the two recommendations for the 
GTH just yesterday and approved the new policy with respect 
to the items that she identified. 
 
We identified, I identified as well, a challenge around the 
governance component. And to that end, Mr. Speaker, I stepped 
back from the board as of yesterday and will no longer be 
chairing the GTH board. There has been an interim Chair who’s 
agreed to take the role, who is currently the Vice-Chair, a very, 
very well-respected individual. And we’re going to be making 
additional changes in the coming weeks to strengthen the 
governance of the GTH because we want to see the GTH 
succeed. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Measures to Reduce Carbon Emissions 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, it’s no surprise that the Premier 
doesn’t want to talk about his scandal. His latest distraction 
started as a Twitter tantrum, and it hit full theatrical flight 
yesterday. Now of course we are opposed to Ottawa imposing 

their own scheme on us without consultation. Of course we’re 
opposed to that. But the Premier’s ranting objections would be a 
lot more effective if he had any credibility on this file at all. 
 
It’s because of the Sask Party’s inaction and their refusal to 
even enforce their own price on carbon, which passed through 
this Chamber six years ago with our support, that the Sask Party 
has thrown away their credibility and has given up 
Saskatchewan’s voice at the table. Every other province has 
taken some action on carbon pricing, so every other province 
has a position from which to negotiate with the federal 
government. But the Sask Party stands alone. 
 
As a first step, as a first step to show even some credibility, will 
the Sask Party finally enact and enforce their own price on 
carbon through the green tech fund? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
thank the member opposite for the question, a very important 
question, I might add, just at this point in time. And 
Saskatchewan, I would add, is committed to making their 30 
per cent reduction of our 10 per cent of Canadian emissions, 
Mr. Speaker, which is 1.6 per cent of global emissions around 
the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll do that through the use of technology, as we 
said, at the carbon capture and storage plant at Boundary dam 3, 
Mr. Speaker, which I might add is the largest public investment 
in any greenhouse gas mitigation technology in the nation of 
Canada. Mr. Speaker, we’ll continue to . . . And it’s also 
technology that has the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to address 
global emissions around the world, again with recognition of 
sequestration that we have here in the province of 
Saskatchewan, as well as our intent to go to 50 per cent 
renewable generation capacity here in the province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
That’s the effort that this government will be making, Mr. 
Speaker. And we will, Mr. Speaker, in time we will bring in the 
tech fund. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about the Sask 
Party’s own plan. If it wasn’t time when oil was well over $100 
a barrel, and it’s not time now when the world is moving to 
address climate change, when is the time? The Premier says that 
our pollution is too small to count for anything. Well no one on 
this side of the House thinks anything about Saskatchewan is 
too small to matter. 
 
When it comes to addressing climate change, we used to be 
leaders and now we are laggards. The Sask Party cut many of 
the advancements the last NDP government had made. Now all 
he wants to do is double down on his carbon capture 
boondoggle. Other jurisdictions are moving away from it, and 
it’s no wonder. There’s no guarantee that all the carbon will be 
sequestered, and it doubles the price of electricity. The people 
of Saskatchewan are already paying the price for it, with two 
rate hikes in just six months. 



October 19, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 741 

So why won’t they admit that what the people of Saskatchewan 
can’t afford is the Sask Party’s $1.5 billion carbon capture tax? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the member’s question is very 
informative. Yesterday we outlined our response to the federal 
government’s imposed carbon tax, our own plan which includes 
the largest per capita investment in carbon mitigation 
technology in Canada, we actually think in North America and, 
from a public sector investment, perhaps the world. She’s 
perhaps ignoring the move to 50 per cent renewables through 
SaskPower by 2030. That’s also part of our plan. There are a 
number of other elements to the plan we laid out yesterday. 
 
And what we did say . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the 
member for Athabasca might want to pay attention since his 
colleague asked the question. The answer to the question 
continues as such. Mr. Speaker, I would point out that we have 
said that when the economy strengthens in this province, we 
will move to a heavy emitter tech fund. But hear what the NDP 
are saying. They’re saying, implement the levy now. Increase 
taxes now. 
 
We’ve seen thousands of layoffs in the oil and gas sector. 
We’ve seen layoffs in the mining sector. Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
seen some trouble in the economy, an economy that’s reliant on 
agriculture and mining and energy, that would be part of the 
heavy emitters group. And the NDP’s plan is to tax that sector 
right now. 
 
Or maybe there’s another plan. Her own constituency has a 
resolution going to the NDP convention this month. Her 
constituency of Saskatoon Nutana says — and I think this is 
what she really wants — shut down the coal industry 
completely in this province. That might be the NDP position, 
but it’s not the position of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition Whip. 
 

Funding for the Northern Teacher Education Program 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, NORTEP works because it’s 
by and for northern people. But this government wants to cut 
the program and take the northern control away. With all the 
Sask Party is getting wrong in northern Saskatchewan, why are 
they attacking a program that is getting it right? The 
government’s own study shows that graduates get jobs, and 
most of them stay in the North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year the Sask Party signed a five-year 
commitment to NORTEP. So the simple question is, will the 
minister stop the cuts, honour the five-year agreement they 
signed, and let this program keep doing what it’s been doing for 
over 40 years: helping northern people get training and find 
work? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Above all, Mr. 
Speaker, we are committed to supporting northern-based 
teacher education programs, and I have met with students and 

staff in La Ronge, and administration, last month. I’ll reiterate 
that to them and administration when I meet with them later 
today. 
 
This is about students first and foremost. It’s about working 
together to find the best northern-based solution for the delivery 
of teaching and professional access programs, not only for 
NORTEP, Mr. Speaker, but for other northern students. And 
what I find so edifying is that NORTEP council is taking the 
lead by self-determining and recommending to us, to me, which 
partner will work best for them to deliver their programs. That’s 
important, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Mr. McCall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, apparently it was such a 
great meeting that the minister had with the students that 
they’ve come all the way down to Regina to say that they were 
disrespected, that the minister wasn’t paying attention in the 
meeting, and that they want to see the future of NORTEP and 
NORPAC secured, Mr. Speaker. That’s the fact of the matter. 
 
Earlier in this question period we heard about some of the tragic 
things that go on in this province, particularly in the North. And 
one of the institutions and one of the groups of people that have 
been on the front lines of fighting the lack of hope and the 
despair that comes with the suicides that we see over the past 
two weeks has been NORTEP-NORPAC. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has an opportunity today to 
provide a solid assurance, instead of the messing around with 
the future of this program that we’ve seen since the dead of 
summer, that we’ve seen since . . . Their own study said that the 
program is doing a fine job and should be bolstered, not 
wrapped up or redirected. So, Mr. Speaker, the question is this: 
they have a chance to make good on their talk about doing what 
they can to bolster hope and help. Will they do that today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, I must say I am 
deeply concerned, and I extend my heartfelt condolences to the 
friends and family of those vibrant, lovely young people who 
have so recently tragically died. 
 
And in terms of meeting, emotions certainly are running high. 
That I understand. However again I will say, I did have what I 
can certainly describe as a respectful, cordial meeting with 
students, staff, and board members in La Ronge last month. 
And it’s that goodwill, Mr. Speaker, that I only wish to 
continue, now more than ever. 
 
Surely in light of what is going on in the North, we need to 
champion a strong North so that people can go to school, train 
for jobs, and live and build families in a vibrant, northern 
community, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 



742 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 2016 

Funding for Saskatchewan Assured 
Income for Disability Program 

 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party cuts don’t stop 
with NORTEP. This summer we’ve seen Sask Party cuts after 
Sask Party cuts. Mr. Speaker, if they were cutting back on Sask 
Party waste or mismanagement or scandals or lining the pockets 
of their Sask Party-supporting friends, I could go behind that. 
We all could. But no, they are targeting some of the most 
vulnerable people in our communities. 
 
Here with us today are concerned members from the 
community who are appalled by the Sask Party’s cuts to the 
SAID program. The SAID program helps Saskatchewan people 
living with disabilities. It helps Saskatchewan people living 
with serious illnesses such as multiple sclerosis and cancer, and 
yet the best the new Minister of Social Services can say is the 
cuts are on pause. 
 
How is it acceptable that your government wastes millions on 
scandalous land transfers but targets the most vulnerable with 
these cold-hearted cuts? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you for the question. I 
would say firstly that let’s remember that it was this 
government in 2008 which created the SAID program for 
people with disabilities. And further to that, since 2008 we have 
raised our support for people with disabilities by 134 per cent. 
 
I would also say, Mr. Speaker, that the cuts you speak about in 
the budget are on pause, and they currently continue to be on 
pause while we work through the budget process. And that will 
continue for now until we can make some other decisions. 
Thank you. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Chair of the Standing 
Committee on House Services. 
 

Standing Committee on House Services 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on House Services to report that the 
committee considered committee membership changes on 
August 31st, 2016 and pursuant to rule 136(6) filed with the 
Clerk the third report of the Standing Committee on House 
Services. I move: 
 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on House 
Services be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Chair of 
House Services: 
 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on House 
Services previously filed with the Clerk as sessional paper 
no. 216 be now concurred in. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Deputy Chair of the 
Standing Committee on House Services. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on House Services to report that the committee 
considered committee memberships earlier today, and I am now 
presenting the committee’s fourth report. And as such, Mr. 
Speaker, I move: 
 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on House 
Services be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Chair of 
House Services: 
 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on House 
Services be now concurred in. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Membership of the Board of Internal Economy 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I would like to 
inform the Assembly that I have received a letter from the 
Lieutenant Governor stating that the membership of the Board 
of Internal Economy is the Hon. Corey Tochor, Chair; Hon. 
Dustin Duncan; Hon. Jeremy Harrison; Hon. Paul Merriman; 
Laura Ross; and MLA [Member of the Legislative Assembly] 
David Forbes; MLA Warren McCall. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 

The Speaker: — In accordance with the Board of Internal 
Economy directive #23, Caucus Accountability and Disclosure, 
I hereby table the audited financial statements for the year 
ending March 31, 2016 and the term audited for the period 
November 7th, 2011 to April 4th, 2016, prepared for the 
Saskatchewan Party caucus by the accounting firm Meyers 
Norris Penny LLP. I so table. 
 
In accordance with the Board of Internal Economy directive 
#23, Caucus Accountability and Disclosure, I hereby table the 
audited financial statements for the year ending March 31st, 
2016 and the term audited for the period of November 7th, 2011 
to April 4, 2016, prepared by the New Democratic Party caucus 
by the accounting firm of MWC Chartered Professional 
Accountants LLP. I so table. 



October 19, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 743 

In accordance with the directive #22, Members’ Accountability 
and Disclosure, I hereby table reports for the fiscal year ending 
March 31st, 2016 for all members. 
 
I so now table all three documents. 
 
Order. Would members come to order. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 2 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 2 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Crown Corporations’ Fiscal Year 
End Standardization) Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and just a 
couple of words to express it’s good to be back, good to see 
you, Mr. Speaker, in the Chair again. And I think we’re ready to 
get going on the work of the Legislative Assembly here. So it is 
my indeed honour to be able to rise today in the adjourned 
debates on this particular bill and look forward to debating 
other bills as well. 
 
This particular bill is dealing with something that’s made it a 
little more difficult to understand the financial statements for 
over the last two years. But I think it’ll straighten itself out 
eventually because what’s happening here is the government is 
moving the year-end for a number of the Crown corporations to 
match the year-end of the government. And I think in the long 
run it will make a lot more sense. 
 
One of my concerns about this bill is the length of time it takes 
to get those annual reports. And currently we get the annual 
reports for these Crowns in June. So I’m wondering if it will 
push them back to later, because certainly delays in receipt of 
annual reports make it much more difficult to put questions to 
the government and the minister when those reports are tabled. 
 
Now of course we do have opportunity in committee, in the 
Crown investments . . . or the Crown and Central Agencies 
Committee to address some of these concerns. But again, 
unfortunately this committee doesn’t meet on a regular basis 
and we aren’t always able to raise questions about these annual 
reports from these Crown corporations in a very timely manner. 
And so again that’s one of my concerns is that we don’t have 
time . . . we don’t have good time or early time to be able to 
address some of the concerns that come up in these annual 
reports. And indeed, Mr. Speaker, there are times when I’ve 
actually spoken to three annual reports in one sitting because 
that’s how far behind they were. So those are the kinds of things 
that I think in order to be effective in our work at the Assembly 

here, we have to be able to review annual reports from these 
very important Crowns, from the Crown and Central Agencies 
Committee, in a more timely fashion. 
 
So moving these year-ends to three months later is, I think, 
going to mean that we will now be seeing the annual reports 
three months later as well, which will obviously cause a 
problem for a timely review of the activities and the financial 
activities of some of these Crowns. And for example we know 
that SaskPower is currently at the top of its spending abilities 
with the 70 . . . near or over the recommended 75 per cent debt 
ratio. So those kinds of factors have to be observed carefully, 
and we don’t often get an opportunity here in the legislature or 
in committee to be able to address those kinds of concerns. 
 
So that in itself is something that I think we need to have a 
careful eye on. And I think in our role as the official opposition, 
to hold this government to account we need the tools that we 
can . . . as many tools as we can have to properly hold the 
government to account, and that includes our Crown 
corporations. Because certainly the fiscal management of those 
corporations and of the province itself are of utmost importance 
to Saskatchewan people, and it’s important that the official 
opposition has the proper tools to be able to do that. 
 
Now the bill itself, I think it was tabled back on May 30th, and 
at that point the former minister for Crown Corporations 
indicated that . . . And I think this is well known, that each 
Crown is formed by its own separate legislation. But there 
wasn’t consistency amongst all those separate pieces of 
legislation that form the Crown corporations suite, I guess, of 
bills, of law. So he is suggesting that some of them didn’t even 
have fiscal year-ends on a specific date and others were subject 
to change by order in council. 
 
So what this amendment is going to do is standardize all of the 
CIC [Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan] 
Crowns by having a fiscal year-end determined by order in 
council as opposed to a legislative date. Now once again — and 
you’ve heard me say this before, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I’ll 
say it again — every time that we move legislative authority 
from the bill itself, or the law itself, to the regulation power 
through order in council, it means we lose the opportunity to 
have scrutiny on those changes before they’re actually made. 
 
So that’s one of the problems with not having this type of fixed 
year-end, fiscal year-end date in the legislation itself, but 
allowing it to be treated through order in council. What I think 
is going to be useful — and I think this is a positive move — is 
the fact that this order in council will now deal with all of the 
Crown corporations and not just one-offs one at a time. 
 
One of the things the minister indicated and the goal behind this 
bill was to be better able to align the budget planning process 
between CIC and executive government. I would suppose that 
makes some sense, and certainly I would imagine that the 
officials at the Ministry of Finance as well as Crown officials 
that are looking after these matters would see the budgeting 
process needs to be better aligned. 
 
These Crowns are an important part of our annual financial 
statements. They’re an important part of the revenues that we 
derive. We know that SaskTel pays out a lot of dividends. I 



744 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 2016 

don’t have the numbers in front of me, but for example, a 
corporation like SaskTel provides a significant amount of 
dividends to the taxpayers, as did ISC [Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan] before it was sold off and 
privatized. ISC was actually a very profitable Crown and 
continues to be a profitable Crown, but unfortunately those 
profits are no longer going to the people of Saskatchewan as 
taxpayers because that was sold off. 
 
We know that’s the concerns with Crowns like SaskTel, SLGA 
[Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority] as it’s being torn 
apart. We see that these revenues are also being forgone for a 
short-term gain by this government. So those are the kinds of 
concerns when we see this government selling off and 
privatizing a lot of the assets that we worked so hard to acquire 
and develop over the years. Short-term gain is a dangerous 
game, Mr. Speaker, and it’s concerning to see those kinds of 
approaches being used by this government when they’re so 
desperate to manage their own finances. 
 
[14:45] 
 
The alignment of budget years, according to the minister, the 
former minister, would also provide Finance with more current 
information on Crown earning expectations and their impact to 
the provincial budget. So it’s not clear to me about how you’ll 
get better numbers if you’re pushing the annual report back 
three months because currently it’s in December, and surely 
those numbers then would be more available to Finance than if 
we are pushing it back to March to align with the provincial 
budget. So I’m going to be curious in committee to be able to 
ask questions about that and how pushing it three months later 
will allow Finance more current information on Crown earning 
expectations and impacts on budget. So that’s something that 
seems a little bit backwards to me, but I think that those are 
questions that we will be able to ask once we get into 
committee. 
 
So the bill itself is a fairly short bill. There are basically seven 
substantive clauses, or six I guess, and there is actually other 
bills that are being impacted relating to specific Crowns. So the 
first one is in relation to The Saskatchewan Gaming 
Corporation Act — that’s a CIC Crown, I believe — and then 
The Saskatchewan Government Insurance Act. Another bill is 
The Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation Act, The 
Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation Act, 
and The Saskatchewan Water Corporation Act. 
 
So those five particular Crown corporations have changes to 
their own particular legislation to bring this changing of the 
year-end in line, and then I think the rest of them are being 
changed through section 2 of the bill itself which is amending 
subsection 34(2) of The Crown Corporations Act by striking out 
April 30th and substituting “120th day.” 
 
Now if you look at the . . . Let’s see if there are explanatory 
notes. I don’t know that there . . . Oh, yes. Clause 2 makes the 
Crown Investments Corporation present its annual report 120 
days after the end of the year instead of April 30th. So this is 
four months, and again that kind of equals April 30th. So it’s 
not clear to me why you would use 120 days rather than April 
30th unless this means now it’s 120 days after March 31st 
which would lead us into April, May, June, July. 

So that looks like we now aren’t going to get the Crown 
Investments Corporation annual report until the very dead of 
summer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, right at the end of July. So I 
know we’re all looking for some interesting reading while 
we’re enjoying the summer weather in Saskatchewan, but 
certainly getting the Crown Investments Corporation annual 
report four months later than we currently get it, or three 
months later than we currently get it, will slow down the public 
response and our ability as the official opposition to do a proper 
review of the activities of the Crown corporation, and it will 
certainly delay any opportunity we have to ask questions in a 
timely fashion, especially when we see the budget being 
introduced in March of every year. 
 
So again, not clear to me how moving the reporting date for 
Crown Investments Corporation three months later is going to 
enable budget planning and financial planning on an earlier 
basis. 
 
So those are very important questions, Mr. Speaker, that I think 
we’re going to have to ask in committee, and I’m sure some of 
my colleagues may have some questions about that as well. So 
it’s a very short bill but I think the impact on financial 
reporting, the impact on public scrutiny of these important 
Crown corporations and the revenues and dividends that they 
bring to the people of Saskatchewan are ones that I think we 
really need to be able to have a very close look at. 
 
Yes, I mean it’s been helpful, I guess, for some of the Crowns 
who are dealing with deficit issues because they’ll only have a 
nine-month reporting period rather than a 15-month reporting 
period for the previous fiscal year. As I said, it’s making it hard 
to compare oranges to oranges and apples to apples when we 
have these different time periods for Crowns that are kind of 
causing a bit of a bump for the last couple of years. We know 
that it’ll straighten out once this is all uniform again. 
 
But in the meantime, I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we will have 
certainly more questions about how moving the timeline ahead 
three months for these Crowns to do their annual reports will 
actually benefit the budgeting and financing process which 
happens before. So it seems to be going in the wrong direction 
and those are questions that I think we will all look forward to 
getting the answers to. 
 
At any rate, Mr. Speaker, I’m fairly certain that other of my 
colleagues are going to want to have an opportunity to comment 
on this bill as well before it goes to committee. So at this point, 
I would move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 2, An Act to 
amend certain Statutes to Standardize Provisions respecting the 
Fiscal Year End of certain Crown Corporations. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Nutana has moved 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 2, The Miscellaneous Statutes 
(Crown Corporations’ Fiscal Year End Standardization) 
Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 



October 19, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 745 

Bill No. 4 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 4 — The Queen’s 
Bench Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur la 
Cour du Banc de la Reine be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And once again, it is my honour to be able to rise in this 
Assembly and provide comments on bills that the government 
has introduced in the Assembly. 
 
This particular bill was introduced on May 31st, earlier this 
year. It’s somewhat unusual in our cycle in the legislature 
where we’re actually combining nine calendar years into eight 
sort of legislative calendars. So normally these bills, as you 
know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we would be looking at them being 
introduced after a Throne Speech in the fall. But of course, this 
year we had a Throne . . . We had no Throne Speech last year 
and now this year we have a Throne Speech in the spring. So 
this leads to a little bit of unusual procedure for the House and 
the Assembly. But here we are. We are now debating bills that 
were introduced in May. 
 
So it’s a little bit of a different scene but certainly it is again my 
honour to be able to be partaking in this debate and providing 
comment to the Assembly in terms of the legislative agenda that 
this government has brought forward. As many of the bills of 
this government reflect, this is more an administrative type of 
procedural bill that’s being put forward here. 
 
And it was introduced by the Minister of Justice, as I said . . . 
Oh May 30th, sorry, was when this bill was introduced. And he 
indicated in his second reading speech that this is attempting to 
do a few things, as I say, perhaps properly identified as 
housekeeping items. But in particular the first thing that he has 
indicated is that these amendments “. . . are required to fulfill 
Saskatchewan’s obligations as a signatory to the New West 
Partnership Trade Agreement, which will allow existing or 
future awards made by dispute resolution panels to be enforced 
against any party as if they were civil judgments of the court.” 
 
So when we enter into these types of agreements, we have to 
find ways to make sure that they’re enforced properly, and that 
requires changes to our laws here within the province of 
Saskatchewan. So if we want to take a look at that particular 
change, and I’ll see if I quickly identify it, but there’s no 
guarantee because . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Take my 
time. Thank you. My colleague gives me time to do that. This 
law is actually in English and French as well, so it makes a little 
bit of difficulty finding it. I’m going to have to look at the 
explanatory notes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Domestic trade agreements . . . So there’s some changes, I 
guess, to the definitions that are being included in section 89 of 
the existing Act. First off, I believe, is an addition. They’re 
going to amend the reference to a domestic trade agreement and 
so that word itself is just being struck, and these are now under 
award. I think the definition itself . . . There’s an actual 
definition of a domestic trade agreement. It’s now being 

amended to remove the reference to domestic and to remove the 
restriction of the enforcement of the order to an order against 
the Crown. So currently that’s . . . 89.2 of the existing bill says 
that: 
 

If an award is made against the Crown, the person entitled 
to the award may file a certified copy of that award with 
the court if the Domestic Trade Agreement permits the 
award to be enforced in the same manner as an order 
against the Crown made by the court. 

 
And so what this is doing here is it’s providing the ability to 
enforce the award, whether it was made on or before this 
section came into force, and remove the restriction of the 
enforcement of the order to an order against the Crown. 
 
So the new section 89.2 . . . I’ll just refer to the bill now. It’s 
near the end of the amendments, so it would be under the 
definitions, I believe, Mr. Speaker. Here we are, under the 
definitions. So this is section 6 of the new bill itself, and 
they’ve actually repealed the entire clause. And now you will 
see the reference to domestic trade agreement is basically gone. 
And now a certified copy only needs to be “. . . a copy of an 
award certified to be a true copy by the official or body 
designated in the regulations as responsible for administering a 
trade agreement.” 
 
So you see there’s no longer a reference to an order of the 
Crown. So that’s . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — She’s going to introduce . . . [inaudible]. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Okay. That’s one of the changes that would be 
made. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the Minister of Social 
Services on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — I ask for leave to make an 
introduction. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister has asked for leave to 
make an introduction. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The minister may proceed. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — I thank my colleagues for the 
leave. I’d like to welcome a friend and constituent of mine 
who’s sitting up in the gallery here, Mr. Rod Donison. He’s not 
only a good friend to me, but I think he’s a good friend to 
many, and he has provided not only his friendship but his calm 
and wise and spiritual counsel to many of us on this side of the 
House and in the community. 
 
He’s currently the chaplain for the Regina city police, an 
organization which definitely needs that in the difficult work 
that they do. He’s the former chaplain of the Saskatchewan 
Riders, the area manager for LeaderImpact, a tireless 
community volunteer, a leader in this city and in this province. 



746 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 2016 

He’s married to his beautiful wife, Rebecca, both born and 
raised in Regina. Again, they’re constituents of mine and it’s 
my privilege to call him a friend, and I thank him for being 
here. Please join me in welcoming to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 4 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2016/Loi 
modificative de 2016 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 

(continued) 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And thank you for the introduction; it gave me a little chance to 
confer with one of my colleagues on some of the clauses of this 
bill, so things are looking up. This bill, Bill No. 4, also deals 
with the court-appointed counsels. 
 
Now what you will see, Mr. Speaker, happening in a lot of legal 
proceedings, particularly with impecunious people, or people 
who don’t have a lot of money, they will either choose to 
self-represent or they are eligible to apply for legal aid. Often 
they don’t get a choice in terms of who will be representing 
them, and often they don’t understand, may not understand the 
process and decide they don’t want a particular lawyer for them. 
 
So typically what’s being done in the current Act is that there’s 
an opportunity for the court to then appoint another legal 
counsel for that individual. And I haven’t had an opportunity to 
look at this really closely, but I understand that this bill actually 
changes that totally. 
 
So what we should probably do is look at what the minister 
himself said when he introduced the bill in May. And he said 
here that: 
 

. . . related amendments to [this bill and] The 
Constitutional Questions Act . . . will be made to provide 
for the appointment of an administrator for the purposes of 
managing the court-appointed lawyer process, set out rules 
and processes for the appointment of a court-appointed 
lawyer from a list of approved lawyers established by the 
administrator, provide that those lawyers are to be paid at a 
fee rate set by the administrator, and provide that any 
lawyers appointed outside this process are not entitled to 
payment by the government. 

 
And it seems a bit draconian, Mr. Speaker, and certainly the 
minister didn’t provide information in terms of why those kinds 
of changes are being instituted at this point in time. And we’re 
still kind of wondering what the answers to those questions are. 
So we certainly will have a lot of questions for the minister 
himself once, again, this bill is put into committee. If we look at 
the explanatory notes that are provided by the government, it 
just says it provides for the new part III.1 to address 
court-appointed lawyers. 
 
[15:00] 
 

So if we want to look at the new part III.1, it will set out the 
definitions. That’s done in section 15.1 of this bill. And the 
administrator here is defined for the purpose of the part. There’s 
a list, and this is a list of lawyers maintained by the 
administrator. So one of the first questions I have is, what are 
the qualifications that this administrator would have to be able 
to determine who in fact would be an appropriate 
court-appointed lawyer? And that’s not an easy decision, and 
certainly I think one that could have perils, Mr. Speaker, when 
we’re controlling who may be seen as a court-appointed lawyer. 
 
What it will do, if I understand correctly, is it will limit the 
independence of the judiciary to ensure that that particular 
accused under those particular circumstances with particular 
needs may not be able to access the legal counsel that they 
might need in order to obtain justice, basically. 
 
So having a third party, an administrative body set up to do this, 
I think it’s fraught with a number of concerns. And again, it 
excludes certain lawyers. I mean, how are you supposed to get 
on the list? What are . . . We don’t know what the procedures 
are going to be. And you would think that the law profession is 
one that could already make these kinds of determinations in 
terms of a self-regulating body in terms of who’s available, 
who’s interested, and who is appropriate for these people who 
are receiving court-appointed counsel. 
 
And so setting up an additional administrative arm, I think, 
would provide a number of concerns and it could be fraught 
with a number of problems which may, in fact, act as barriers 
for people to access the justice that they so desperately need. I 
don’t think this is something that the minister has given any sort 
of rationale or explanation for. Even in the explanatory notes, it 
just sort of tells us about the technical changes that are being 
made but there’s certainly no justification. So that’s very 
concerning. 
 
The minister did say in his comments that currently there’s a 
lack of a statutory basis for the administration of the court 
appointed legal counsel program, and it results in 
inconsistencies in when and how such counsel are appointed. I 
don’t think that restricting the independence of the judiciary is 
the answer here, Mr. Speaker. And in fact, you know, this may 
be a regressive move instead of a progressive move. 
 
So we certainly want to examine that and I know my colleagues 
will have much more to add to this as we go through the debates 
here in the Assembly and also right within the committee 
process itself. Because, as you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s 
really hard to get answers from the government. But when we 
are in committee, that is an opportunity for us as critics and as 
the members of the loyal opposition to provide detailed 
questions to the minister and their officials to answer these 
types of concerns and flesh out really the meaning of these bills. 
 
And in fact, people look at the Hansard from the committees 
quite carefully. Just a couple months ago, I got a call from a 
lawyer that I know in Saskatoon and she was looking for the 
removal of indemnification provisions in The Environmental 
Management and Protection Act from 2010. And she actually 
studied not only the text of the bill itself, not only the 
regulations, and not only the Hansard in the House but she 
went to the committee. And that’s where she went, to the 



October 19, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 747 

Hansard for committee to find out whether this had been 
discussed. 
 
And it certainly was raised at the time by our critic but the 
answers, sadly, weren’t fulsome on the part of the government. 
And so now it’s still a question: why are these provisions 
removed? And it’s hopefully something that I’ll be able to raise 
in my capacity as Environment critic to the committee when 
there’s an opportunity to do so. 
 
I often find that committee is a limited period of time to be able 
to ask questions and we don’t really have . . . we don’t seem to 
get enough time to ask questions. But it’s an intensive process 
and you know how tired we all are, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by the 
time the spring session is completed. But it is a very important 
part of legislative process. 
 
And so, as I indicated, I’m sure our critic is going to have, she’s 
very well versed in this topic and will have some very important 
questions for the minister. And maybe this is advanced notice 
for the minister to get a few of those answers ready so that we 
can have proper and complete answers to those questions as we 
bring them up in the committee process. 
 
The other part, I guess . . . There’s some small changes to the 
size of the court, increasing the size from the Chief Justice and 
31 other judges to a Chief Justice and 32 other judges to reflect 
the actual size of the court. So apparently we have 32 plus a 
Chief Justice right now. And again I think what we’re seeing in 
a lot of jurisdictions is that the legal system is getting backed 
up, that there simply isn’t enough support and court time and 
available counsel with the necessary trial times to be able to 
conduct trials in an efficient and orderly fashion. And I think 
just recently — I forget what province; it might have been in 
one of the territories — where an alleged criminal was actually 
released because his trial didn’t happen in a time that was, you 
know, proper for him as an accused to have. 
 
Those kinds of things cause concern from the public, and I 
think our legal system is looking very hard at these issues. It 
was an issue when I was practising law and when I was 
articling 20-some-odd years ago. But it seems as the courts get 
. . . The complexity of trials is like the complexity of health 
care. Our society is becoming more complex, and obviously 
there are more people engaging with the criminal justice system 
and with the civil justice system. And again, access to that 
system as well seems to be less available than it was in the past 
as well. So I know things like pro bono law and the mediation 
process and the conciliatory process are stepping into the void 
and, I think, providing some good opportunities and 
understandings for people of the legal system that will maybe 
take some of that pressure off the actual formal court system, 
but I think we have a long ways to go. 
 
So The Queen’s Bench Act, as the minister indicated, 
establishes criteria for the operation of the Queen’s Bench 
court. And some of these changes appear to be rather pro forma; 
like they’re just, as the minister said, adjusting the size of the 
court to reflect its actual size to 32 rather than 31. So it is not an 
expansion, but it’s just a case of the law catching up to the 
reality, which is not always the best way to do things, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. But at least it’s fixing a problem that exists, so 
that’s important. 

The changes to the domestic trade agreement interpretation of 
the Act, as I explained earlier, this is just to allow for trade 
agreements to have a broader application. And the only 
connection here with the Queen’s Bench court is the reflection 
that these orders or awards with the domestic courts under the 
trade agreements would actually not have to be enforced in the 
same way as an order made by the Crown against the court. So 
that’s the only parallel touch, I guess, upon the court system is 
how these trade agreements were expected to be enforced 
similar to that of the courts. So they’re removing the restriction 
of the enforcement of the order to an order against the Crown. 
That’s gone. 
 
There’s also some changes to the regulation provision just to 
remove the reference to “domestic” under domestic trade 
agreement. So “domestic” is gone. I guess that would then open 
it up to all international agreements as well, and we know 
there’s plenty of those being floated around these days. 
 
And then there’s some other minor provisions relating to The 
Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2012. So that’s the 31 judges 
that I talked about earlier. And of course, as the minister 
indicated, there were also some changes required for The 
Constitutional Questions Act. And in there, it also refers to 
appointments of court-appointed counsel. So that Act has to be 
amended, as well as The Queen’s Bench Act, in order to bring in 
these new changes that we are questioning at this point in time. 
Certainly wanting more information there as well. So it has a 
dual impact because it’s not only The Queen’s Bench Act, but 
The Court of Appeal Act. 
 
Constitutional questions are questions that reflects our rights 
under our Constitution, and these are fundamental questions 
that are often referred to the court by individuals when their 
rights under our constitution — the Charter would be part of 
that — are being infringed upon. 
 
And again, the imposition of an administrator to look after 
court-appointed counsel and restricting the ability of the 
judiciary is something that needs to be taken very, very 
seriously. And I think the minister will certainly have to answer 
to that, once we get an opportunity to do so in committee. 
 
Yes, there’s a number of regulations that can be done now in 
terms of how this application for legal representation is going to 
be made, how notice is going to happen, so a lot of those 
administrative things that fall from one of these kinds of 
changes to the Act. So those are secondary, I guess, in the sense 
of what’s happening within this bill. But those processes require 
amendment if in fact the court-appointed lawyers process is 
going to go forward in this way. 
 
And also this bill allows the minister to keep a list of lawyers 
who can be appointed as court-appointed lawyers, regulating 
their compensation. So this again fixes the compensation that 
these lawyers can provide. 
 
I know that, I don’t know how Saskatchewan compares to other 
provinces, but I know that the compensation for legal aid 
lawyers that are providing services to folks in the community 
often does not reflect the fees that are charged by private bar 
lawyers. And whether that’s fair or not, I guess is up to the 
public opinion. But the minister now will be able to keep a list 



748 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 2016 

of those lawyers and also regulate the fees that they are entitled 
to have. I don’t know how this impacts on the legal aid system 
or whether it does. As you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, legal aid 
tends to focus on criminal matters or family matters, so this 
may or may not apply in there. And again my other colleagues 
are going to have better commentary on that particular point. 
 
But as far as it goes right now, this is an interesting Act. Again 
the minister didn’t really provide justification in his 
introductory comments on second reading when he explained 
the technical processes that are being affected, but certainly not 
the rationale. And I think he’s got some explaining to do, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So at this point this time, I know other of my colleagues are 
going to want to be able to comment on this. And so I would 
like to move that we now adjourn debate on Bill No. 4 which is 
An Act to amend The Queen’s Bench Act, 1998 and to make 
related amendments to The Constitutional Questions Act, 2012. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 4, The Queen’s Bench 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. 
 

Bill No. 5 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 5 — The 
Electronic Information and Documents Amendment Act, 2016 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise and enter into the debate on Bill No. 5, An Act 
to amend The Electronic Information and Documents Act, 2000, 
or known informally as, where’s the first quarter report? No, 
but this is something when you think about reports. And they 
love their reports over there, but the one that people are missing 
most this summer was that first quarter. 
 
So here we are talking about reports and The Electronic 
Information and Documents Act. And in many ways this seems 
like a relatively simple, simple piece of legislation because 
really it talks about striking out the word “department” and 
introducing the word “ministry.” And here we are how many 
years later, and we’re still cleaning up after this government’s 
needless change of getting rid of department language and 
creating ministries. And here we are how many years later, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, still wrestling with that thing because they 
didn’t do their homework the first time. And it really seems 
really straightforward, but there’s a lot of questions about it. 
 
And I know many of us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will be watching 
the debate tonight, the presidential debates, and you can see 
when things go horribly wrong with electronic information. 

And I’m thinking of Hillary Clinton and how that just won’t let 
go, the emails and WikiLeaks and all of that. You want to make 
sure you have it right. You’ve got to have it right, and that’s 
very, very important. 
 
And so if you were to look at this piece of legislation, and 
people at home TV watching, it’s a little more than a page and a 
half, of which half of it talks about deleting the word, striking 
out the word “department” and substituting the word 
“ministry.” And it goes on and on in doing that several times. 
 
But there is one that I found interesting. You know, this is part 
of what we do here. We sit back, we read these pieces of 
legislation and say, does this meet the smell test, the sniff test? 
And I’ve got to tell you, this one leaves me a lot of questions. 
And I’m wondering if this is one that the government is saying, 
you know, the timing is not great for this piece of legislation to 
come forward because it’s really pointing a finger at their 
credibility, their credibility. 
 
And the one that really I want to talk about is section 4(1)(e) is 
repealed. And for most people, they would say, okay, well must 
be pretty innocuous. It’s not very important. Can’t be much, 
they’re not even talking about what it is. But let me read what 
4(1)(e) says. And they’re making this now that you don’t have 
to do it in paper form but you can do it electronically. They’re 
getting rid of: 

 
(e) documents that create or transfer interests in land and 
that require registration to be effective against third 
parties; or . . . 

 
[15:15] 
 
Now what have we been talking about in question period? 
Land, land fiascos, land scandals. And here they are, a 
government that’s wanting to change legislation. And they’re 
nodding their heads over there, going, I can’t believe this. But 
isn’t it kind of ironic that after all these years, the GTH and the 
ugly stink that has in this province, they’re wanting to get rid of 
the fact that you have to do that in paper. Because they want to 
do it electronically because those folks over there have been 
dealing with really interesting situations at record speed, record 
speed that only telephone calls can stop on the way into the 
cabinet meetings. But they don’t want to answer those 
questions, but they want to change legislation. So there’s some 
really, really interesting things. 
 
And I want to quote the minister. This is what he said on May 
30th, you know, just a few weeks before the auditor’s report 
came out. Actually it was interesting, the auditor’s report came 
out, I think the last day of session, wasn’t it? The last day of 
session. Oh, it’s the auditor, they’d say over there, what can you 
do? What can you do? Well maybe we need to revisit that. But 
this is what, this is what the Minister of Justice said. And I 
quote: 
 

Following requests from the real estate and credit union 
communities, it’s recommended the Act be amended to 
remove the existing exemption from the application of the 
Act for documents that create or transfer interests in land 
and that require . . . to be effective against third parties, and 
to update references in the Act from department to 



October 19, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 749 

ministry. 
 

Well maybe the real estate people and the credit unions have 
asked for that. And that’s fair enough; we do listen to people. 
But you know, we have got a big elephant in the room called 
GTH and we’ve got to deal with it. 
 
Today even the Premier couldn’t answer questions about that, 
simple questions. And he deflected, and then the Minister of 
Economy got up, couldn’t answer questions. People over there 
couldn’t answer questions. And here we are putting this 
forward. And this may be interesting in committee to have 
questions put forward. Why the rush? Why the rush? Under the 
guise of simply changing from department to ministry after all 
these years, that seems to be a priority. But here is this one 
thing. And I go on to finish my quote of the minister: 
 

Mr. Speaker, the exemption provision was originally 
intended to protect the registry system from land 
transactions occurring without adequate evidence and 
proper registration. 

 
I think I want to read that again: 
 

Mr. Speaker, the exemption provision was originally 
intended to protect the registry system from land 
transactions occurring without adequate evidence and 
proper registration. 

 
And that really means without dotting the i’s and crossing the 
t’s, and if there ever was a case of not dotting the i’s and 
crossing the t’s was the Global Transportation land fiasco that 
we see before us these days of which the government has no 
answers, refused to come clean on. And here we are passing this 
pretty innocuous, pretty innocuous piece of legislation, Bill No. 
5, that was introduced back in May, and it seemed pretty 
straightforward. Ministry, crossing the word department out, 
putting the word ministry, like getting rid of that simple 
protection. Now maybe they’re okay with that. Maybe they feel, 
hey, what’s a couple of, you know, 20 million, 25 million in 
lost income on land that’s not quite worth it. Maybe that’s just 
the way of doing business with the Sask Party government and 
you’ve just got to roll with it. Maybe that’s how they work. 
 
But I’ve got to tell you, we have a lot of questions, a lot of 
questions about it. And bills like this that come before us, you 
know, was so interestingly just after an election. Just after an 
election when you should be talking about big visionary pieces 
of legislation and here you are still housekeeping after the third 
election. And this is the best you’ve got? But I do want to draw 
attention to that one clause that really caused us to take a 
second look, a second look at this. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I say, I can’t go on long on this 
because there’s not much to it. But I do want to highlight to the 
people at home, this is a government that wasn’t 
straightforward before the election about what was happening 
in the Global Transportation Hub, and so many other things — 
the cuts that were coming down, all those kind of big question 
marks out there. And here we have this piece of legislation that 
I can tell you we will have questions in committee about why 
that one piece is in there when it . . . When you think about the 
kind of scandals that we’re going to be dealing with and talking 

a lot about in this House, it just raises a lot of flags. And I think 
this is important. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I know that others will want to speak 
to this piece of legislation and have the same questions, and 
we’ll have those answered in the time that’s appropriate. But 
right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, The Electronic Information and 
Documents Act, 2000, the Act to amend that Bill No. 5, I would 
move that we adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 5. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 6 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 6 — The Statute 
Law Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s good to 
be back and to have an opportunity to enter debate on bills 
before us here today. Today I’m pleased to enter the debate on 
Bill No. 6, An Act to amend the Statute Law. It’s one of those 
bills again before us that is housekeeping by and large, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to make changes. The minister pointed out in 
his second reading speech that on Bill No. 6, 24 Acts, this bill 
impacts 24 other Acts. There will be amendments to update 
language and correct grammatical and reference errors, 
basically changing terminology. 
 
There will be three Acts amended to remove the term provincial 
magistrates with provincial court judge. I had a conversation 
with my colleague who is a lawyer, of which I’m not, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and she pointed out that provincial magistrate 
is not something that exists here in Saskatchewan at this point 
in time. There will be eight Acts amended to be consistent with 
Queen’s Bench rules changing the language from substitutional 
services to substituted services, Mr. Speaker. This Act also, Bill 
No. 6, An Act to amend the Statute Law, will also repeal and 
replace words that have a variety of spelling like extraprovincial 
and tortfeasor to move to more consistency in the legislation. 
 
But I just want to walk you through some of these 24, just so 
folks at home have some idea about what this looks like. So for 
example, we’ve got The Agricultural Implements Act before, 
which is one of the 24, and it will be amended to replace 
references with department to ministry, which is interesting. 
Again my colleague who spoke before me on the previous bill 
points that out as well, that many years later here we’re still 
moving from what we used to term these bodies that used to be 
departments and they’ve become ministries. I guess that was a 
decision the government decided. This happened in 2007 and 
2008. 
 
I have to confess at that point in time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 



750 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 2016 

was involved having a brand new baby and paying attention to 
being a mom of a brand new baby so I don’t remember the 
debate or discussion why we moved from department to 
ministry. 
 
But I remember thinking at the time, because I actually used to 
work for the Department of Labour, but I remember thinking at 
the time, isn’t this is an awfully costly endeavour to move . . . 
So you think about bills that need changing, stationery, all the 
things in communications that happen in the ministry. I didn’t 
know what, I don’t know today still what the rationale was, 
what constituted the move from department to ministry, but it is 
interesting that still this many years later we are still updating 
bills, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So that’s one of the changes that’s happening. I can point you to 
something like The Child and Family Services Act that will be 
amended to replacing ex parte with the language, “application 
without notice.” And this is one of the Acts where substitutional 
service will be replaced with substituted service. 
 
As the Health critic, it’s always interesting to me when bills pop 
up that fall under my critic portfolio, and there are several Acts 
actually under Health that are going to be amended, albeit with 
minor amendments. We have The Midwifery Act, The 
Occupational Therapists Act, The Medical Profession Act, The 
Regional Health Services Act are some of the Health Acts that 
will be amended. And I’d just like to take a moment . . . Oh, 
and The Pharmacy and Pharmacy Disciplines Act. Again very 
minor amendments like the . . . Again we have The 
Occupational Therapists Act, 1997. The subsection 49(3) of this 
Act is amended to replace ex parte again with the words, 
application without notice, and substitutional service with 
substituted service. 
 
But you know, I think again this provides us an opportunity 
when we see bills before us that will be amended, thinking 
about what else could be done or what the government is going 
to be proposing. And I want to draw your attention to The 
Regional Health Services Act which is one of the Acts that is 
being amended right now. And the change in this particular Act 
is clause 18(1)(a). The Regional Health Services Act is amended 
to correct an internal reference, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So I suspect . . . I just have to put some comments on the record 
regarding The Regional Health Services Act. This is the bill that 
establishes our health regions here in Saskatchewan, and I think 
most people will be aware that this government, after the last 
election and during budget time, has announced the need for 
transformational change. 
 
I think here on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we wouldn’t 
disagree that things need to change here in health care and 
education all across the board, Mr. Speaker. But I think we just 
need to think about over-capacity in hospitals and our ERs 
[emergency room] in Saskatoon, Prince Albert, all over 
Saskatchewan, quite frankly. We can think about the cuts to 
mental health services here in Regina, Mr. Speaker, 20 
positions in mental health, which will have a huge impact on 
people. 
 
So this government is embarking upon what they call 
transformational change, and we do need change here but we 

have some big fears, not just as an opposition, but people in 
Saskatchewan are waiting not very happily. People who work in 
health, people who spend time in hospitals or any of our 
long-term care facilities are worried about what this 
transformational change is going to look like. 
 
I’ve had an opportunity as the Health critic to travel around to 
some communities in Saskatchewan. I was most recently last 
week in La Ronge, North Battleford, and Prince Albert. And it 
was interesting to me, in La Ronge . . . Because we spoke a lot 
about this health services Act, and you know, people said to me 
that one of the things they think is really important, that if the 
process the government is embarking upon right now was really 
about a great vision for health care in this province, making 
equity of services across the province, that would be a really 
great goal. But people fear that this is simply an economic 
driver, Mr. Speaker, that this government thinks they can create 
the illusion of saving money by amalgamating health regions. 
 
And we’re not quite sure where this government is going to go 
yet. There was a consultation process that was very brief in 
terms of allowing people — less than a month, Mr. Speaker — 
in allowing people from across the province to add their voices 
to how they think this should go. And those invested 
stakeholders who know what happens in the system, they had a 
very short amount of time and very little face time with the 
committee to make a presentation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So when I think about this Bill No. 6, An Act to amend the 
Statute Law and the reference to The Regional Health Services 
Act, I suspect come spring we will have The Regional Health 
Services Act before us in a very different fashion. I don’t know 
what the government will be doing and what will come out of 
these, not robust . . . I’m trying to think of the opposite of not 
robust — a very weak, lacking in time consultation process. 
And I wouldn’t diminish the people who are doing them but I 
think this government has put them under a very tight timeline. 
 
[15:30] 
 
So I believe that we will have this regional health services Act 
before us as soon as this spring to fit with this government’s 
budget line. And I have some huge concerns about what that’s 
going to look like for the people of Saskatchewan on the 
delivery of services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a government who has had record revenues, more 
money than any government has ever had in the history of this 
province. And instead of creating a health care system that is 
visionary and ensures that equity of services, ensuring people in 
all parts of the province from La Ronge to Estevan to Stony 
Rapids, wherever it might be, have good quality services, 
instead we hear about what those services look like. 
 
I was at the hospital in La Ronge. There was a nurse who 
worked a 24-hour shift, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Not good for the 
nurse, certainly not very good for the nurse and her well-being, 
but definitely not good for patient care. 
 
So I’m very frustrated as a member of the opposition and as the 
Health critic thinking that the resources that this government 
had at its disposal, I think about $40 million spent on John 
Black. And that’s the tip of the iceberg that was spent on this 



October 19, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 751 

lean project. That was the John Black contract. What if we 
would have invested that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in poverty 
reduction, where we think about the costs of poverty, where 
they really are, and how that could have impacted outcomes 
today, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
 
So we have Bill No. 6, An Act to amend the Statute Law before 
us. And some of those Acts, as I said, include some health Acts 
including The Regional Health Services Act. And as I said, I 
suspect that will be before us in the spring and we will be 
continuing on this debate. But this is again a housekeeping Act, 
but it can’t help but sort of twig or make you think about how 
things could have been different, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the 
last two terms of this government with the resources that they 
had at hand. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know I’ll have colleagues who will 
add their own comments about Bill No. 6 to the record as well. 
But with that, I would like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 6, Bill No. 
7 . . . Sorry. Bill No. 6, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016. 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 7 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 7 — The Statute 
Law Amendment Act, 2016 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2016 modifiant 
le droit législatif be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again I am 
pleased to weigh into the debate, this time on Bill No. 7, An Act 
to amend the Statute Law (No. 2). Again this is mostly a 
housekeeping Act, a very brief bill before us. And what it does, 
much like Bill No. 6, it is making those housekeeping changes. 
But these are bilingual Acts, three bilingual Acts that will be 
amended, updating language, removing an unnecessary section, 
and correcting a reference error, and replacing the word 
substitutional with substituted again to be in line with Queen’s 
Bench rules. 
 
So the three Acts that are being amended are The Enforcement 
of Maintenance Orders Act, 1997, where subsection 46(2) of 
The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, 1997 is amended 
to correct a reference to the Queen’s Bench rules. We have The 
Evidence Act before us or as one of the bills that will be 
amended where the section 67 of The Evidence Act is repealed 
because it was a transitional provision that is no longer 
effectual, Mr. Speaker. And we also have The Family 
Maintenance Act, which is impacted by this bill, and subsection 
23(3) of the English version of The Family Maintenance Act is 
amended to replace “substitutional or other service” with 
“substituted or other service.” 
 

And small changes for sure, but language always does matter, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. But that was a brief bill, and with that I 
would like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 7, The 
Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 (No. 2). Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 8 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 8 — The Summary 
Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to speak to 
the Bill No. 13, the cancer agency, or . . . I’m sorry, am I out of 
order with . . . Okay. The Summary Offences Procedure 
Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a bill that has been proposed to amend this 
Act with a number of changes to definition. It allows peace 
officers to submit statements by fax in cases where the Crown is 
proceeding summarily. It provides cabinet more power to 
change the way fines are charged and allows for people to apply 
for fine payment extensions through an administrative process 
than using valuable court time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Belanger spoke to this particular bill back in 
the spring session talking more broadly about provisions of 
justice, and I want to add to some of those comments today. In 
his comments, Minister Wyant spoke to the amendments 
proposed being aimed to reduce court volumes and . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I’d simply like to remind the 
member to refer to members by their seat or their title, not by 
their names. I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Now I’m rattled. Mr. Speaker, when Minister 
Wyant rose in . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — The Minister of Justice. 
 
Ms. Beck: — The Minister of Justice. Oh excuse me. Okay, 
rose in May, spoke to this bill talking about, the proposals were 
“. . . aimed at reducing court volumes and improving court 
efficiency.” And I think that that certainly is, passing legislation 
is one way to deal with those issues. 
 
Reducing court volumes, there were also a number of social 
factors that go into the volumes going before the courts. One of 
those would be community sentencing and measures at the 
community level to avoid the court system altogether, and I 
think that often goes overlooked and unfortunately even has 
been cut in recent years. Those opportunities to avoid the court 



752 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 2016 

system not only improve outcomes for people within those 
programs but also improve outcomes for communities. 
 
As was also noted, the aim of this bill was to expand 
regulation-making authority and other changes to the court 
processes, and allowing the means of telecommunication and 
other remote accesses applicable to provincial offences. I think 
that that is an interesting use of technology, Mr. Speaker, and I 
think that something . . . that in a province that has as many 
remote and rural communities as Saskatchewan, is something 
that we should continue to look at providing services that way, 
and is certainly one of the main benefits of having a public 
telecom company that can provide those services to areas that 
probably the big providers wouldn’t come in and provide that 
type of service, be it through the justice system or education 
system or the medical system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that my colleagues will have more to say 
on this bill, but with that I move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 8, The Summary Offences 
Procedure Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 9 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 9 — The 
Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 
2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’exécution des jugements 
canadiens be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and it’s a 
pleasure to rise on . . . enter into the debate on Bill No. 9, An 
Act to amend The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Act, 
2002. And I understand that this is a relatively straightforward 
piece of legislation. It allows for easier enforcement of tax 
judgments made by Canadian courts outside of Saskatchewan 
by removing an administrative process. And so, you know, 
again it’s our job here to enter into debate, and it has been . . . 
This was a bill that was introduced back in the spring on May 
30th by the Minister of Justice, and it seems a relatively 
straightforward piece of legislation. 
 
And of course this is one that would be, I think, done internally 
between the federal government and the provincial government 
in terms of making sure that there’s a process, that if there’s a 
national judgment, a Canadian judgment, that in fact that 
collection can be made and can be carried out. And so this 
seems relatively straightforward. I mean, and maybe I’ll cover 
parts of it because I know that folks at home may not have the 
same access to the bills. But of course it’s Bill No. 9 and it talks 
about what a Canadian judgment . . . and that means: 
 

a judgment, decree, or order made in a civil proceeding by 

a court of a province or territory of Canada other than 
Saskatchewan. 

 
So it’s outside of Saskatchewan. If it was inside Saskatchewan, 
it’d be a Saskatchewan judgment, but we’re talking about other 
provinces and territories. 
 

that requires a person to pay money, including: 
 

an order for the payment of money where the order is 
made in the exercise of a judicial function by a 
tribunal of a province or territory of Canada other than 
Saskatchewan and is enforceable as a judgment of the 
superior court of unlimited trial jurisdiction in that 
province or territory; and 
 
an order made and entered pursuant to section 741 of 
the Criminal Code in a court of a province or territory 
of Canada other than Saskatchewan . . . 

 
but does not include a judgment, decree or order that: 

 
is for maintenance or support, including an order 
enforceable pursuant to The Family Maintenance Act, 
1997. 

 
So it’s important to have that clarification, and is not for a: 
 

. . . payment of money as a penalty or fine committing 
an offence; [or] 
 
relates to the care, control or welfare of a minor, other 
than a Canadian civil protection order. 

 
And it’s a bilingual piece of legislation, and that would make 
sense. It’s: 
 

. . . made by a tribunal of a province or territory of 
Canada other than Saskatchewan whether or not it is 
enforceable as an order of the superior court of unlimited 
trial jurisdiction of the province or territory . . . to the 
extent that it provides for relief other than the payment 
of money; or 
 
relates to the granting of probate or letters of 
administration or the administration of the estate of a 
deceased person. 
 

And so it seems relatively straightforward, and we’ve had that 
opportunity in the months in between May and now to hear 
from people who would have that interest. I’m not aware of 
issues raised by other organizations that would have concerns, 
but as I said it’s a pretty well straightforward piece of 
legislation. 
 
I just want to take a moment and review what the minister said 
back on May 30th, because quite often their remarks — the 
ministers’ remarks — are quite informative, either by what that 
minister says or doesn’t say. Sometimes it’s a lack of clarity, 
but really as my colleagues already had said, the minister’s 
remarks upon the introduction of a bill is very important, 
because people come back to the remarks often to look at what 
was the plain language, the intent of the legislation. 



October 19, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 753 

And so what he talks about is it provides for a registration 
procedure for the enforcement of civil judgments between 
Canadian provinces and territories, and that’s confirmed that 
courts in each province need to recognize tax judgments for 
other jurisdictions in Canada. So this is important, and this is 
something the Uniform Law Conference of Canada has 
recommended. And they’ve recommended these amendments to 
provide greater certainty with respect to enforcement of 
Canadian tax judgments. 
 
[15:45] 
 
And we have a lot of respect for the Uniform Law Conference 
of Canada. It’s gone a long ways to make sense of the 
differences between interpretations in the law between the 
provinces, sometimes quite unintentional and sometimes quite 
significant. And if we can straighten those out, make those a 
little bit more level, that’s a good thing. 
 
He goes on and talks about Manitoba recently implementing 
these amendments, and by being among the first of the 
provinces to make these changes, Saskatchewan will be leading 
by example, encouraging other provinces and territories to 
adopt these amendments. 
 
So it’s something this government would like to see move 
forward. And while it seems to be more or less a 
straightforward piece of legislation, something that most people 
would hope that they’re never involved with, a tax judgment, 
that they pay their taxes and in fact they hope they get a little 
refund and not having to pay a little more. Most people would 
hope that they don’t have to be on the receiving end of this kind 
of legislation, and particularly from another province where 
they might have worked or conducted business. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I know that there will be . . . There’s 
lots of work to continue here on this afternoon, and this one 
seems a relatively straightforward piece of legislation, and so 
with that I would move that Bill No. 9, The Enforcement of 
Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2016 be adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 
moved adjournment on Bill No. 9, The Enforcement of 
Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 10 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cox that Bill No. 10 — The Forest 
Resources Management Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and again 
it’s my honour to rise to speak today in this portion of the 
proceedings about Bill No. 10 which is An Act to amend The 

Forest Resources Management Act. 
 
So first up I will make a couple of comments regarding the 
second reading speech by the previous minister on May 30th. 
He actually makes some very extended comments, and I think 
that’s a very helpful thing, not only for us as members who are 
entering into the debate, but it’s also very helpful I think for 
posterity. When people have the opportunity to see these 
extended comments, it gives people a better understanding of 
what the bill is about. So I do want to thank the former minister 
for taking the opportunity to do that. He had a fair bit to say 
about this Act itself and about the amendments, so that’s very 
helpful for all who are taking a look at these bills and why 
they’re coming to the House. 
 
The first thing, this forest resources management amendment 
Act, he did indicate in his comments that it addresses a number 
of subjects, a variety of streamlining for industry while sort of 
enhancing the government’s ability to ensure that forests are 
properly managed. He says it’s in line with the results-based 
approach that we now see the government using for 
environmental legislation. And we know that that approach 
does have its limits, Mr. Speaker, and certainly I think time will 
tell whether events like the Husky oil spill this summer 
happened where there was actually no inspection of that 
particular pipeline. 
 
And so when you have results-based legislation which allows 
things that are deemed to be low risk go uninspected, I think we 
see now what the price can be when those kinds of things 
happen. So obviously no one wants overinspection, no one 
wants irresponsible inspection, but even the auditor herself is 
calling for better inspection and actually inspecting, which is 
not a bad thing. And I think it’s sort of getting a bum rap here, 
Mr. Speaker, when we see this results-based approach. 
 
I think, you know, government’s role is to be responsible for 
this regulatory review. And I think whenever the government 
introduces something that says it’s a results-based approach, I 
think we need to pay special attention to that. When they say 
it’s being streamlined, then I say, well what corners are being 
cut here? What shortcuts are being provided, and then what’s 
the net price of that? So streamlining, fine, but what are we 
losing as a result of the streamlining? Is it streamlining or is it 
actually shortcuts? 
 
And so those are two very different things, and I think we have 
to take a very close look at whether or not this claim of 
streamlining is really not a shortcut, and ensuring that the 
people of Saskatchewan are protected, and in this case the forest 
resources that we rely on for our Crown resources for the 
taxpayers. And the citizens of Saskatchewan rely on these 
resources for filling our coffers and providing the services and 
programs that we need to access as much as we can. 
 
He indicates there will be streamlining, more flexible processes 
to adjust management fees and ensure that fees are collected or 
in line with actual forest management costs, ensuring public 
forests are properly renewed, and that the Saskatchewan forest 
industry remains competitive. So again we’re talking about 
balancing, Mr. Speaker, between profit-making ability for 
industry versus protection of the environment and protection of 
the resource. And as you know, our forest industry is obviously 



754 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 2016 

a renewable resource so extra care needs to be taken when 
we’re managing that resource, and forest management 
agreements need to be carefully reviewed and scrutinized and 
ensure that they are not only responding to industry needs but to 
the needs of the people that live there and to the needs of the 
people of Saskatchewan and protecting the resources. 
 
One of the very first things he talks about in terms of the 
changes that this bill is addressing is the long-standing issue of 
abandoned forest roads and trails. And I was immediately taken 
back to memory lane back in the early ’90s when I was a tree 
planter, and we actually used to have to plant out these 
abandoned trails and roads. What would happen is the forest 
company, once they would build the roads into the cutblocks in 
order to be able to remove the forest product, and then they 
would just basically take a backhoe and dig out a big gouge out 
of the road once they left the cutblock so that trucks and 
vehicles couldn’t get in and out of that area. But then, as tree 
planters, we were asked to go in and actually plant the road and 
reforest that road portion as much as we would reforest the 
other parts of the cutblock. 
 
Roads were kind of interesting because, as you can imagine, all 
the debris and the organic matter that used to lie on those roads 
was scraped right off and you’re dealing with basically hardpan. 
That’s what we call the hardpan. So whenever we got to those 
reforested areas, we would ask for a little bit more money from 
the boss because, when you’re doing hardpan, it’s rock-solid 
and it was really a lot of work to do those cutblocks or, sorry, 
the abandoned roads. On the other hand, you could put a lot of 
trees in a small area. So in some ways it was a good bit of work 
to get assigned to if your foreman decided that you were the one 
that was to go in and do the roads. 
 
So a little memory trail there. Back down memory lane, I guess, 
when I saw that this was happening to the forest roads and trails 
that are being managed by the Minister of Environment. 
 
Now the minister had pointed out that the roads compose both 
public safety and environmental risk. Legislative changes 
supporting enhanced efforts to address this issue will be 
welcomed by all stakeholders. Now the actual change itself is 
fairly straightforward when you’re looking at the existing Act 
as found in clause 7(1)(i), and that basically talks about the 
roads. I’m just going to pull up the actual clause itself. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They’re probably harvesting those trees 
right now. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — I don’t know. The member thought we might 
be harvesting. Twenty-five years? It’s not that long ago, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s actually . . . They might be this high. Who knows? 
A lot of those were done in the area of Carrot River where this 
member is from, and so we should maybe go, take a road trip 
and see if we can find some of these roads and see how tall they 
are. I hope they survived, I really do, because we put a lot of 
care into those seedlings. I hope they’re still there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Section 7(1) reads following: 
 

The minister may enter into agreements with the 
Government of Canada, the government of any other 
province or . . . minister . . . [etc., etc.] . . . for the purposes 

of furthering activities . . . 
 
And currently, the activity described in subsection (i) says, “the 
location, clearing, closure and reclamation of roads.” 
 
According to the explanatory notes that were provided by the 
ministry, what this clause now does is much more 
comprehensive than just those seven words basically describing 
roads. It’ll expand on the minister’s authority to enter into 
agreements for the purpose of developing, improving, 
maintaining, closing, reclaiming, and managing new and 
existing roads, road allowances, and rights-of-way. 
 
So in this case, it now allows the minister to enter into 
agreements for maybe keeping that road and developing it, 
improving it, maintaining it, not just closing it or clearing it or 
reclaiming it. So obviously the tree planting we did was part of 
the reclamation, but in some cases the trail may be seen as 
appropriate for recreational use, and lots of people like to use 
the forests for recreational use, both snowmobiles, obviously 
skiers, and horseback riders and hikers. So in some cases those 
trails may actually now be developed and improved. 
 
And one of the things the explanation points out that I’m not 
sure the minister made clear in his comments was that because 
of past industrial activities, a legacy of roads and unreclaimed 
access remains on provincial forest lands. Requests to use these 
legacy roads and trails are regularly received from forest users. 
So the authority to enter into agreements with others to use, 
maintain, or reclaim the abandoned roads and trails will help 
reduce the ecological impacts and public safety issues created 
by them. 
 
And immediately, one of the public safety issues that I can 
imagine when, if you have young folks out quadding along 
these trails, all of a sudden one of those cut-outs that they used 
to use to close the road off may not be properly signed. And I 
know it’s happened where any number of people have actually 
gone into those cut-outs, damaging their vehicles for sure, but 
also could cause serious injury to the individuals and perhaps 
even loss of life. 
 
So I think that’s something positive. We need to make sure, if 
they weren’t properly reclaimed, that they are reclaimed and 
that these legacy roads and trails which are being used, that the 
ministry has the proper authority to be able to allow other 
people to use them and not just deal with the closure and 
reclamation of roads through the forest management agreement 
itself. 
 
The next part of the bill that the minister speaks about is 
provisions for greater accountability for forest companies 
operating in publicly owned forests. These include requiring 
long-term forest management planning following the second 
renewal of a term supply licence, making licensees accountable 
for the actions of their contractors, and issuing long-term 
licence prohibitions for those who refuse to follow the rules. 
 
Now I know, Mr. Speaker, that there aren’t a lot of large forest 
management agreements, licence agreements, out there in 
Saskatchewan. Certainly the one that Weyerhaeuser had, I guess 
it would have been in the 2000s, they basically walked away 
from it, and as a result we saw the closure of the Prince Albert 



October 19, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 755 

pulp mill and, for a number of years, the closure of the Big 
River saw mill or the mill in Big River. Fortunately that has 
been reopened but we still don’t see any action on the part of 
the pulp mill. 
 
And there was a company that made big promises, and I think it 
was even part of a campaign promise to the people of Prince 
Albert in the 2011 election, that that pulp mill and the jobs 
associated with it would be forthcoming. And there was some 
talk of a diaper fluff factory and all kinds of things that were 
going to happen in the Prince Albert pulp mill, but 
unfortunately for the city of Prince Albert that hasn’t yet 
happened. 
 
And I think a lot of promises were made on the part of the 
government to the people of Prince Albert that those jobs would 
be secured. And sadly I think there was several hundred jobs 
that were impacted by the closure of that mill. And there is still 
no diversification of that mill. And I’m not sure what the 
intentions are of the current owner of the mill, but basically 
they were let off the hook. Weyerhaeuser had obligations to 
keep that mill running, and they got to walk away from that. 
 
There’s also been a complete shift in sort of how that forest 
licence management agreement was transformed, I guess is a 
good word for it. And I think that the transformation to a 
management company, Sakâw Askiy forest company, was not 
one that was welcomed by the companies that were involved, 
but it was imposed upon them. I think there’s still questions to 
be asked about how that’s going for the individual companies, 
the smaller companies that got pieces of that rather large forest 
management agreement. 
 
[16:00] 
 
I remember in my natural resources law class, and this is again 
many years ago when those seedlings were still pretty little, in 
that class we studied the forest management agreement that 
Weyerhaeuser had. And the area that they were granted was a 
size larger than the province of New Brunswick, so it’s a very, 
very large area of forest that was given to Weyerhaeuser at the 
time. And this was in the ’80s I believe, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And Weyerhaeuser’s had a pretty good deal. I mean their main 
obligation was to establish public roads for use. And certainly 
the pulp road north of Big River is a very well-used public road. 
I think it’s . . . I’m trying to remember, the number of 722 or 
something. Anyways it has a provincial highways number. And 
that was one of the main arteries that Weyerhaeuser was 
required by law to establish when that forest management 
agreement was signed in the ’80s. Unfortunately that was about 
it. 
 
And somebody basically said, we sold the farm on that one and 
weren’t able to realize the benefits from the sale of these natural 
resources vis-à-vis Weyerhaeuser and then ultimately seeing 
Weyerhaeuser basically walk away from it when the softwood 
woes with the United States of America began in the 
mid-2000s. That has impacted a lot on the lives of people in 
these small communities who are losing jobs, and certainly the 
city of Prince Albert. So these are things that need to be looked 
at carefully. 
 

This particular bill addresses another, a whole number of 
different subject areas, things like forest management fees. And 
again these are ones that need to be balanced in terms of enough 
incentive for a company to undertake forest activities in the 
area, but also to ensure that the reforestation is taking place and 
that the public is getting, through the royalties and the stumpage 
fees, an appropriate return on our Crown resource. So these are 
things that governments always have to look at carefully. 
 
And in this case I haven’t seen an exact comparison of the 
forest management fees that are being proposed under this bill 
as opposed to what’s happening in other provinces, so that’s 
certainly something I think that we would need to look at in 
committee once that opportunity is presented. 
 
The minister also referred to a 2009 Provincial Auditor’s report 
where there were recommendations regarding reforestation for 
provincial forests that are being harvested. And one of the 
findings he indicated of the auditor from back in 2009 was that 
the forest management fees need to be sufficient to cover the 
actual costs of reforesting harvested areas, which can vary 
depending on the site. The current fee is not at all appropriate, 
so there is a change in the bill regarding forest management 
fees. And I just want to take a minute to see if I can identify 
quickly which one that is. The licensing section is section 21, 
and that’s being amended to be . . . As far as I can see, it’s a 
much more clean section. It’s quite long in the original bill but 
this one is a very pithy section, so that’s interesting. 
 
Section 22 is being repealed, 22(6). And we see a substitution 
there about fees, referring to the regulation and the prescription 
and the regulations of the fees themselves. Subsection 38 is 
being repealed and substituted with some directions for forest 
management plans and when they’re to be submitted. And then 
section 45 is, again, the forest management plan and operating 
plan, some requirements relating to that. 
 
So under the forest management plan obviously the 
reforestation provisions are found within there, so there’s 
nothing specific in the wording of the new bill that refers to 
that. But if I take the explanatory notes, we can look at it there. 
There it is. It’s the amendment to section 22(6) because what it 
does is it enables the minister to address the findings by the 
Provincial Auditor to establish a set “. . . a process be 
established to set reforestation fees at a level sufficient to cover 
reforestation costs on non-forest management agreement areas.” 
 

This is an enabling provision . . . [it sets] an alternative to 
set the amount and manner of payment of forest 
management fees in a licence. Setting the amount in the 
licence is suited to area based term supply licenses who 
have renewal obligations and who are seeking a more 
streamlined and timelier process to adjust forest 
management fee rates so that they are in keeping with the 
actual reforestation costs. 

 
So again I think the particulars of this would be . . . It would be 
worthwhile to address with the officials in committee when that 
time comes, Mr. Speaker, depending on when committee will 
be convened for this bill. 
 
I know that there are a lot of theories on reforestation and 
appropriate methods of reforestation and when you actually 



756 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 2016 

need to physically replant areas when, you know, other 
techniques like dropping seedlings through, you know, pine 
cone seeds through helicopters. There’s all different ways and 
often just natural regeneration. 
 
And back in I think it was 1990, I did a regeneration survey in 
the Hudson Bay area of this province near a place called 
McLean Lake. And we were actually looking at reforestation 
within a burn area, a forest area that had been burned a few 
years earlier. So you could see how reforestation happens when 
there’s a fire which is in most cases a natural occurrence, 
although it could be caused by human activity which, I guess, 
could be argued is natural. But at any rate when you see the 
regeneration from fire . . . 
 
And then we were in areas that had been harvested by 
MacMillan Bloedel. So this is going way back in the ’70s and 
checking out the reforestation there, and the regeneration of 
conifers, not deciduous trees but coniferous trees. So the pine 
trees and the spruce trees was much more significant in the burn 
area than it was in the forested area. So those are interesting 
observations, and I know that the people who look after this in 
the ministry are very keenly aware and follow those sorts of that 
type of information. And that’s indeed why we were hired was 
to go in and look at how the regeneration was happening.  
 
We also got to go in and check on some plantations that had 
actually been reforested, and sadly those trees that were planted 
in the ’70s hadn’t survived very well. There was very few of 
them that had actually made it and were continuing to grow. So 
reforestation itself is a big investment, and I think we need to 
ensure that not only are those seedlings being put in the ground 
but that they are being put in in situations where they will 
survive. And I’ve often wanted to go back and check out some 
of the plantations that I was involved in in the early ’90s, and 
maybe will someday. But that’s part of the scientific, I guess, 
approach to reforestation, and we learn from what we do. And 
so I’m hoping that those efforts in the ’70s and ’80s and ’90s 
are now informing tree planting operations in this time and age. 
And I know . . . Now my sons are tree planters, so I guess 
they’re the ones that are benefiting, and their work will continue 
to inform reforestation efforts on our forest resources here in 
the province and elsewhere. 
 
But it’s an interesting cycle when you think about it, Mr. 
Speaker, and certainly I think in order for forest companies to 
be able to manage their finances that they have to make sure 
they put aside enough for these reforestation fees. And they 
need to be required to do that. And that’s what happened in the 
’70s. MacMillan Bloedel wasn’t required to do reforestation in 
the same way that they would have been in the ’90s or the 
2000s. So in that case then, the liability for the lack of 
regeneration is assumed by us as taxpayers and by the 
government as the responsible authority. 
 
So when we set these fees under this process, we have to be 
careful to ensure that they are sufficient, that they’re being put 
aside and that, although they’re being streamlined, that there 
aren’t shortcuts being taken which will impact the ability of 
these forests to regenerate in the future and continue to provide 
the people of Saskatchewan the resource that they are, 
renewable resource that has potential for the future, that it will 
continue to provide for us in the future. 

And as we know, our forests are huge carbon sinks too. So they 
serve a very important function not only as a renewable 
resource but also in terms of our climate and the way 
greenhouse gases are processed. So our forests are taking on a 
much more important role as we see the climate change as we 
go along. And unfortunately I think those changes are 
happening more quickly than scientists anticipated. So the role 
of the forest takes on even a larger and more critical role. So we 
need healthy forests just to provide that service to the planet, let 
alone the profits that we derive from the forest industry as 
taxpayers and citizens of the province. 
 
So that’s regarding the reforestation fees and that again, that’s 
section 22(6) which is now being expanded. And I’ll just look 
at the new bill; 22(6) is repealed and it basically just directs the 
licensee to pay the fees in the prescribed amount and in the 
prescribed manner. So there’s not a big change to this, although 
it says it enables the minister to address the Provincial 
Auditor’s findings that requires a process to be established. This 
is an enabling provision that establishes an alternative to set the 
amount and manner of payment. 
 
So it looks like they’re looking for a much more flexible way to 
provide for these reforestation fees. And I guess it allows them 
to look at areas outside of the supply area, non-forest 
management agreement areas, which raises a few questions in 
my mind, Mr. Speaker, because why would you ask a company 
to reforest in an area that’s not in their forest management 
agreement? So again those are other questions I think that we’ll 
want to pose to the minister and the officials to get some 
explanation for that. There’s nothing in the explanation notes. 
 
I will check with the minister’s comments and see what he says 
here. He said, “The obligation to reforest . . . is established in 
two types of licences: the 20-year forest management agreement 
and the five-year area-based term supply licences [which are 
issued within the forest management agreement.]” And what 
they’re saying is the “area-based term supply licence holders 
pay rates established in the regulations which are not easily 
adjusted . . .” So it looks like there’s problems with adjusting 
the rates for the five-year plans. They haven’t been updated 
since 1999, and the people that hold these licences are seeking 
an alternative to the fixed regulation fees. So this is a request 
coming from industry, according to the minister. 
 

In 2014, during the development of the new provincial 
dues system, the ministry was advised that an amendment 
to the Act would be required . . . [to get that] streamlined 
and timelier process to adjust the fee rates . . . Ensuring 
that sufficient fees are collected to renew harvested areas 
. . . will reduce the government’s potential financial 
liability associated with nonregenerating areas . . . 

 
He didn’t talk in detail about why the areas that are not within 
the forest management agreement are included in the new 
section. So again I think that’s something we’ll look for further 
explanation once the committee is established, and we are able 
to ask direct questions because these are technical issues that I 
think again, people who are looking for explanation of these 
bills will want to see in the future when there’s questions being 
raised. 
 
There’s another fairly long comment, as I said, by the minister. 



October 19, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 757 

And he talks a lot about the roads on page 202 of Hansard on 
May 30th, and he talks a little bit about forest management 
plans in general. So he talks a little bit about management 
objectives for large forestry licence areas and that: 
 

Originally the Act contemplated term supply of forestry 
licences being issued only to small- and medium-scale 
operators . . . Over time, a subset of those licences was 
adopted to be transitional five-year, area-based term supply 
licences. 

 
And they were supposed to give a “. . . window of opportunity 
for larger scale companies to harvest timber while seeking to 
transition to the longer term . . . agreement.” 
 
He says now: 
 

The government has found itself in a position where 
proponents were negotiating for multiple renewals of the 
five-year licence with the intent of avoiding the 
requirement to prepare a forest management plan. 

 
So I think, if I understand that correctly, what that means is that 
rather than do what was required under the long-term 20-year 
plan, they were just recycling . . . not recycling but operating on 
five-year plans without a proper view as to the 20-year plan. He 
says it doesn’t mean they’re trying to avoid the responsibility. 
That could be arguable, but I think it’s just where we need to 
have those long-term plans in place. And I think that’s what this 
bill is intending to do. 
 
[16:15] 
 
There are some commitments by the minister that the 
amendments will enhance the public’s confidence that their 
valued forest resources are well managed and that there’s 
significant consequences for those who break the rules. 
Absolutely, Mr. Speaker, we need to have confidence in our 
legislation and into the activities of government when it comes 
to managing our valued Crown resources and our renewable 
resources in particular. 
 
And as I said, for the forest resource that we have here in 
Saskatchewan, it’s taking on a more and more important role in 
terms of collecting and sequestering carbon as we deal with 
more and more emissions of carbon being put into our 
atmosphere. So the role of the forests is becoming way more 
important as we go forward into the future. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the rest of my colleagues are also 
going to want to be speaking to this bill. I’m not sure if . . . I 
don’t think everyone’s had a chance to speak to it yet, so I look 
forward to their comments as well. And I think at this point 
that’s the extent of my comments. So I move that we adjourn 
debate on Bill No. 10, An Act to amend The Forest Resources 
Management Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 10, The Forest Resources 
Management Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 11 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cox that Bill No. 11 — The Forestry 
Professions Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s me again. This is Bill No. 11, An Act to amend The 
Forestry Professions Act. It’s a very short bill, and I think it’s 
intended to address one particular matter. 
 
I think what’s interesting, when you look at the legislative 
agenda of this particular government, is that we often see bills 
coming back for fixing, and this is another example of that 
where this bill was more recently, just recently in the House in 
2013. And I remember the debate on the bill at the time because 
the forest professionals were looking for self-regulatory 
authority and an ability to deal with members. Only certain 
people could call themselves forest professionals, so they were 
given that authority in legislation. And again, they were looking 
for ability to fine people who were holding themselves out to be 
forest professionals but weren’t. 
 
So that was all fine and dandy, and that was supposed to be 
done in section 40 of the Act which only referred to section 23. 
So let’s take a look at section 40 of the Act which basically set 
out the fines and contraventions that were available. So it says, 
“Every person who contravenes section 23 is guilty of an 
offence” and here are the fines that are in relation to that. So 
that’s section 23. 
 
Now what we find out is that they actually meant section 23 and 
section 23.01. Now if we want to take a look at those two 
clauses, section 23 is who can use the title of registered 
professional forester, registered forester and professional 
forester. So there’s a whole . . . No one other than a professional 
forester can use those titles. No one other than a professional 
forest technologist can use the other titles in section 2, and then 
section 3 deals with foresters in training, and section 4 deals 
with a forest technologist in training. So we’ve got the forester, 
the technologist, the forester in training and forest technologist 
in training. So that’s that section. 
 
And that’s where, if you are holding yourself out to be one of 
these people and don’t have the authority to do that, there’s a 
fine: first offence, 5,000; second offence; 10,000; and each 
subsequent offence a fine of not more than 15,000 or 
imprisonment for a term of not more than six months. So you 
could actually be put in jail if you were using these terms and 
weren’t authorized to do so. 
 
Now if we look at the amendments, there’s two little 
amendments in this Act, so it’s just a cleanup of something that 
should have been caught in 2013. But it’s now adding section 
23.01 in an existing Act. This is the section that’s entitled 
“Prohibited practice and exceptions.” So again it goes on to say, 
no person shall engage in the professional practice of forestry 
unless they’re a practising member who is registered. 



758 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 2016 

And it says there’s a few people that are exempt from that, for 
example, Saskatchewan land surveyors, professional engineers. 
These are people who are regulated under another Act. And I 
guess, interestingly enough, no member of the Canadian Forces. 
They’re exempted from the penalty provisions in this Act and 
the protection of the title. 
 
So this is basically a cleanup Act where they forgot to include 
the fines being applicable to people who engaged in the 
professional practice of forestry. They remembered to make the 
fines applicable to those who called themselves professional 
foresters or professional forest technologists without authority, 
but they forgot to add the section that says you can’t also 
engage in that practice of forestry without being properly 
registered, subject to the exceptions that are there, of course. 
 
So here we are debating it now. I think that this is just clearly a 
cleanup item that was missed back when the bill was amended, 
I think it was in 2014 actually it was before the House, and in 
2013 and in 2010 and in 2009. So this is the fifth time the bill 
has been before us since the Sask Party government took over 
government. So I guess they’re keeping their officials busy, and 
maybe they’ll get it all fixed up here pretty soon. So we’ll keep 
taking a stab at it each time it comes forward in the House, Mr. 
Speaker.  
 
I just find it interesting that, you know, the forestry professions 
have engaged with government through lobbying to create their 
own professional Act. Today we met with individuals from the 
financial adviser profession, and I don’t know that everybody 
knows this in Saskatchewan, but you can hang out your shingle 
as a financial adviser and not be subject to any professional 
regulation at all. We had a chat with the advisers about that. We 
know that social workers have to belong to a professional body, 
lawyers from my profession, teachers, doctors — the list goes 
on. But when you think about people giving you financial 
advice as, you know, your future as a pensioner or as a senior, I 
kind of would like for them to have a professional body. 
 
So I think what’s happened here with the forestry profession is 
you see these professions getting organized and coming 
forward. And it’s just interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that that 
process continues with other professions as well. So again, I 
think this is just a matter of cleanup that was missed by the Sask 
Party in the last five times the bill was before us. But certainly 
it’s been caught now, and now these individuals who actually 
practise the forestry as a professional forester are also subject to 
fines as well. 
 
At this point I don’t think there’s much more to add to the bill 
or to the debate from my perspective, so I would like to move 
that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 11, An Act to amend The 
Forestry Professions Act. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Nutana has 
moved the adjourned debate on Bill No. 11, The Forestry 
Professions Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 12 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 12 — The Public 
Health (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It brings me great 
pleasure to be able to stand up in the House to talk about Bill 
No. 12, The Public Health Amendment Act. I think it’s very 
important that both sides of the House, we take a look at 
different bills and we ensure that they’re up to date because it’s 
important for everybody who’s working on the front lines. And 
it’s also important for us to make sure everything is up to snuff, 
so like I said, I’m really happy to be talking about this bill. 
 
This was brought up by the Minister of Health at our last 
session. And it’s the very first day of this session, and it’s nice 
to be able to stand here and be able to talk a little bit about 
health care items because my previous employment, I worked 
in health care. So I’m really interested in things that pertain to 
that. 
 
And so when I was looking at this bill, I was looking at how 
there was quite a few sections that they were adding the nurse 
practitioner after physician, which is really important with the 
fact that we have a lot of nurse practitioners working in the 
field. And they have the opportunity to do a lot of diagnosing, 
and so we need to make sure that they’re also identified in these 
bills so that they are looked upon as being the professionals that 
they are. 
 
So there’s also the update of the definition of clinic nurse, and 
that’s to be in line of some of the bylaws with regards to the 
Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association. So we need to 
work with these registered bodies as well, and they need to help 
us and provide us the guidance that we need so that we ensure, 
like I said before, that the bills are in line so front-line 
practitioners, they have the support that they need to provide the 
jobs that they have to provide. 
 
Another part of this bill discusses having public access to public 
health inspection, and it’s really important to be open and 
transparent with regards to health-related information. And it 
also talks in this bill about how things are being currently 
provided with regards to eating establishments, which I think is 
important, And I don’t know if anyone else here has, you know, 
gone online and checked out some of the eating establishments 
and made sure that they were properly inspected and what the 
health inspector has to say about that. And that’s important to 
have that, the health inspectors going out and ensuring that 
these businesses are doing everything that they need to do to 
ensure that services and things like food are going to be served 
to us in a proper manner. 
 
So I just had a little bit of questions, and I’m hoping that they’ll 
be, through the process of all these discussions, talked about. 
But I don’t know exactly what . . . how many establishments 
this is going to mean and what other areas that public health 
needs to disclose of their information that isn’t already being 



October 19, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 759 

disclosed. I couldn’t find too much information with regards to 
that, but I always do think it’s really important that, you know, 
people in the public know exactly what level of services all of 
the public agencies are providing. And they need to be 
accountable to citizens in our communities as well. 
 
Also there’s a lot of discussion about public health, and public 
health is a really important feature of our health system. 
Ensuring that reporting of communicable disease control is 
done, and ensuring that it’s current and reflective of the health 
practitioner’s scope of practice, I believe that’s what the 
Minister of Health indicated when he brought this bill forward. 
 
And of course we do realize how important public health is in 
our communities, and that it’s important that our public health 
facilities have the services available. I know, like I’m more 
familiar of the Prince Albert and northern areas and the services 
that are provided there. And I know our public health agency, 
they’re run off their feet. They’re trying to get into the schools 
and do some preventative services, and they’re trying to get out 
to the community to inform people of the possibilities of these 
communicable diseases. Plus they’re also working with some 
very, very vulnerable people in our communities that have 
severe, sometimes, addiction issues or mental health issues and 
that are oftentimes very transient. 
 
And so I was reading a little bit about how part of the guideline 
is to ensure that anyone who may be in contact of a 
communicable disease, especially one in the category of 
number two communicable disease, that public health does 
everything that they can to contact these clients or people who 
may have been in contact within the 72-hour period. And I 
think nobody would disagree that that’s a really good time 
frame to ensure that people are being, you know, notified about 
their possible contact. 
 
But we also have to make sure that we have supports in these 
community agencies so that our practitioners can actually 
inform people within that 72 hours so that we’re not putting up 
something here that’s not achievable. And I think we all want 
this to be achievable. So I hope the Minister of Health is 
prepared to ensure that the public health agencies in our 
communities have the appropriate funding so that they can have 
the staff complement that they need so that they can provide 
that. Because I know in Prince Albert, in the North, like we talk 
about the AIDS [acquired immune deficiency syndrome] 
epidemic, you know, and we talk about how much more 
diseases we are finding and we are noticing. 
 
And like I said before, those practitioners are doing it as much 
as they can to ensure that people are notified and that they’re 
receiving the proper treatment and treatment’s being followed 
through. But because of the population that they oftentimes 
work with, it is quite difficult for them to ensure that, you 
know, they can reach everybody in a timely fashion. So I really 
hope that, because the Minister of Health has put this bill 
forward, that this is an indication that he believes that public 
health is a priority, and that he’ll ensure that within future 
budgets that the proper budgeting is provided for public health 
and for these services that are much needed and very 
appreciated in our society. 
 
[16:30] 

And also, like when I talk about public health, and we talked a 
little bit about the public health inspection, that whole area 
needs to make sure that it’s a focus of our government and that 
we ensure that they have again the proper budgeting for that. 
 
So other issues with regards to this bill, I noticed there was a lot 
of housekeeping issues. And again, like I said, I think it’s 
important that we always consistently review bills so that we 
can assure that some of those housekeeping items are up to date 
and that we know that we are keeping up with what’s going on 
because, you know, every day here we’re passing things and 
things are proceeding. And we’ve got to ensure that all the 
documentation is being followed through also with that. 
 
So with regards to that, I’m sure I have some other colleagues 
that have a lot that they would like to add to this bill, but at this 
time I’m going to move to adjourn debate on this bill. Thanks. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 12, The Public Health 
(Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 13 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 13 — The Cancer 
Agency Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m standing today to 
speak on The Cancer Agency Amendment Act, 2016. When the 
minister rose earlier this year to speak to these proposed 
amendments, one of the main reasons stated for the proposed 
amendments was to update substantively the term “cancer care” 
to “cancer control.” My understanding in reading through the 
explanatory notes was that the term “cancer control” is now a 
term used to describe a broad range of services used to prevent 
cancer, improve early detection, reduce the incidents of cancer, 
improve cancer patients’ treatment outcomes, and support 
cancer research. And I think that, unfortunately, cancer is . . . 
Those are good goals, and cancer is something that I’m sure we 
can’t find a member in this legislature who has not been 
touched by cancer and the rates of cancer. 
 
Also in the preamble to that discussion, it was noted that despite 
efforts . . . We have an 85-year-old cancer agency in this 
province that has done a lot of good work around education and 
prevention and innovation in the area of cancer care. Despite all 
of those efforts, we’re looking at a 54 per cent increase in rates 
of cancer in this province by 2013. And I certainly do share the 
concern with the minister that this is an issue that certainly 
needs addressing, and I know my colleagues on this side would 
wholeheartedly agree with that. 
 
There are a number of factors that impact health and certainly 
rates of cancer, and a number of them I think we know about. 



760 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 2016 

Lifestyle issues such as . . . I think of our knowledge about the 
impact of smoking on the rates of cancer, and that certainly has 
been something over the 85-year history of the cancer agency 
that has been updated through research, through that sort of 
investment in public health research. 
 
We also know that other lifestyle factors such as diet and rates 
of exercise play a role, as do genetics. 
 
And I do think that it is important that we continue to ensure in 
this province that people have timely and well-researched 
access to cancer treatment and cancer care. But one thing that I 
can’t help but wonder if we’re not missing in terms of the 
picture when we’re looking at rates of cancer in the province, 
and those are the social determinants of health, which we often 
overlook, I’m afraid. 
 
When we look for shorter term solutions, sometimes the impact 
that things such as education levels and income levels, we 
overlook the impact that those have on our health and 
particularly, in this case, on rates of cancer. 
 
In doing some background on this bill, I noticed that there is 
about a 12 per cent, almost a twelve and a half per cent gap in 
terms of mortality rates in Canada between those at the lowest 
and the highest income rates. And I think that that represents a 
very troubling situation. So not only are those other factors, you 
know . . . You can control for rates of smoking, control for 
lifestyle, but if you are poor, you have a 12 per cent increased 
rate of likelihood of dying from your cancer. And I think that 
that’s something that we can’t turn a blind eye to in this 
province or elsewhere. 
 
Other factors that impact, those social determinants of health 
that impact not only rates of cancer but the outcomes of cancer 
include education levels, unemployment, geography. We live in 
a province where many people live in rural and remote areas 
and their access to treatment, to timely treatment, of not only 
diagnosis and treatment — those are very important factors — 
but also their access to food and their access to educational 
opportunities . . . 
 
I think of the program like we talked about earlier today, 
NORTEP, and the role that those teachers play in educating 
their students, the role that they play in terms of taking that 
knowledge, that local knowledge at their school and 
disseminating it throughout the North in their classrooms. And I 
think that’s very important. And it’s something that when we’re 
looking at a real, long-term, thoughtful discussion about 
reducing cancer rates in this province that we need to look at. 
 
I think that on the issue of access to food, there was a recent 
study that came out looking at not only availability but the cost 
of food across the province. And it’s no surprise that not only 
access but the cost of food in the North makes that diet that we 
talked about, the high-fruit, high-vegetable diet that we strive to 
attain all that more unattainable. And when you layer over top 
of that low levels of income and that income disparity, it only 
exacerbates that problem. So I think that, you know, looking at 
rates of cancer, looking at ways to innovate is important and I 
do agree with that. But let’s be long term and strategic and let’s 
acknowledge that income inequality does play a role, and plays 
a big role in this province in terms of health outcomes, 

including with cancer. 
 
One of the other stated goals with this bill, or sorry, one of the 
changes that is proposed is adding the term “palliation” to the 
mandate of the agency. And I really do think that this is 
important. Access to palliative care programs is . . . You know, 
adding it to the bill is important, but the second step is ensuring 
that people in Saskatchewan actually have access to those 
palliative care services. 
 
Earlier — I believe it was last year — I had the opportunity to 
have breakfast with a gentlemen called Ian Bos who was 
walking across Canada to raise awareness about hospice care in 
Canada. And he started his journey after his father had passed 
away. And Ian was so struck by the comfort and the care that 
not only his father received in the hospice care, but also he and 
his family, and how that improved his grieving. But he was 
really supportive of those services, and when he found out that 
the experience that his family had is all too rare in Canada, he 
decided to set out across the country to raise awareness for this 
issue. 
 
It’s my understanding that of those who require or request 
palliative care and hospice care in this country, only 16 to 30 
per cent of those people actually have the opportunity. And I 
think that that’s something that . . . You know, we really need to 
look at the full spectrum of care. And when we’re talking about 
things like transformational change, these are opportunities to 
really look at transformational change, look at socio-economics 
and how that impacts health care, look at the full spectrum of 
care provided. 
 
Too many people are dying in hospitals when it’s not the best 
place for them. It’s actually in some cases, with weakened 
immune systems and exposure to superbugs, that actually can 
contribute to declining health. And, you know, acute care beds 
is in most cases not where people would choose to spend the 
last days of their lives. And it’s not only where they are but it’s 
the access to the services. 
 
I had the opportunity to work with some of who I considered to 
be the most special people that I know and those are those who 
work in palliative care — the physicians, the nurses, the social 
workers within our health care system — and how they can 
provide support to the patient but also the family so that those 
last few days of a person’s life can be marked with positive 
memories, with, you know, saying the things that need to be 
said. And it really impacts a whole family in terms of their 
grieving process and their ability to move on from that space 
and view it as positive after, you know, after the shock of the 
initial diagnosis passes by. 
 
So when we’re talking about transformation and innovation, 
these are truly transformational changes that I would suggest 
could have a big impact in our health care system and, you 
know, while the adding of the word is a start in this legislation, 
again I’ll reiterate that the word is one thing. It’s actually 
providing those services that is going to be the real measure of 
that service. 
 
One of the other changes that is proposed — and I’m sure that 
my colleagues will have more to say about this — is the 
proposal allowing the Ministry of Health to disclose a patient’s 



October 19, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 761 

cancer diagnosis to the agency. I’m just going to pause for a 
second here. 
 
While I certainly understand the reasons for this as outlined by 
the minister allowing the agency to share information and to 
participate in research and keeping better statistics on rates of 
cancer and treatment in the province, I think that it’s very 
important every time that we are talking about loosening rules 
around sharing of health information that we take a very 
careful, careful look at that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in his comments the minister noted that: 
 

I want to assure all members that the Office of the 
Information and Privacy Commissioner will be consulted 
about the agency’s ability to collect information and 
disclose it for specific purposes . . . 
 

And I know that we will be paying attention to that, and 
ensuring that that does take place and that we will have 
additional questions about that. Of course this is very sensitive 
and delicate information, and it needs to be put through with 
thoughtful consultation and with many, many eyes on it, 
including the Privacy Commissioner. 
 
One more thing that I wanted to touch on, and this got me 
thinking as I was looking through this bill and the proposed 
amendments, and this is on this side of prevention of cancers. 
And while we’re talking about innovation and prevention and 
using research to provide the best care in this province, one 
thing that has been on my mind a lot over the summer is HPV 
[human papillomavirus]. A few years back there’s been an 
initiative to ensure that girls receive the HPV vaccine in school, 
and I think that that was a very strong, evidence-based initiative 
and very important. 
 
[16:45] 
 
I think half of it is missing, though, Mr. Speaker, if I might. The 
fact is that rates of HPV cancers — and there are six types of 
cancers that can be caused by the HPV virus — don’t only 
show up as cervical cancer in girls, but they also show up in 
boys and young men. And yes, it’s a story that we’re hearing 
too often. And I think that this would be a real opportunity 
when we’re talking about innovation and we’re talking about 
prevention of cancers in the province and, you know, looking at 
the Cancer Agency, that I might suggest that this would be 
something that we should really consider and look at the 
evidence elsewhere. I know this is the way that other 
jurisdictions are going, and I think that it would be something 
that would improve those rates of HPV-related cancer in the 
province and is just the next logical step with that vaccination 
program, so by way of adding some suggestions to this. 
 
I’m sure that my colleagues will have further comments as we 
move through, but with that I would like to adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 13, The Cancer Agency Amendment Act, 2016. Thank 
you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 13, the cancer amendment 
Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 14 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Stewart that Bill No 14 — The Horned 
Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise today to speak to The Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act. 
I believe this is the first piece of legislation I get to give my 
comments on, so I couldn’t ask for a more incredible, frankly, 
legislation to be able to speak to, one of which I didn’t — I’m 
not going to lie — I didn’t have a whole lot of knowledge of 
before. But I’m happy that the minister provided quite a good 
commentary when he tabled this legislation for the second 
reading. 
 
For those who don’t know, the legislation repeals The Horned 
Cattle Purchases Act as well as the accompanying amendment 
Act. And there aren’t a whole lot of explanatory notes in here, 
but that’s simply because that’s pretty much what this 
legislation is. And it’s removing and repealing basically a very 
antiquated legislation that’s out of date for this particular group 
of producers. And from what I see, the cattle producers have 
been consulted on this, and they’re favourable about this 
change. I’m very happy to see that some consultation was 
listened to because as I know, historically, that’s one thing that 
the Sask Party is not very good at, is listening to consultations. 
So I was very happy to see that with this particular piece of 
legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the bill removes the $2-a-head penalty for selling horned 
cattle in Saskatchewan. Like I said, I didn’t have a lot of 
knowledge of this before. I’m grateful to the minister for 
providing some information. You know, I didn’t grow up on a 
farm. My dad grew up on a farm that had some cattle, some 
grain, chickens. Unfortunately he never provided me any 
information on this important piece of legislation so, you know, 
it would have been really nice if he would’ve taught me that 
growing up, but he didn’t and that’s okay. I’ll make do with 
what I do know. 
 
This, like I said, is a very antiquated piece of legislation, so it’s 
really good to see that this is being moved forward and that it’s 
being repealed, and I thank the minister for doing the work on 
that. For those who don’t know, this Act is quite old. It actually 
came into force in July of 1939, which is quite a long time ago 
— it obviously was a bit before I was born — to penalize the 
marketing of cattle with horns in Saskatchewan. 
 
So the intention of the Act, Mr. Speaker, was to reduce the 
number of cattle with horns being marketed. And essentially 
this isn’t really necessary anymore, Mr. Speaker, so it’s good 
that we’re moving forward on this. 
 
Now industry has asked government to intervene with 
legislation that’s no longer required. And it sounds like there’s 



762 Saskatchewan Hansard October 19, 2016 

some consultation going with industry to figure out what the 
best solution is for this moving forward. So like I said, very 
happy to see the government consulting and listening to the 
stakeholders in this area, that’s for sure. 
 
Not only does it have the support of the cattle organizations, but 
it has many beef cattle producers in support as well, so we’re 
happy to see that. We’re looking forward to this going further. 
And we’re also looking forward to monitoring this particular 
area and ensuring that stakeholders are continued to be listened 
to and that a solution is put in place that works for everybody in 
the province, in particular those in the cattle industry, and that 
we can move forward on that in a way that’s best for everyone 
in the province. 
 
Unfortunately I would like to speak more, but I know I have 
colleagues that will want to speak to this rather lengthy piece of 
legislation, so with that I will move adjourned debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Douglas Park has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 14, The Horned Cattle 
Purchases Repeal Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 15 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 15 — The 
Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second 
time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A 
pleasure to join debate this afternoon on Bill No. 15, The 
Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2016. And as ever, always 
good to have colleagues from across the way shouting 
encouragement, or perhaps bidding a good afternoon; it’s 
sometimes hard to figure out which. But anyway, good to join 
debate. 
 
It’s sometimes said, Mr. Speaker, that there’s housekeeping 
legislation and then there is justice system housekeeping 
legislation. And it’s interesting to go through the minister’s 
second reading remarks as pertains to the amendment and of 
course the fine tuning that this piece of legislation anticipates 
for the Provincial Court. 
 
Now I’m no lawyer, just a hard-working legislator, Mr. 
Speaker, in the opposition, of course and, you know, God 
willing, some day from the government benches again. But it’s 
interesting to look at this piece of legislation, and it provides a 
good sort of tour through the complexities of what is our legal 
system for the layperson as they contemplate the different levels 
of court and the different powers that those courts exercise, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In terms of part V of the legislation, and again we’re referring 
to the second reading speech from the minister, part V . . . And 

that’s, you know, available in Hansard, May 31st, 2016. But 
from the minister’s second reading speech: 
 

Part V of that Act sets out the process for the review of 
Provincial Court judges who are the subject of a complaint 
as to their conduct by the Judicial Council. The Judicial 
Council is comprised of representatives from all levels of 
the judiciary in Saskatchewan as well as members of the 
bar and government appointees under the chairmanship of 
the Chief Justice of the province. 

 
Fair enough, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to see that bit of 
clarification brought to bear. And certainly if you can’t be clear 
about who will judge the judges, you know, it’s a good place to 
start in terms of making certain that your system is one based 
on integrity and consistency. 
 
Perusing further on in the second reading speech, Mr. Speaker, 
where the minister states . . . And this is the Minister of Justice, 
of course, Mr. Speaker, stating: 
 

This bill will amend the Act to provide the Judicial Council 
with greater flexibility in the conduct of their reviews of 
the allegations of judicial misconduct and for the remedies 
that may be imposed. 
 

Again, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to not just be judicious but to 
have the sanctions that bring a level of propriety to the various 
offences involved. So again that you’d have greater flexibility 
and provide the Judicial Council the opportunity to be 
judicious, you know. Great work, great work, but that’s where 
I’d again refer you to my earlier remarks around there’s 
housekeeping legislation and, you know, at the very pinnacle of 
the housekeeping legislation mountain, Mr. Speaker, there is 
justice system housekeeping legislation. So here we are with 
one such example of that kind of stirring legal action. 
 
Carrying on in the minister’s second reading speech, where he 
states that: 

 
This bill will authorize the Minister of Justice to directly 
establish the list of temporary judges, including those from 
other jurisdictions, as recommended by the chief judge of 
the Provincial Court. That list would be published in the 
Gazette. Currently this process requires an order in council. 

 
It’s again an interesting sort of bit of something in terms of a 
measure in the legislation. But again, that division of powers 
between what is an order in council and what is more properly 
the purview of the Judicial Council, and what this says about 
the separation between the different branches of how we govern 
ourselves in Saskatchewan, and that distance that should be 
there between the judiciary and the executive government as 
evidenced by the transfer of powers from order in council to 
what is, you know, more properly clarified as a decision for the 
Judicial Council — and again, fair enough. 
 
In terms of the list of the temporary judges, again fair enough. 
It’s important work, maybe a bit mundane, Mr. Speaker. But 
you’ve got to make sure these things are nailed down properly, 
Lord knows. 
 
Again referring to the minister’s second reading speech where 



October 19, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 763 

he states that: 
 

This bill will also create a notice requirement specifically 
for the appointment of court-appointed legal counsel. 
Amendments to this Act, The Queen’s Bench Act, 1998, 
and The Constitutional Questions Act, 2012, are being 
proposed to improve the consistency in the application of 
the rules for the appointment of court-appointed lawyers. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, fair ball. And always good to bring greater 
clarity to matters of law, to questions of law, who’s got the 
power and who’s got the appropriate authority. 
 
And then getting back to the minister’s second reading speech 
where he states: 
 

Finally, broader authority is set out to establish fees 
through the regulations in order to allow for the 
introduction of further cost recovery. 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t ring quite like the Magna Carta 
or, you know, the Bill of Rights or anything like that, but 
important points, certainly. Perhaps, you know, not Sermon on 
the Mount, but these things need to be refined and are defined 
over time, certainly. But this is . . . I wouldn’t want to say this is 
representative of the legislative agenda of this government but 
it’s certainly not exactly an exception to the rule. 
 
But with that, Mr. Speaker, noting the time, to bring my 
remarks to a close on the Bill No. 15, The Provincial Court 
Amendment Act, 2016, and with that I’d move to adjourn debate 
on said same bill. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
has moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 15, The Provincial 
Court Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly 
to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — It now being 5 p.m., this Assembly will stand 
adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 17:00.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Apology 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................... 731 
ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 Introduction of Sergeant-at-Arms 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 731 
 Introduction of Pages 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 731 
 Membership of the Board of Internal Economy 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 742 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 731 
  Doherty ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 731 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 731 
  Eyre ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 731 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 732 
  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 732 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 732 
  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 732 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 732 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 732 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 733 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 733 
  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 733 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 733 
  Lambert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 733 
  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 733 
  Beaudry-Mellor ......................................................................................................................................................................... 745 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 733 
  Carr ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 734 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 734 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 734 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 734 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 734 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 735 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 735 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 735 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Northern Teacher Education Program 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 735 
 There is Help and There is Hope 
  Wilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 736 
 Middle Years Classroom Chat 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 736 
 Saskatchewan Physicist Selected for Prestigious Fellowship 
  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................... 736 
 Remembering Shirley Ryan 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 736 
 Domestic Violence Shelter Opens in Melfort 
  Phillips ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 737 
 Election Spending 
  Heppner ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 737 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Youth Suicides in the North 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 737 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 737 
 Role of Global Transportation Hub in Land Acquisitions 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 738 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 738 
  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 739 
 



 

 Measures to Reduce Carbon Emissions 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 740 
  Moe ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 740 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 741 
 Funding for the Northern Teacher Education Program 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 741 
  Eyre ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 741 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 741 
 Funding for Saskatchewan Assured Income for Disability Program 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 742 
  Beaudry-Mellor ......................................................................................................................................................................... 742 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on House Services 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 742 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 742 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 2 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Crown Corporations’ Fiscal Year End Standardization) 
 Amendment Act, 2016 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 743 
 Bill No. 4 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 745 
 Bill No. 5 — The Electronic Information and Documents Amendment Act, 2016 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 748 
 Bill No. 6 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 749 
 Bill No. 7 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016(No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2016 modifiant le droit législatif 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 751 
 Bill No. 8 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2016 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 751 
 Bill No. 9 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2016 
 Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 752 
 Bill No. 10 — The Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2016 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 753 
 Bill No. 11 — The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2016 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 757 
 Bill No. 12 — The Public Health (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2016 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 758 
 Bill No. 13 — The Cancer Agency Amendment Act, 2016 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 759 
 Bill No 14 — The Horned Cattle Purchases Repeal Act, 2016 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 761 
 Bill No. 15 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2016 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 762 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 




