






















































Hansard: October 31, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 33A  MONDAY, OCTOBER 31, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (Ind.) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10; Independent (Ind.) — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 961 
 October 31, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Later 
this day . . . with leave for an extended introduction please. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Later 
this day, the Minister Responsible for SGI [Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance] will be introducing measures so that 
our province can react in a more effective way and be proactive 
in a more effective way on the issue of driving while impaired 
in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have the dubious distinction in Saskatchewan 
of being a national leader in this regard. And we are reminded 
today with great clarity as to the implications, the results, from 
the fact that this province leads in this dubious way because 
quite literally drinking and driving kills people. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, I think the minister responsible will also want to 
introduce the group that’s with us, but permit me please to 
introduce some very brave families who have joined us today 
who were here earlier today for the announcement, the technical 
briefing, by the minister. 
 
In no particular order, Mr. Speaker, I want to introduce, sitting 
in your gallery, Louis and Linda Van de Vorst and their 
daughter Angie White. We know well the Van de Vorsts lost 
their son Jordan, daughter-in-law Chanda, granddaughter 
Kamryn, and grandson Miguire this past January. 
 
As well we have with us today, and no stranger to the Assembly 
itself, Allan and Melanie Kerpan are here. They have both been 
very courageous in speaking out for change in Saskatchewan. 
They lost their daughter in October of 2014. 
 
We are joined, I believe, as well in the gallery by Craig and 
Bonnie Stevenson. The Stevensons’ son Quinn was killed in 
August of 2013. 
 
And we have family and friends of Tanner Kaufmann that are 
here with us today. Tanner was taken from us just last month by 
an impaired driver. Tanner’s wife, Alyscia, and friends Dave 
Limacher and Catharine Yates join us today, as well as Brent is 
here now. I believe he stayed with us as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these families know better than anyone on the 
floor of the Assembly the costs of drinking and driving in 
Saskatchewan. They have been very courageous in the case they 
have made for change. But you know, all of the laws, all of the 

tougher administrative restrictions that we can place so we can 
empower our law enforcement and traffic officers to bring to 
bear upon drivers and onto the roads of our province, all of that 
just pales in comparison to what we could accomplish in 
Saskatchewan if we just stopped this, if we just resolved that 
this was absolutely unacceptable. 
 
So there’ll be much more to say on this, I know, later on, and I 
appreciate the fact the opposition will as well. But I do want to 
ask all members if they would please welcome these 
courageous friends and families to their Legislative Assembly 
today to witness this historic day in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure for me to 
introduce another very special guest in your gallery that has 
joined us today. With us on her first official visit to 
Saskatchewan is Ms. Caroline Saunders. Ms. Saunders is the 
British Consul General in Calgary. Accompanying Ms. 
Saunders are Melinda Carter and Anne McRorie. Those are 
folks with our Intergovernmental Affairs office. Mr. Speaker, 
Ms. Saunders was appointed to her position earlier this year. 
She is a career diplomat. She’s served in Kuala Lumpur, in 
Delhi, in Brisbane. Most recently she has served as the head of 
global challenges and innovation, and the head of global low 
carbon growth at the Foreign & Commonwealth office in 
London. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the consul general has a busy schedule during her 
stay here in our capital city. I’m going to be meeting with her a 
little bit later on. As well I think the Lieutenant Governor will 
also be meeting with her later on. We hope actually to be both 
very busy, the Lieutenant Governor and I and all members of 
the House, on some legislative work that we’re going to do, but 
we’re going to work this meeting in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she will also meet with officials from SaskBuilds, 
Innovation Saskatchewan, SaskPower and the two universities, 
as well as the Saskatchewan Trade and Export Partnership. I 
believe she had a meeting already today with the Minister of 
Agriculture. The schedule is a reflection of the specific interests 
of the consul general, namely energy, carbon capture and 
storage, climate change and innovation, and student exchanges. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we want to welcome her to this Assembly 
today. We want to welcome her to the province of 
Saskatchewan and wish her well in her work representing the 
mutually beneficial relationship that has existed for many, many 
years and will continue to exist between the province of 
Saskatchewan and the UK [United Kingdom]. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with the 
Premier here today and recognize these courageous families that 
have endured a loss that we can only imagine. And I thank them 
for joining us at our Assembly here today. 
 
We have so many that have endured so much, and 
heartbreaking losses that have occurred. We’ve had moms and 
dads and friends and neighbours and brothers and sisters and 
sons and daughters that have been stolen from their families and 



962 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2016 

from communities. 
 
And we need not only to stand together and to show respect to 
these families that are enduring a loss that many of us can only 
imagine, but to work to make improvements, which is why the 
work that we’ll be undertaking here today is important and, 
reflecting the words of the Premier here as well, why it’s so 
important that we each play the role that we can on this front. 
 
And without a doubt, we have to address the problem of 
drinking and driving within Saskatchewan. It’s taken far too 
many from so many across our province. We each play that role 
and we need to work together. We have some legislation that 
we’ll be talking about here today and advancing, but again each 
and every one of us needs to take this on in our own lives and 
with our own relationships as well. 
 
I can only imagine the courage that it takes for these families to 
be here today, and I want to thank them for coming. It does help 
all of us as a problem . . . respond to a problem that needs to 
come to an end. 
 
And here we have, as have been introduced, Mr. and Mrs. Van 
de Vorst. Thank you for being here. We have Mr. and Mrs. 
Kerpan, somebody that’s served our province and our country 
here as well. Mr. and Mrs. Stevenson are here also. And then 
we have Tanner Kaufmann’s family here also: his dad, Brent — 
thank you for being here — and his wife, Alyscia, friends 
Catharine Yates, Cathy Yates, and Dave Limacher. 
 
And I guess just as a point, I don’t know, didn’t know Tanner 
incredibly well, but I did have the privilege in my life to get to 
know Tanner. He was a special individual. And I know, as 
described by his friends, he was — and family — he was 
somebody that was loyal and loving. In the ways that I knew 
him, he was always someone incredibly interesting, incredibly 
caring, taking on all sorts of adventure, an avid hunter and 
fisher, incredible with his two young boys, a great hockey 
player, and just a really good friend to so many. 
 
We stand together. I think of this family and as I say, we each 
have a role to play. And we’ll do our part as legislators here 
today for these families — for those that have been lost, and for 
all those that are living — to make sure that we have the 
protections in place and to change this horrible culture that’s 
taken far too many from people all across the province. 
 
While on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would also like to welcome 
the British consul from Calgary to Saskatchewan. Your 
presence is important and it’s valued. We have a long and 
historic relationship with Britain as a province, a valued 
relationship that dates back to the signing of our treaties with 
indigenous peoples and one that extends on so many other 
fronts, including standing together against tyranny and abuse 
and standing together for peace, for human rights. 
 
And we’ve fought together on these fronts for well over a 
century, Mr. Speaker. We have a lot in common and a lot to 
share and a lot that can be accomplished together. I know 
during the Second World War, of course, we had hundreds of 
British pilots that came to Saskatchewan and received care and 
training here in the province. And so many of our brave soldiers 
trained in Britain, including my grandfather, and fought. And 

some died alongside the Allies from the United Kingdom in 
places like the beaches of Normandy. 
 
So this is a relationship that’s lasting, a relationship that’s 
valued. And through your visit here today and through your 
meetings, this is a relationship that will continue to grow and to 
strengthen. Those mutual ties that bind will continue to bring 
benefit to the people of Saskatchewan, the people of Canada, 
and to the people of the United Kingdom. So thank you very 
much for your presence here today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Carlton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to join the Premier and the Leader of the Opposition as well in 
welcoming some families who I’ve had the privilege of 
spending some time with over the past couple of weeks and 
some time with this morning as a group. I was very honoured to 
be able to spend this time with them and meet with them and 
talk with them and hear their stories. And it’s very moving, I 
tell you, Mr. Speaker. It’s been very moving. 
 
Joining us today are the families of Jordan, Chanda, Kamryn, 
and Miguire — that’s Lou and Linda Van de Vorst — as well, 
the families of Danille Kerpan, Allan and Melanie; the family 
of Quinn Stevenson, Craig and Bonnie Stevenson; and the 
family and friends of Tanner Kaufmann: Alyscia Kaufmann, his 
father Brent, as well as his friends Dave Limacher and 
Catharine Yates. And I say their name first, Mr. Speaker, 
because they were real people and we can’t treat them as though 
they were just statistics. They were real people and these 
families up there loved them dearly. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, these families know very well the devastation 
caused by impaired driving, and they suffer through it every 
day. They’re getting stronger. They’re taking action, and 
they’re being strong advocates against drinking and driving on 
behalf of their loved ones that they’ve lost, Mr. Speaker. And 
I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming them to your 
gallery. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, it’s my pleasure 
to welcome three guests in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. With us 
today are Dr. Rob Haver, Dr. Amanda Waldner, and Dr. Brent 
Janzen. They’re here today from Moose Jaw, Mr. Speaker. 
They join us following a meeting that we had this morning in 
my office with the two MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] for Moose Jaw. 
 
These doctors, Mr. Speaker, are from Moose Jaw. They’re 
products of our post-graduate residency position training that 
happens in Moose Jaw. As you know, we have residency 
positions outside of our major centres, and they completed in 
Moose Jaw and they continue to practise there, Mr. Speaker. 
We had a great discussion, look forward to hearing more about 
their experience in members’ statements to come from the 
member from Moose Jaw Wakamow, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But one thing of encouragement to me as we were meeting — 



October 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 963 

and Dr. Janzen actually communicated this, but I think it’s the 
sentiment of most family medical practitioners if not all, I know 
of the three in attendance today — he called himself a friend 
and an advocate of patients, Mr. Speaker. And I think that’s so 
commendable, that our practitioners do think that way, and they 
do serve our people in our province so very well. 
 
We did communicate congratulations to them, but I thought 
more appropriate, Mr. Speaker, was a sincere thank you on 
behalf of the government, but mainly on behalf of the people of 
our province, that they’ve taken up this task of being a family 
practitioner but also choosing to practise in a rural setting, Mr. 
Speaker. So I ask all members to welcome them to their 
Legislative Assembly and bid them thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I have, seated in the west gallery, 23 students from MacNeill 
School. These grade 7 and 8 students are accompanied by their 
teacher Ms. Alana Nelson, and educational assistant Ms. Kari 
Deics. We also have as a member of this school group a very 
special student, Drayden Hornoi. Drayden, do you want to give 
us a wave? Yes, Drew asked me to say . . . and make sure that 
we had you acknowledged in the House today. So thank you 
very much. 
 
[13:45] 
 
So please welcome each and every one of these students to the 
Legislative Assembly. I will be meeting with them later on after 
question period to have a wonderful discussion that they would 
be able to . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . No, I’m not buying 
them ice cream. Drinks. But we’re going to have a fulsome 
discussion on their opinions of question period today. So with 
that, I would like everyone to welcome them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Marshall, 
Lloydminster, Battleford, Frenchman Butte, Dinsmore, 
Wiseton, Rapid View, St. Walburg, Paradise Hill, Martensville, 
Lone Rock, and Maidstone. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition regarding wetlands in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Wetlands are home to wildlife, including 
waterfowl. They clean the water running off of agricultural 
fields. They protect us from flooding and drought. And they are 
a playground where families can explore and play. In the worst 
cases, such as some areas on the prairies, as much as 90 per cent 
of our wetlands have disappeared. Sound wetland policy will 
allow Saskatchewan to provide sustainable development for all 
sectors of business in the province. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

They respectfully request the Government of 
Saskatchewan to: 

 
Increase funding to do the proper inventory work, putting 
Saskatchewan in a better position to manage the water 
resource; 
 
Speed up the evaluation of high-risk watersheds where 
there is significant damage annually from flooding. This 
evaluation must include a recognition of drainage works 
that could be closed or restored that will alleviate some of 
the issues downstream with respect to flooding and nutrient 
loading. 
 
Create a sound and transparent mitigation process that 
adequately addresses sustainable development. 
 
The sequence should first focus on avoiding the 
environmental harm whenever possible before a secondary 
focus on minimizing the harm, with compensation being 
sought only when the development is deemed essential and 
the first two stages cannot be met. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens from Saskatoon and 
Regina. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition in support of Wakamow Valley 
Authority. And we know that as a result of the passage of The 
Wakamow Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2016 on June 30th, 
the Wakamow Valley Authority in Moose Jaw lost its statutory 
funding of $127,000 from the Saskatchewan government, in 
addition to $30,000 of supplementary funding. This loss of 
annual funding negatively affects the ability of Wakamow to 
maintain its lands or repair its facilities and provide services to 
its community in Moose Jaw. This funding resulted in a layoff 
of one-third of park staff, which included two summer students 
and two regular employees. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, on June 21st, 2016 the provincial 
government, including the two members from Moose Jaw, 
voted in favour of this bill, resulting in cuts to Wakamow and 
subsequent job losses. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 



964 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2016 

honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately repeal The Wakamow Valley Authority 
Amendment Act, 2016 and reinstate statutory funding to the 
Wakamow Valley Authority. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from 
the city of Moose Jaw. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
present to you a petition condemning the Sask Party’s cuts to 
the SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for disability] 
program. After nearly a decade of wasting the economic boom 
and blowing through the savings, the government is now 
forcing the province’s most vulnerable to pay for the Sask Party 
mismanagement. 
 
The Sask Party’s latest cold-hearted cut will take money away 
from people who are unable to work due to a disability. Many 
of these people who are being hurt by this Sask Party cut live 
with serious illnesses such as multiple sclerosis, cancer, autism, 
among other illnesses. And contrary to the Minister of Social 
Services’s claims, the government underfunds clients in regards 
to shelter allowance, and that shelter allowance should be 
reflective of the current rental costs. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to stop their plan to cut 
the SAID funding and immediately restore funding for 
those living with a disability; that shelter allowance is 
reflective of the current rental costs; and that the Sask 
Party government implement the recommendations of the 
advisory group on poverty reduction. 

 
These petitions were signed by residents from Saskatoon and 
Wynyard. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition regarding child care centres in Saskatchewan. Those 
signing this petition wish to draw attention to the following: 
across Saskatchewan, licensed non-profit child care centres are 
taxed inconsistently. Many of our licensed non-profit child care 
centres pay commercial taxes, and this is not done in Alberta, 
Manitoba, Ontario, BC [British Columbia], or New Brunswick. 
 
Child care is essential to the economy yet most centres struggle 
to balance their budgets. This issue threatens both the number 
of child care spaces and also the quality of care. Quality child 
care has an enormous positive economic benefit on a child’s 
future outcomes and yields a high rate of economic return. 
Child care centres are institutions of early learning and 
childhood development, and it is appropriate that they have the 
same tax treatment as schools. I will read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognize 
that licensed non-profit child care centres provide 
programs that are foundational to a healthy society by 
including them in the Saskatchewan education Act and to 
exempt all licensed non-profit child care centres in 
Saskatchewan from property tax through changes to the 
appropriate legislation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those signing this petition today are citizens of 
Carrot River and of Yorkton. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling for a stop to the Sask Party sell-off of 
SaskTel. Among other things, the petitioners point out that in 
the last five years alone, SaskTel has returned $497 million to 
support government programs and services like education and 
health care. They point out that SaskTel is an important part of 
building a stronger and fairer Saskatchewan together. And they 
point out that once SaskTel is gone, there’s no getting it back 
and there’s no telling what else the Sask Party will then sell. 
Mr. Speaker, in the prayer that reads as follows:  

 
The petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the Saskatchewan Party 
government to keep their promise, stop their plan to sell off 
SaskTel, and keep our valued Crown corporation in the 
hands of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular batch of petitions is signed by 
individuals from Cabri, Lancer, and Swift Current. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
to stop the redirection of funding of the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, Inc. A recent report shows that 94 
per cent of the NORTEP [northern teacher education program] 
grads found employment in the North. NORTEP has improved 
teacher retention rates in the North. NORTEP has a positive 
economic impact in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
NORTEP provides highly qualified, face-to-face instruction and 
service to students. The province’s financial deficit cannot be 
fixed by cutting indigenous education in the North and a 
program that has served the North for over 40 years. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to immediately restore 
their five-year agreement to fund the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, Inc. and continue to fund 
NORTEP/NORPAC programs in La Ronge. 

 
It is signed by many good people of the North. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from 
Rosthern-Shellbrook on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — I’d ask leave for an introduction. 
 



October 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 965 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you and to 
all members of the Legislative Assembly, I see just entered into 
the Assembly is Ms. Jenn Bustin from the community of 
Spiritwood. And I know Jenn has some questions and concerns 
with respect to her daughter. And I would just ask all members 
to welcome Jenn to her Legislative Assembly here in the capital 
city of Regina. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you. With leave, I’d like to make an 
introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to all members of this Legislative Assembly, I’d like to join 
with the minister or the member in welcoming Jenn to her 
Legislative Assembly. She’s also here with a supporter and an 
advocate as well, so I understand that . . . and I know we’ve had 
the opportunity to speak a few times on some concerns that she 
has with respect to the health care field and how it’s impacted 
her daughter, and not just her daughter but all people in 
Saskatchewan with similar afflictions. So I’m happy that you’re 
here today and partaking in your Legislative Assembly. I ask 
that all members join me in welcoming them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Action in Response to Tragedy 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, it is with a heavy heart that I 
rise in the Assembly today to bring attention to yet another 
death by suicide in northern Saskatchewan. Six girls have taken 
their own lives in the last number of weeks. Six families are in 
mourning and are left to wonder what these precious lives could 
have been and what potential these children could have reached. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the causes of these deaths aren’t a mystery. 
They aren’t anything new. These deaths are the result of 
generations of colonial violence, generations of governments 
that sought that destroy indigenous families and build barriers 
to block indigenous peoples from reaching their full potential, 
barriers like the Indian Act, the pass system, the peasant 
farming policy, residential schools, the Sixties Scoop, and the 
underfunding of First Nations schools and child welfare 

agencies that continues to this day. 
 
But there is a way forward, Mr. Speaker. The Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission’s calls to action offer us a path to 
partnership between indigenous and non-indigenous 
communities, one based upon the treaty relationship and mutual 
partnership. That’s the path we all need to embrace if we’re 
ever going to see an end to these tragedies in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all the members to join in calling for 
immediate action to address this long-standing crisis. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 

Diwali Celebrations 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I had the 
privilege of bringing greetings to the 2016 Regina Diwali 
festival for the last two Sundays. This is where the local 
Indo-Canadian community join together to celebrate this major 
festival. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Diwali is known as the festival of lights, and it 
takes place every fall. It’s a significant day that includes five 
days of preparation where often you see people refreshing their 
homes. On Diwali night, people dress in their best and light up 
the inside and outside of their homes, their offices, and their 
cultural centres. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was an evening of dancing and singing and great 
food and celebration, but best of all it was spending time with 
amazing people. Diwali has come to be considered an 
opportunity to show our community the richness of their 
culture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this festival is bright. It’s fun. It’s full of energy 
and friendship. But best of all, it’s also a celebration of good 
over evil. So it’s fitting that the festival of lights signifies 
victory over darkness and hope over despair. Now this is a very 
important reminder to all of us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last night was a demonstration of diversity in our 
province. And, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members in this 
Assembly to join with me in wishing everyone Happy Diwali, 
and also Happy New Year in India. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Saturday, 
alongside Opposition Leader Trent Wotherspoon and over 700 
other members from the community, I was honoured to attend 
the Hindu Temple to celebrate Diwali, the Hindu festival of 
lights, and mark the 25th anniversary of the temple’s opening. 
 
Diwali is celebrated across the globe every year on the 15th day 
of the month of Kartika in the Hindu calendar. It spiritually 
signifies the victory of light over darkness, good over evil, 
knowledge over ignorance, and hope over despair. Alongside 
many others, I found great meaning and took great inspiration 
from these words. Celebrating the light, Diwali is an upbeat 
festival of sights and sounds, and on Saturday we were treated 



966 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2016 

to an abundance of delicious sweets, cultural entertainment, and 
stunning fireworks. 
 
[14:00] 
 
I want to acknowledge the hard work and hospitality of Yashu 
Bither, the president of the Hindu Samaj of Southern 
Saskatchewan, and thank him for hosting a fantastic celebration 
and for the great work he does throughout the year. Yashu also 
was my dance partner at the India Supper Night last month but 
lucky for him and everyone at the temple, no one had to suffer 
my dance moves this time. 
 
I ask members to join me in congratulating the Hindu Temple 
of Regina, a cultural and spiritual staple in our community, on 
their 25th anniversary and a successful Diwali celebration. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 

Breast Cancer Awareness Month 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As members 
may know, October is Breast Cancer Awareness Month. Each 
year many Saskatchewan businesses, organizations, and 
families go out of their way to raise funds and awareness about 
the impact of breast cancer and the need for continued research 
and support. 
 
Two of the many fundraisers this month were CIBC [Canadian 
Imperial Bank of Commerce] Run for the Cure events in 
Saskatoon and Regina which helped the Canadian Breast 
Cancer Foundation raise an estimated 17 million across Canada. 
 
We are proud of the work of the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency, 
including the screening program for breast cancer which has 
saved lives by providing mammograms for the past 26 years, 
Mr. Speaker. Screening and early detection are among the best 
defences against breast cancer. The screening program performs 
approximately 39,000 mammograms through its clinics in 
Regina and Saskatoon, satellite offices in six communities, and 
a mobile unit that travels to rural and on-reserve locations. 
Approximately 200 cancers are diagnosed through the program 
annually. Our government’s commitment to the fight against 
cancer is strong, providing more than double the amount of 
funding since 2007. 
 
Every family is affected by breast cancer. My own mother 
passed away from this disease. Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
remember all the brave women and men who have been touched 
by breast cancer. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

New Physicians Choose to Stay in Moose Jaw 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week it was 
announced that dozens of new physicians had recently begun 
practising in Saskatchewan following the successful completion 
of the SIPPA [Saskatchewan international physician practice 
assessment] program and the postgraduate medical program at 
the U of S [University of Saskatchewan]. 
 
In 2014, the University of Saskatchewan expanded its family 

medicine residency program to the Five Hills Health Region. 
Mr. Speaker, this expansion allowed four individuals to 
complete their family medicine residencies right in Moose Jaw. 
Three of those doctors are here with us today: Dr. Rob Haver; 
Dr. Brent Janzen; and Dr. Amanda Waldner. I’m proud to 
announce that all four physicians who completed their 
residency in Moose Jaw, including the three with us here today, 
have decided to stay and practise in Moose Jaw. 
 
Overall, Mr. Speaker, the retention rate of family medicine 
graduates trained at the U of S has jumped by 17 per cent over 
the last three years to 75 per cent. Drs. Waldner, Haver, and 
Janzen are great examples of the success of our government’s 
efforts to recruit and retain local medical grads, especially in 
rural communities. I ask all members to join me today in 
welcoming these new doctors to Moose Jaw and in thanking 
them for choosing to stay in our province. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

SaskBuilds Wins Silver at International P3 Awards 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 2012, SaskBuilds 
was created to modernize how our province builds its roads, 
schools, and hospitals. Mr. Speaker, four years later, a team at 
SaskBuilds is being internationally recognized as world leaders. 
It is my pleasure to inform the House that last week at the 2016 
International P3 Awards, SaskBuilds was awarded the silver 
medal for Government Agency of the Year in the Americas. 
This award is considered among the most prestigious in the 
industry. 
 
In receiving silver, SaskBuilds outperformed the national 
agencies of Brazil, Colombia, and Honduras, as well as state 
and city authorities from the US [United States] and Canada. 
And it’s no wonder. In only four years, SaskBuilds’ four P3 
[public-private partnership] projects have saved taxpayers $586 
million — that’s $586 million, Mr. Speaker — provided work 
to over 190 local businesses, and supported 12,500 construction 
jobs. 
 
The first P3, a long-term care home in Swift Current, finished 
on time and on budget this spring. The remaining projects, 
including 18 schools, a mental health hospital, and 464 
kilometres of road, are also on track. This well-earned 
recognition is a testament to the professionalism of our public 
service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 
congratulating SaskBuilds for winning this prestigious award 
and literally breaking new ground in the world of infrastructure. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. 
 

Hindu Temple Hall Opening 
 
Mr. Parent: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently I had the 
pleasure of attending and bringing greetings at the opening of 
the newly expanded Hindu temple hall in Saskatoon. This 



October 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 967 

celebration was co-hosted by the Hindu Society of 
Saskatchewan and the temple expansion committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the temple, which first opened in 1985 and has 
been expanded once before, is a beautiful example of Hindu 
architecture. In addition to its role as a place of worship for 
Saskatoon’s Hindu community, the temple is also an important 
community hub which hosts music events, yoga classes, 
language classes, and youth activities. The years of hard work 
and fundraising that led to the temple expansion is a testament 
to the Hindu community’s work ethic and dedication to 
volunteerism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we know, Saskatchewan’s motto is “from many 
peoples, strength.” The Hindu Society of Saskatchewan has 
made numerous contributions toward strengthening our 
communities and improving our quality of life of Saskatchewan 
people. By adding to our province’s cultural diversity and 
promoting a more harmonious society, our growing Hindu 
population is contributing to the Saskatchewan continued 
growth. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating the temple 
expansion team committee and the Hindu Society of 
Saskatchewan on the inauguration of the temple hall expansion. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Prevention of Youth Suicides 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, my heart breaks as I rise 
again in the House to speak of another young life lost in the 
North. Just yesterday we heard of a sixth child overcome by 
despair and darkness. The immensity of this issue has brought it 
to the nation’s attention. But as those in the North will tell you, 
this isn’t new. Each and every year there are far too many 
funerals for suicides. 
 
The minister has said, “. . . working closely with the northern 
regional health authorities to fully implement suicide protocols 
and mental health and addictions services.” Mr. Speaker, that is 
important, but it’s not the entire solution. There are 
long-standing inequities and inadequacies, too often dismissed 
by government, that require immediate, long-term action to 
address this epidemic — through education, through justice, 
through community health and recreation, through the 
economy. 
 
Will the Premier commit today to ensure immediate support and 
real, long-term action and funding that supports the North and 
builds hope and opportunity? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 
thank the Hon. Leader of the Opposition for the question. I 
think when we all received the news of this latest tragic death, 
we were all suitably motivated to ask the very questions that 
he’s asking of the government today. And I want to share with 
members of the House that the short answer to his question is, 

yes I can commit to the fact that we will continue to deploy 
existing and new resources in the North on this particular issue. 
There is a long list of actions that are under way now, and I’ll 
get through as many as I can, but can also provide them to 
members of the House in any other manner that might be 
requested, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Since October 12th, 2016 a regional emergencies operation 
centre has been established at La Ronge and Stanley Mission to 
aid in better planning and coordinating service and action on the 
part of the government. The Ministry of Health is working with 
the northern regional health authorities to fully implement 
suicide prevention protocols and northern medical officers 
working to understand the patterns and be able to plan 
appropriate services. Information’s being provided on northern 
radio, informing people where they can go to help. And we 
could use this platform to highlight that anyone experiencing 
any depression or suicidal thoughts can call our HealthLine. It’s 
811. And the Kids Help Phone is 1-800-668-6868. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a long list of specific actions we’re also 
taking to fund within the budgets of Health and Social Services 
and Justice which I can provide to members of the House as 
well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the words of 
the Premier. But we need immediate and urgent assistance, 
action to follow the words, and to bring the whole range of 
funding and supports to address long-standing and too often 
dismissed inequities and inadequacies that have devastated so 
many. Mr. Speaker, these kids need our help. The leaders in the 
North are doing their part. Now we need to have our 
government act also to stop cutting and start investing in these 
communities and in these kids. Mr. Speaker, this tragedy may 
be centred in the North, but it grips all of us. 
 
Tomorrow marks the first day of work for our new child and 
youth advocate. As one of the steps, Mr. Speaker, just one of 
the steps, will the Premier join our call to have the northern 
crisis be the first priority considered by the child and youth 
advocate, remembering though that that doesn’t take away from 
this Premier and that government’s need to act with meaningful 
long-term supports and funding? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I thank the 
member for his question. And I would indicate very much 
support in principle for the idea that Mr. O’Soup’s first order of 
business would be the plight of northern youth in particular and 
with specific focus on the issue of depression and suicides that 
we’ve seen and the attempted suicides. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has moved to increased support 
for northern CBOs [community-based organization]. We’ve 
doubled that since 2007. And with respect to suicide prevention 
in the North in particular, there has been the participation in the 
embracing life committee, where Government Relations has 
funded 17 community-based suicide prevention initiatives 
through embracing life committee. That has been a $277,000 
investment over in the past two years with that continuing.  



968 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2016 

Since last year in ’15-16 the number of in-person clinics — in 
other words, not remote clinics obviously, Mr. Speaker — 
scheduled for northern Saskatchewan has increased by 59 per 
cent, appropriately resourced by government so that would be 
the case. This does not include the Telehealth psychiatry 
services that have been offered. There’s currently one child 
psychiatrist and two adult psychiatrists who provide services 
via Telehealth. 
 
There’s a partnership resource by the government with trainers 
from Northern Lights School Division to provide suicide 
prevention training to staff. Keewatin Yatthé RH [regional 
health] will continue to provide ASIST [applied suicide 
intervention skills training], that’s the acronym, suicide 
prevention at least four times in a year, in this next year. That’s 
also being resourced by the government. There’s a long list of 
things. 
 
The bottom line is we do want to act. We have been backing up 
words with actions and obviously, obviously more needs to be 
done. I congratulate local leaders in the North. The government 
is fully seized of this issue. I think the child advocate should 
focus on this particular issue early on in his term. And I look 
forward to the next question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Support for Northern Communities 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad 
to hear that there’s finally acknowledgement of the serious 
issue, that this is a tragic time for all of us. But the answers go 
deeper. Research and experience shows us the connection 
between youth suicide and the autonomy of indigenous 
communities. Working on reconciliation and empowering 
communities is a large part of that solution. But when our 
current Health minister was asked about implementing this 
TRC [Truth and Reconciliation Commission] 
recommendations, he said, “If there are things that make sense 
and we can do them relatively quickly, that’s what we should 
do.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, thousands and thousands of consultations were 
undertaken with indigenous communities and residential school 
survivors for the TRC. They were not done so provincial 
ministers could decide what made sense to them. If this 
government really isn’t willing to listen, if they really aren’t 
willing to work with the indigenous communities, if they are 
only going to do what is quick and easy for them, then how 
does this government expect anything to change? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations and First Nations, Métis and Northern Affairs. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I cannot agree with the member suggesting that this government 
is not willing to listen. 
 
There is a long list of the number of meetings, the list is quite 
extensive, of where different ministers have met with different 
northern leaderships as well as the leadership through FSIN 
[Federation of Sovereign Indigenous Nations]. Mr. Speaker, 
there has been numerous times where we have spent time in 

northern communities, not just myself but a number of other 
ministers as well, to listen to what the northern leadership has to 
say. Through that, through those conversations, Mr. Speaker, 
there has been increased funding in education, a large focus in 
education through both K to 12 [kindergarten to grade 12] and 
post-secondary through the adult basic education, Mr. Speaker, 
and apprenticeship training. Mr. Speaker, we’ll continue to 
listen to what they have to say and to work on initiatives that we 
can. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the facts don’t back up the 
minister’s words. They’ve been in power for nearly a decade 
and have had record revenues, revenues never enjoyed by any 
government in the history of the province of Saskatchewan. But 
they didn’t reinvest in the North. They cut programs and they 
cut hope, and they’ve blown through so much money with their 
mismanagement, their scandals, and their waste. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one good example of that is the GTH [Global 
Transportation Hub] scandal which cost millions and millions 
and millions of dollars. These scandals matter because that is 
millions and millions and millions of dollars that could have 
been spent on schools, on hospitals, and giving hope to our 
communities in the North. And we know, Mr. Speaker, that the 
cabinet rejected the GTH the first time they saw it, and a year 
later they accepted it and spent those millions and millions of 
dollars foolishly. 
 
So once again the question around waste: did the former 
minister of Government Relations, either the first or second 
time, stand up to defend the North or did he approve spending 
these valuable dollars on this horrific waste? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, again I have to disagree 
with what the member opposite has said. We have doubled 
funding for health services in the North. There has been 
millions of dollars quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, spent on housing 
in the North. There’s been a number of additional housing units. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there has been additional funding spent for 
education. La Ronge enjoys a brand new school, as do a few 
other communities in the North, Mr. Speaker. There has been 
additional funding through Justice for the North, and additional 
funding through Social Services in the North. So, Mr. Speaker, 
for the member opposite to suggest that we have not been 
spending millions more, he would be wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As the leader of the government has said, the Premier has said, 
there is more work that needs to be done. We’ll continue to 
listen. We will continue to travel to the northern communities to 
listen to their leadership and what they need. But, Mr. Speaker, 
the money has been increased substantively for northern 
communities. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 



October 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 969 

Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, look at the SAID program. 
Look at the Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre. Look at the 
NORTEP-NORPAC [Northern Professional Access College] 
program. Look at the housing programs, Mr. Speaker. This 
minister and that government have cut the North on a continual 
basis. They have knocked the North down time and time again. 
And what have they done in exchange, Mr. Speaker? They have 
spent millions and millions and millions on scandals, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s what upsets northern Saskatchewan the 
most. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to ask the questions around the GTH 
because those scandals really attribute to the fact that they’ve 
wasted opportunity they could have reinvested in the North. 
This approval went to cabinet at least twice. The first time it 
was rejected. The second time the scandal passed, so it matters 
how the ministers voted because it shows a commitment to their 
files versus a commitment to their big donors.  
 
So Mr. Speaker, I’m going to ask the former minister of 
Government Relations, did he vote in favour of the $25 million 
GTH scandal, or did he actually stand up for his file and for the 
North? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, again, perhaps the 
member opposite hasn’t been able to hear the answers, but let’s 
just talk about health in specific. Since 2007, Mr. Speaker, there 
has been a 45.9 per cent increase in operating funding to the 
Athabasca regional health authority. Since 2007 there’s been a 
57.8 per cent increase in operating funding for Keewatin 
Regional Health Authority, since 2007 an 83 per cent increase 
to the operating fund to Mamawetan Regional Health Authority, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s just in health alone. 
 
He mentioned housing, and again there has been a substantive 
amount of housing units that have been added to the northern 
communities. Mr. Speaker, there’s been a number of programs. 
The most recent announcement of course was for La Loche 
where a number of units were announced. And, Mr. Speaker, I 
would also like to just use a quote from Bobby Cameron, the 
chief of FSIN, who said: 
 

The FSIN is grateful for the changes his government made 
to the education system to incorporate Indigenous history, 
in particular Treaty education, and the work his 
government has done so far on the Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission’s Call to Action. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that was said by Chief Bobby Cameron on August 
24th, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Global Transportation Hub and Land Acquisitions 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Another day of questions on the GTH 
land scandal. A lot of questions, not an answer from 
government. Let’s be clear here. The cabinet met on the sale. 
They pushed it off once because the GTH didn’t have the 
money. And there was no name on the deed at that point, but a 

year later they approved it. Of course the $25 million from 
SaskPower was now very conveniently in place, and the second 
Sask Party supporter’s name was now on the deed. To the 
Premier: did no one over there find this a tad questionable? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve been focused on moving forward with the 
GTH. And to that end, I have an important announcement to 
make today, Mr. Speaker, which is that Doug Moen has agreed 
— a very distinguished former public servant who served as a 
deputy minister under their government and under this 
government — to chair the GTH going forward. 
 
We’re focused on the challenges that were identified by the 
Provincial Auditor. She made 10 recommendations, many of 
which had to do with communication between the Ministry of 
Highways and Infrastructure and the GTH. We’re going to be 
focused on implementing those recommendations. We accept 
all of them; we accept the report. And as I said, we look 
forward to working with Mr. Moen, a very distinguished former 
public servant, as the new Chair of GTH moving forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Provisions of The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, day after day, no one over 
there is willing to take accountability for anything. They want 
the people of Saskatchewan to just trust them on the GTH land 
scandal. And, Mr. Speaker, what is a promise worth these days 
from the Sask Party? 
 
They promised to not privatize the Crowns, of course. Now 
much more than SaskTel, they’re putting everything on the 
auction block: 49 per cent to the highest bidder. Our Crowns 
have been built by and for Saskatchewan people, and the people 
of Saskatchewan are their shareholders. Giving up control of 
half our Crowns will mean losing benefits for all Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Our Crowns are too important to be sold off through word play 
and semantic games of this Premier, a Premier that clearly 
doesn’t have a mandate to privatize our Crowns. Will the 
Premier, will the Premier admit that this legislation undermines 
his promise and, in order to keep his promise, will he finally do 
the right thing and withdraw this bill? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there he goes again. We 
just heard in the preamble him characterizing it completely 
incorrectly, characterizing the changes introduced by the 
Minister of Justice to The Interpretation Act as the ability of 
government now, if it’s passed, to sell half the Crowns. Wrong. 
And to lose control of the Crowns. Wrong. 
 
In fact the exact intention of the changes is to fill a void left by 
members opposite. They passed this bill to guard against the 
privatization of the Crowns. They didn’t define what it meant. 
So, Mr. Speaker, the bill that he’s engaged in this sort of 



970 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2016 

hyperbole, and I would just say incorrect descriptions around, 
actually uses the World Bank definition of privatization so that 
no government — not this government, not any future 
government — can sell a controlling interest in the Crown 
corporations per the Crown corporation protection Act, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s what it says. That’s what the bill says.  
 
And I would just ask him, we can engage in a debate around a 
minority interest expansion, but I would ask him, please on this 
occasion, stick to the facts. Let’s deal in truth in this Assembly. 
Let’s have an honest debate. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Wait Times for Child Surgery 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not too much to ask for the 
people of Saskatchewan to be able to count on their government 
to keep their promises. Last week we asked about the increasing 
wait times for surgery. And we talked about Emily, a 
three-year-old who needs surgery and whose mother is worried 
about the long wait times for not only her daughter but for 
children across the province. 
 
The minister’s response that day was to send Emily’s mom to a 
website. The website just showed the wait for Emily’s surgery 
would be 80 weeks. Eighty weeks, Mr. Speaker. That’s a lot 
more than the government’s stated goal of three months. But, 
Mr. Speaker, Emily is just one of 70 per cent of people waiting 
over three months for ear, nose, and throat surgeries. 
 
Will the minister agree that 80 weeks is too long for a 
three-year-old child who bleeds from the ears and wakes up in 
agony to wait for a surgery? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
see that Jennifer, Emily’s mother, is here today. And I certainly 
can’t imagine how difficult this must be, what her and little 
Emily are going through right now. 
 
Last week, along with the member from Rosthern-Shellbrook 
who had spoken to her earlier, I had the opportunity to speak to 
Jennifer on the phone. At that time, Mr. Speaker, she indicated, 
I believe, it’s tomorrow that she’d be meeting with the 
specialist. And I would think at that time, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
when they would have a discussion about the priority and the 
wait-list and where the doctor rates it. Mr. Speaker, that’s where 
those discussions need to take place. 
 
To the point on the website, Mr. Speaker, what the member — I 
hope by accident — inaccurately portrayed that somehow I 
referred Jennifer to a website. That’s not the case. One of my 
staff members who had spoken to her earlier pointed out that 
some time ago there was an initiative done so that people could 
see potentially where other specialists had shorter waiting 
periods. Mr. Speaker, I look forward to a follow-up question so 
I can continue to answer. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Regina Douglas 
Park. 

Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, last week the minister said, and I 
quote, “. . . I certainly hope the member opposite isn’t 
suggesting in any way that politicians should be deciding on 
who’s on the wait-list.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard this line from the past minister, and it 
would seem that the new minister hasn’t even bothered to come 
up with his own spin. This insinuation is incredibly 
disrespectful to Emily’s mother, Jennifer; in fact Jenn has gone 
out of her way to point out that this is not just about her little 
girl. No child, no one should have to wait in pain for a year and 
a half. 
 
No one is asking for special favours, Mr. Speaker. When will 
this government take responsibility for a health care system 
where parents can’t get the care they need for their kids? And 
will the minister apologize for suggesting that this was about 
anything other than trying to fix the system? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, since we were given the 
privilege of forming government, we’ve made health care a 
priority. Mr. Speaker, we’ve increased funding by over 50 per 
cent since we formed government in 2007. 
 
To the issue that the member opposite raised last week on 
specialists, for example, while overall there’s close to 650 more 
doctors in the province today than there was in 2007, those are 
not only GPs [general practitioner], Mr. Speaker. Two hundred 
and ninety of those are GPs; that’s a 30 per cent increase over 
2007. Three hundred and forty-three more specialists, Mr. 
Speaker; that’s a 44 per cent increase since 2007. That’s not to 
mention other health care professionals, including over 3,000 
more nurses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the point I was simply trying to make to the 
member opposite is politicians shouldn’t decide where patients 
are in the queue. That needs to be done by medical experts. I’m 
glad that Jennifer is going to have an opportunity to speak to 
her specialist tomorrow. It’s specialists that need to make those 
decisions. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Coroner Examinations of In-Custody Deaths 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, last week I asked about the Sask 
Party’s latest strategy to deal with the backlog of coroner’s 
inquests: to remove the requirement for a coroner’s inquest. 
Even though these inquests are crucial to providing 
transparency and justice and giving families some answers, and 
even though they are key to allowing the system to learn and 
improve, they are removing the requirement for the coroner to 
hold an inquest into a death in custody. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when first asked about this legislation, both in the 
House and by reporters outside, the minister denied the 
consequences of this bill. Mr. Speaker, this legislation is short 
and it is clear. Why was the minister, and apparently his 
ministry, not aware of the content and consequences of this 
government bill? 



October 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 971 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
think I was very clear in the House last week. Mr. Speaker, the 
coroner will continue to investigate all in-custody deaths. The 
question as to whether or not he will hold an inquest into any 
particular death is now within his discretion, Mr. Speaker. And 
there’s always the discretion within the Ministry of Justice, in 
my office, Mr. Speaker, to call an inquest if one isn’t called.  
 
But he will continue to investigate, Mr. Speaker, following two 
other investigations — one by the police, Mr. Speaker, and one 
by the Corrections people. And that report that he does, his 
investigation, will be a public document, Mr. Speaker. If, as a 
result of his investigation, he determines that an inquest is 
necessary, as with in any other death that happens in 
Saskatchewan, he will call an inquest. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, another definition change. And 
while I appreciate the minister’s sincerity, as one journalist 
pointed out, that government is now asking us to have more 
faith in his office and the coroner’s office, and at the same time 
he’s admitting his office dropped the ball. The minister 
admitted this and said: 
 

It’s a bit ironic, and I should have been better informed 
with respect to the legislation. I’m going to go back to my 
office and have a consultation with my ministry officials. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, has the minister had that consultation? Can he 
inform the House now if his position on this piece of legislation 
has changed, and he is prepared to withdraw this wrong and 
dangerous bill? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I can inform 
the House that we will not be withdrawing the bill, Mr. 
Speaker. We have great confidence in the coroner and in the 
work that he does, Mr. Speaker, so there will be an 
investigation that’s done with respect to any in-custody death, 
Mr. Speaker. That will be a public investigation. That will be 
made public. And if any circumstances arise as a result of that 
investigation, it gives rise to the coroner thinking then there 
needs to be an inquest so that he can inquire further into it, that 
will happen, Mr. Speaker. But we will be proceeding with the 
legislation and continue to have full confidence in the coroner’s 
office to continue his work. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Measures to Reduce Impaired Driving 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, today impaired driving and its 
devastating consequences are front of mind. Last year 53 people 

were killed and 562 were injured due to impaired driving. We 
simply must do better at addressing this issue. 
 
The changes announced today are important, and we called for 
the core of them three years ago. But more enforcement on the 
road is a big part of this too. People need to know that they will 
be caught. 
 
The combined traffic safety services Saskatchewan pilot project 
added an additional 60 enforcement officers to the road. This 
was fully phased in for 2015. Half of the funding came from the 
Auto Fund and is administered by SGI, one of our province’s 
Crown corporations. 
 
The Premier wants to be able to get rid of 49 per cent of this 
Crown. If SGI is sold, would there still be co-operative work to 
ensure that we have the enforcement on the road that we need to 
deal with impaired driving? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments and SGI. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 
the member opposite for the question. Mr. Speaker, impaired 
driving is a top priority for this government, and we intend to, 
as we’ve seen far too many deaths on the road, we intend to 
deal with that. Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the opportunity to meet 
with many families of victims of impaired driving as well as 
representatives from Mothers Against Drunk Driving and 
students against drunk driving as well as various members of 
the police forces, municipal and RCMP [Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police] throughout the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is very important to this government, and we 
will be taking action on it very, very soon. And we will 
hopefully drive the numbers down from what they currently are. 
There’s far too many, and our target will be zero deaths from 
impaired driving, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 42 — The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous  
Enforcement Measures) Amendment Act, 2016 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of SGI. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 42, 
The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous Enforcement Measures) 
Amendment Act, 2016 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister 
Responsible for Saskatchewan Government Insurance that Bill 
No. 42, the traffic safety amendment Act, 2016 be now 
introduced and read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? I 



972 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2016 

recognize the Minister of SGI. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I request leave to consider all stages of 
the bill immediately. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to consider 
all stages of the bill immediately. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Leave has been granted. I recognize 
the Minister of SGI. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 42 — The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous  
Enforcement Measures) Amendment Act, 2016 

 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today 
to move second reading of The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous 
Enforcement Measures) Amendment Act, 2016. Last year in our 
province, there were nearly 1,200 impaired driving collisions 
killing 53 people and injuring 578 others. Mr. Speaker, our 
government takes this issue very seriously. That’s why we are 
taking action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, allow me to outline the specific amendments in 
this bill, which built on the already significant changes we 
introduced back in 2014. Currently, for experienced drivers 
with a blood alcohol content between .04 and .08, vehicles 
aren’t impounded until a second offence. We’re changing that 
to impoundment on the first offence. British Columbia and 
Alberta have seen success with this approach of impoundment 
on the first offence, and we’re optimistic we will see similar 
results. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re also proposing to change the zero tolerance 
threshold for drugs and alcohol. This is currently limited to 
drivers under the age of 19. Drivers age 19 to 21 are 
overrepresented in alcohol-related collisions compared to 
drivers under 19. That’s why we are proposing the zero 
tolerance threshold apply to all drivers 21 years of age and 
under. Other jurisdictions such as Ontario, New Brunswick, 
Quebec, and Manitoba have had positive results with similar 
legislation in place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ignition interlock devices prevent drivers from 
operating a vehicle if they have alcohol in their system. Mr. 
Speaker, this legislation proposes further strengthening ignition 
interlock measures. These include imposing longer interlock 
periods for blood alcohol content over .16 or refusing to provide 
a breath sample, imposing longer interlock periods on second 
and third offences for experienced drivers over .08, imposing 
mandatory interlock for third or subsequent offences for new 
drivers with any drugs or alcohol in their system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, along with the changes I’ve just outlined, I’m 
pleased to announce our commitment to provide $800,000 for 
an additional 32 automated licence plate readers to help police 
catch disqualified drivers. This brings the total to 47, enough to 
equip all enforcement vehicles in the combined traffic services 
Saskatchewan pilot. This pilot involves 60 officers dedicated to 
traffic safety enforcement, targeting problematic roads and 

intersections in central and southeast regions of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are also providing $500,000 for law 
enforcement to increase checkstops targeting impaired drivers. 
Knowing there will be more police checkstops provides an extra 
motivation for people to plan a safe ride ahead of time. 
 
Further on the education side, Mr. Speaker, SGI is bolstering 
awareness of impaired driving consequences through 
multi-media advertising campaigns and social media channels 
with the goal of changing driver behaviour. Members have 
likely seen many of those ads which are currently running. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also know that distracted driving is an issue in 
this province. In response to recommendations from law 
enforcement, we are also strengthening cellphone legislation. 
We are changing the offence to holding, viewing, using, or 
manipulating a mobile device while driving instead of simply 
using a mobile device, which is the current wording. 
 
There are also a few smaller housekeeping amendments, Mr. 
Speaker. The first includes removing all vehicle impoundment 
and driver licence suspension forms from the regulations and 
placing the requirements for them in the Act. Currently, 
regulatory changes are required every time a prescribed form is 
amended because the form is specifically identified in the 
regulations. These forms are primarily used by law enforcement 
to carry out their duties, so we want to make sure we can get 
them from the updated forms when required. 
 
A final housekeeping change we’re making, Mr. Speaker, is 
around dealer licence plates. This past February, the Financial 
and Consumer Affairs Authority made changes to The 
Consumer Protection and Business Practices Act, which 
governs companies that sell vehicles as part of their business. 
This resulted in the unintended consequence that several 
businesses and entities that regularly use dealer plates no longer 
qualified for them. The proposed change to this Act essentially 
allows SGI to continue to administer dealer plates the way it 
always has. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of The Traffic Safety 
(Miscellaneous Enforcement Measures) Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance that Bill No. 42, the traffic safety 
amendment Act, 2016, be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member from 
Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the minister 
for his comments. And we’ve just had the opportunity to just 
now look over Bill 42. Mr. Speaker, not only are we ready to 
ensure swift passage of the bill today, members from this side 
of the House were ready to see certain of those measures 
proposed in this bill enacted over three years ago when they 
issued a minority opinion on the Special Committee on Traffic 
Safety final report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as was noted in 2013, to continue to ignore the 
profound evidence of the efficacy of a mandatory three-day 
impoundment of vehicles for drivers found in the warning zone 



October 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 973 

would be to risk more lives in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, as 
the families in your gallery know all too well, too many lives 
have been impacted and lost in our province due to impaired 
and distracted driving. To the families with us today, and all 
families impacted by this senseless crime, you have our deep 
and sincere sympathy. Please know that we will be paying close 
attention to ensure that the regulations associated with this 
legislation are robust and provide a clear path. We will also be 
watching to ensure that the resources needed for effective 
enforcement are forthcoming, adequate, and secure. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I will call upon the minister to do 
what he needs to do in order to provide swift passage of this 
bill. There will be no delay from members on our side. This 
legislation is long overdue. 
 
The Speaker: — Question before the Assembly is the motion 
moved by the Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance that Bill No. 42, the traffic safety 
amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Minister of SGI. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I designate that Bill No. 42, The 
Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous Enforcement Measures) 
Amendment Act, 2016 be committed to the Committee of the 
Whole on Bills and that the said bill to be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills immediately. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Committee 
of the Whole on Bills. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Committee of the Whole on Bills. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for the House to go 
into Committee of the Whole on Bills. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ON BILLS 
 

Bill No. 42 — The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous  
Enforcement Measures) Amendment Act, 2016 

 
The Chair: — Members, the item before the committee is Bill 
No. 42, The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous Enforcement 
Measures) Amendment Act, 2016. Clause 1, short title, is that 
agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[Clauses 1 to 21 inclusive agreed to.] 
 
[14:45] 

The Chair: — Her Majesty, by and with the advice and consent 
of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, enacts as 
follows: Bill No. 42, The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous 
Enforcement Measures) Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
I recognize the Minister Responsible for SGI. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I move that the committee report the 
bill without amendment. 
 
The Chair: — It has been moved that the committee report Bill 
No. 42 without amendment. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Mr. Chair, I move that the committee 
rise, report progress, and ask leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — The Government House Leader has moved that 
the committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit 
again. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the committee to 
report Bill No. 42, The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous 
Enforcement Measures) Amendment Act, 2016 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read the third time? I 
recognize the Minister of SGI. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 42 — The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous  
Enforcement Measures) Amendment Act, 2016 

 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — I move that this bill be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that Bill No. 42, the traffic 
safety amendment Act, 2016 be now read the third time and 
passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 



974 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2016 

Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — At the next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 92 through 96. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered answers 
to questions 92 to 96. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answer to question 97 through 100. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled answers to 
questions 97 to 100. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 101 through 112. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered questions 
from 101 to 112. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 40 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016 
Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’interprétation 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today for the second 
reading of The Interpretation Act, 2016. Members of the 
Assembly will be aware that The Interpretation Act, 1995 
operates as a law of general application to provide interpretative 
direction and assistance to all forms of statutory instruments. 
 
This bill makes two changes to the Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Section 27 of The Interpretation Act sets out a series of 
definitions in terms of other bills, unless they are specifically 
overwritten within the text of a specific bill. For example, the 
terms like “bank” and “lawyer” are defined so that they don’t 
have to be defined in each legislative instrument that they are 
used in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this bill clarifies the term: 
 

‘privatize’ means, with respect to a Crown corporation, 
the transfer to the private sector of all or substantially all of 
the assets of the Crown corporation, the controlling interest 
. . . or the operational control of the Crown corporation . . . 
[by a variety of listed methods]. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, it will not include a winding up and 
dissolution of a Crown corporation or other restructuring of the 
Crown corporation. The bill will also provide the ability to use 
the regulations to add additional methods of transfer of control 
that will constitute privatization, if appropriate. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the definition is based on the World Bank 
definition of privatization. It will clarify what transactions will 
be considered a privatization under The Crown Corporations 
Public Ownership Act. It will also clarify what the term 
“privatized” means in any other Act, regulation, or bylaw that 
uses that term going forward. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is not about privatization of any 
particular Crown corporation. This definition clarifies the 
transactions that would be considered privatization and provides 
government the flexibility to restructure Crown corporations 
while still owning them. 
 
The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Act will continue to 
govern the process to be followed in the case of a privatization. 
With these changes, we will now have a better idea of what 
privatization means. Mr. Deputy Speaker, legislation without 
definition is meaningless. This legislation simply serves to 
provide clarity to legislation based on an authoritative and 
well-recognized definition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments also propose to ensure that the 
death of the monarch would not create undue legal problems or 
complications in our statutes. This is an interim measure until 
each of these references can be changed individually. These 
amendments will provide that when the sovereign is a king, any 
reference to “queen” in the statutes shall be interpreted to mean 
“king” and vice versa going forward. An amendment will also 
be made to the standard enacting clause for legislation so that 
“Her Majesty” will be changed to “His Majesty” where 
applicable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of The 
Interpretation Act, 2016. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Minister of Justice has moved 
that Bill No. 42, The Interpretation Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time. Is the Assembly ready for the question? I 
recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise in 
my place today to give our initial comments as the official 
opposition in reference to Bill No. 40, An Act to amend The 
Interpretation Act. And what I want to do for folks back home, 
those that may be tuning into this particular part of the 
Assembly process, is to understand what the bill is all about. 
 
Now what happens is we know we have Crown corporations 
that are owned by the people of Saskatchewan: SaskTel, 
SaskPower, SGI. These are all Crown corporations that are 
owned and certainly operated for, and by, and with the people 
of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. Speaker, we often maintain on this 
side of the Assembly, within the NDP [New Democratic Party] 
ranks,, that some of these Crown corporations are very 
important for the people of Saskatchewan. They’re very 
important for the province overall. 
 



October 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 975 

And as a party position, the New Democratic Party position is 
that there should be no privatization of any of the Crowns 
whatsoever in any way, shape, or form, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 
something that we certainly have continued to uphold as a party 
that believes in the Crowns, Mr. Speaker. So it’s really 
important for the people of Saskatchewan to hear from the party 
perspective, that the New Democratic Party of Saskatchewan 
and the people of Athabasca always believe that the protection 
of the Crowns, ownership of the Crowns is so very important 
for the future of our province, for our children and 
grandchildren. 
 
Now what this bill does, Mr. Speaker, and this is where we get 
kind of confused as to what the Saskatchewan Party is all about. 
And make no mistake, the Saskatchewan Party has a lot of 
conservative leanings, Mr. Speaker. We all know that half the 
caucus over there are either card-carrying federal conservatives, 
Mr. Speaker, or certainly are supporters of the Conservative 
Party of Saskatchewan overall. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it’s really important . . . Now they come 
along and they’re talking about the Crown corporations in 
general. And this bill talks about, of all things, what is meant by 
privatization. They are playing a bit of word semantics here, 
Mr. Speaker, in the sense of saying, well what does the actual 
interpretation of privatization mean?  
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the question that we have on this side of the 
Assembly, any time you begin to meddle in those 
interpretations of wording within the ownership of the Crown 
corporations, it all denotes, certainly to my colleagues and 
myself, the fact that they do have a nefarious agenda when it 
comes to the future of our Crowns. And no matter what kind of 
wordsmithing or what kind of interpretation that they wish to 
throw our way, when it comes to privatization I’d like to echo 
the sentiments and comments of our current leader, the member 
from Regina, in which he says, quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, 
where he says quite frankly that privatization is privatization is 
privatization. 
 
Now what this bill does, Mr. Speaker, is according to the 
minister’s initial comments, as he says, this bill creates a new 
definition of privatization that allows the government to wind 
down, dissolve, or sell up to 49 per cent of the shares of a 
Crown corporation without holding a referendum. 
 
Now I want to re-indicate the gist of what the bill is all about. 
Bill 40, what the bill does, Mr. Speaker, is it creates a definition 
— a new definition — for privatization, that allows the 
government to wind down, dissolve, or sell up to 49 per cent of 
the shares of a Crown corporation without holding a 
referendum. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this to me, I think the point that I would 
raise, Mr. Speaker, is if that doesn’t spell out privatization, Mr. 
Speaker, well let me assure the people of Saskatchewan that on 
this side of the Assembly, and many corners and quarters of our 
province of Saskatchewan, that spells privatization to many 
people across the province, Mr. Speaker. And this new 
interpretation Act that defines the word “privatize” is just silly 
games being played by the Saskatchewan Party to do exactly 
what they wanted to do all along, Mr. Speaker, is really begin 
the process of selling our Crowns. 

Now what’s really important, Mr. Speaker, is that they never 
went to the public on this one. In the last election, the word 
“privatization” didn’t come along as something that they 
needed to interpret properly, Mr. Speaker. The Premier, the 
cabinet, and every candidate on that side of the Assembly that 
were elected, Mr. Speaker, didn’t have the courage to talk to 
people about laws of this sort or interpretations of privatization, 
so they kept very quiet during the election, Mr. Speaker. They 
didn’t mention privatization all along. They kept away from this 
and the Premier kept on indicating to people that that was not 
on the agenda. And, Mr. Speaker, a mere seven months later, 
we have this Act that says, well we’re now trying to interpret 
what privatization means, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this is where we get a . . . It would be funny if it wasn’t 
serious, Mr. Speaker. When you look at the whole notion of, 
well the World Bank, the World Bank is indicating this is what 
privatization means, that we’re allowed to sell 49 per cent, and 
it’s still considered not privatization, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan are not that silly. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Now how does this affect our communities, Mr. Speaker? So 
let’s be clear: from the party perspective, the New Democratic 
Party supports the continued 100 per cent ownership of all 
Crown corporations in Saskatchewan by, and for, and with the 
people of Saskatchewan. We’re not going to interpret what 
privatization means as per the conservatives’ way of dealing 
with this whole notion of trying to sell off Crown by Crown by 
Crown, Mr. Speaker. We’re simply not buying that argument, 
Mr. Speaker, and we never will. 
 
Now here’s what the crux of the problem is, Mr. Speaker. 
Because the Saskatchewan Party refused to be truthful, Mr. 
Speaker, before the election on the future of the Crowns, Mr. 
Speaker, they went into the election with their lips sealed. They 
never had the courage to tell the people what their plan was. 
Now today, seven months later, they’re saying, well we’re 
going to look at this now. Now, Mr. Speaker, to me, I mean that 
spells out betrayal in its most purest form, Mr. Speaker. 
Because the bottom line is because you don’t have the courage 
to tell the people the exact fact of what you had planned for the 
Crown corporations, then perhaps you should have been more 
forthcoming with your position. And you chose to not say 
anything, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now what I want to point out to the people out there in 
Saskatchewanland what exactly are the values of the Crown? 
And I can tell you from my perspective and my history that, as 
you manage the provincial economy of Saskatchewan, as you 
look at some of the challenges facing the economy overall, 
you’ve got to make sure that there’s a role for large 
corporations and the small business community to thrive in 
Saskatchewan. We understand that on this side of the 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. We know that investment by a wide 
variety of companies — big and small and certainly medium — 
are very necessary to our economy. 
 
We also know, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve got to have a good 
balance between making sure that we support and protect the 
labour force that’s going to help these resource-based 
companies develop these opportunities. We understand that as 



976 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2016 

well. That’s the second most important cylinder in this whole 
economic engine that we’re trying to build here in the province 
of Saskatchewan. So that’s really, really important. 
 
So we lay it out as a New Democratic Party. There’s three or 
four pieces that are pretty crucial to the future of our economy, 
pretty crucial to the future of continuing to look at 
Saskatchewan, and promoting a better and brighter future for 
many people to come to our province and to make it their home. 
 
So what’s really important, Mr. Speaker, is that you have a 
good atmosphere or a good environment to invest for big, small, 
and medium-sized businesses, Mr. Speaker. It is important for 
us to make sure that we have the proper skilled labour force, 
that we also protect that labour force through organizations, and 
certainly the collective strength of things like unions, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re also really important because the unions have 
to make sure that they protect their workers. They’re there for 
the workers, and their rights need to be incorporated. And some 
of the things that we’re doing to really stimulate our economy 
all provide services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The third part, which is really important, it’s incumbent upon 
governments, Mr. Speaker, to try, and part of their process to 
create the environments to make sure that we take care of our 
environmental challenge as well — that there’s water, there’s 
air, there’s oil, there’s soil. There’s all these issues that we have 
to incorporate. 
 
And when we looked at issues, Mr. Speaker, that talked about 
investment for Saskatchewan, the environmental guidelines 
were pretty darn important as well because people obviously 
expect that. Because a good example on the Husky Oil spill, 
Mr. Speaker, there was a number of communities that were in 
an uproar. They wanted to see what was going on. How did this 
happen, look at the damage that was created, look at the cost for 
the city of Prince Albert and some of the First Nations along the 
Saskatchewan River watershed, Mr. Speaker. These were some 
of the issues that really came to bear and really came to light 
when this whole oil spill occurred, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it’s important that people understand there’s four or five 
moving parts to building the economy of Saskatchewan. As I 
said, one is of course to make sure we have a good climate to 
attract investment, again from big, small, and medium-sized 
business, that we do our best to ensure that the workforce is 
available to help drive the economy forward by making sure 
that there’s some good representation that protects workers’ 
health, workers’ benefits, and of course, salary as well because 
they’re all part of the economy, Mr. Speaker. And also of 
course, you look at the environmental protection of any 
development. That’s also an important consideration when 
designing the economy of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the fourth cylinder, Mr. Speaker, if you will, in this 
economic engine-building process, is our Crown corporations, 
Mr. Speaker. I want to sit and talk about the Crown 
corporations for just a minute because it’s all interconnected. 
The province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, has the 
opportunity to enjoy ownership of a number of Crown 
corporations. 
 
And let me be very, very clear that these corporations, these 

Crown corporations, offer a lot of benefit and value to the 
people of Saskatchewan. And I’ll say it again: they offer a lot of 
value and benefit to the people of Saskatchewan. And it’s no 
small part on their effort, Mr. Speaker, that we recognize that 
they have had a huge, a huge commitment to the Crown 
corporations — I’m talking about the employees and the 
managers — to make sure that some of these Crown 
corporations are doing what they can for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’ll go so far as to say this, Mr. Speaker, that as you look at 
some of the Crown corporations . . . I’ll use SaskTel as an 
example. SaskTel is able to do what the Saskatchewan Party 
cannot do for the economy of Saskatchewan. SaskTel has 
created services, Mr. Speaker; they have created employment 
opportunities, and they have created profit for the people of 
Saskatchewan. That’s something that the Saskatchewan Party 
cannot do, and that’s where we begin to tell the people of 
Saskatchewan that there is a difference between the 
Saskatchewan Party politics and the reality of a Crown 
corporation called SaskTel. 
 
So look at SaskPower, Mr. Speaker, look at SaskTel. They are 
able to do something that the Saskatchewan Party has not been 
able to do, Mr. Speaker, and that is create jobs, create profits, 
and create good services. And this is why, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
totally beyond reason as to why a government would come in 
and try and sell these Crown corporations off from the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So once they are sold, Mr. Speaker, we can never get them 
back. That’s the important argument that I have to the people of 
Saskatchewan that might be listening to this debate around the 
Crowns because it’s not an interpretation debate as the Minister 
of Justice would have us believe, Mr. Speaker. It is clearly a 
definition, and privatization or not to privatize, Mr. Speaker. 
From our perspective, that’s all we’re going to add to the people 
of Saskatchewan. That’s the angle we’re taking on Bill 40. We 
know that’s their agenda, Mr. Speaker, and no matter what the 
definition is, privatization is privatization is privatization. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that’s really important is, 
look at some of the wording. This is what’s really perplexing to 
myself as a layperson. When we use the legal jargon, I 
understand from the minister some of the jargon that he’s used 
in describing this bill: transfer of control if appropriate. Like 
what does that “if appropriate” really mean? These are some of 
the wording that we look at . . . [inaudible] . . . the bill and we 
see some of the language that is being used, and people of 
Saskatchewan should be very, very worried. Because if you 
look at some of the legal jargon that is being used, the average 
person such as myself, we don’t have a lot of legal background 
in terms of being trained or even understanding what some of 
the jargon means. But to me, as an everyday person, “if 
appropriate” . . . Well “if appropriate” by who? Or for whom? 
And from whom? 
 
See, these are some of the questions I would have right off the 
cuff, is how do you begin the process of understanding what 
their intent is through The Interpretation Act? Because to us, if 
they start meddling with the definition for privatization, Mr. 
Speaker, it really begins to beg the question: what is their 
agenda? What is their agenda? 



October 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 977 

Now I want to point out, some of the people that I speak to that 
are conservatives in general, they tell us . . . This is what they 
tell us. They say, well we know the province is in debt. But you 
know, a lot of the conservatives folks say, well we don’t like to 
see tax increases. A lot of them tell us that. And they also tell 
us, we don’t like to see a lot of waste either. We kind of hate 
that stuff, that waste that the governments do from time to time. 
 
And I talked to a lot of them, Mr. Speaker, and a lot of them 
give me some other perspectives on what they think of the debt, 
what they think of the Crowns. And a lot of those people that 
are of the conservative thinking. They think that yes, the 
Crowns are a good thing to have. And I ask, why? And they 
say, well because it gives us a certain security that our 
insurances won’t go through the roof, as an example, with SGI. 
It gives us a certain perspective on, for example, power rates, 
that they’re not going to go through the roof all of a sudden for 
my business or for my home. And, Mr. Speaker, these are some 
of the points that they make. But more importantly what they 
say . . . Well they talk about the security the Crown provides 
them. Many of the people that don’t want to see tax increases 
highlight that as well. 
 
But then they turn around and say the most perplexing thing to 
me when I ask them, well what do you think of the sale of the 
Crown? The vast majority of the conservatives that I speak to, 
Mr. Speaker, they say there’s no value in selling the Crowns 
because they’ll see the Saskatchewan Party just simply 
squander that money once again through mismanagement or 
through some of the scandals that they’ve been having. So 
what’s the use of selling the Crowns if all they’re going to do is 
play with the profit, end up wasting all that money through 
scandals and mismanagement, and we’re no further ahead when 
it comes to the scheme of things? 
 
So a lot of the conservatives share that stuff and some of their 
points with me. And so they, themselves, a lot of the 
conservatives, they tell us that the vast majority of them don’t 
believe that the Crowns should be sold. And the reason they say 
that, Mr. Speaker, is for a number of reasons. Like I said earlier, 
these Crowns create jobs. They create services and they 
maintain services, Mr. Speaker. And more importantly, they 
create profit for the people of Saskatchewan, something that the 
Saskatchewan Party can’t do. And that’s where you begin to 
deviate that the lines, or certainly explain the lines and describe 
the lines between what a Crown corporation is and what the 
Saskatchewan Party stands for, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s no question in my mind that The Interpretation Act is 
simply a Trojan Horse to try and achieve the agenda for the 
people of Saskatchewan without going to a referendum, Mr. 
Speaker, to try and allow them to privatize where they are able 
to do, under the guise of The Interpretation Act. And I say to 
them, Mr. Speaker, shame on them for not coming forward with 
this kind of agenda. Prior to the election they should have been 
talking about this, but not one Saskatchewan Party MLA or 
candidate said a peep about this, Mr. Speaker. It’s because they 
never had the courage to go to the people of Saskatchewan with 
these particular Acts and these particular bills. 
 
Now I want to go on further about the Saskatchewan Party and 
how this Act, Mr. Speaker, that is going to define privatization 
for our Crowns, how is it going to affect the finances of our 

province? How is it going to affect the finances of our 
province? Well we on this side of the Assembly, we maintain 
over time that there is a number of moving parts to our 
economic plan that’s important. I talk about the labour unions. I 
talk about the investment opportunity, the environmental 
protection, Mr. Speaker, and the role of the Crowns. 
 
A lot of people also say that we have to make sure we keep our 
taxes low. A lot of the conservative people that I sit down with 
talk about keeping the taxes low. But this is what I’ll tell the 
conservative people out there that are maybe listening to this 
particular component of our Assembly. Number one is that if 
you look at the Saskatchewan Party themselves, they have put 
the province in debt. We all know that. We’re going to find out 
fairly soon what that debt load is, and the vast majority, the vast 
majority of people know that the debt is big and it’s getting 
bigger each day. 
 
We know that when the Saskatchewan Party took over, they had 
record revenue. Debt was falling. The economy was certainly 
pumping on all cylinders, and the population was growing. And 
a scant eight years later, Mr. Speaker, we’re now in debt. We 
are now in the hole so bad, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan 
won’t see light for the next 10, 12 years. 
 
Now what’s really important, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
conservative people that I speak to understand that we’re going 
to have more debt. They understand that. And what worries 
them, Mr. Speaker, is how is that debt going to be paid? They 
don’t think selling the Crowns is going to help because they 
believe, a lot of them believe that the Saskatchewan Party will 
just squander that money. It’s going to be either mismanaged or 
it’s going to be eaten up in some scandal, and six, seven years 
later that money that we sell the Crowns for will be gone. 
That’s what they think right now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you look at the Crown dividends. I’m talking about the 
taxpayers’ perspective here. So if you don’t have the money 
from the sale of the Crowns to work with, Mr. Speaker, if you 
don’t have the dividends, the dividends that the Crown 
corporations give to the people of Saskatchewan each and every 
year. And I think the amount that we’re giving to Saskatchewan 
each and every year, 2015 and 2016, Mr. Speaker, the Crown 
corporations almost returned almost $300 million, $300 million, 
Mr. Speaker — $300 million that the Crown corporations gave 
to the province of Saskatchewan in 2015-2016, Mr. Speaker. So 
they make $300 million for us each and every year and that’s 
profit for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Well guess what? That profit displaces pressure on the 
government to go back to the taxpayer and ask them for more 
money. That’s how simple this is for the Saskatchewan Party 
not to understand it. That’s how simple it is. This way, and I tell 
a lot of my conservative friends, this way you don’t have to 
keep going back to guys like you that are complaining about 
paying more taxes because the Crown corporation makes $300 
million a year for you. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we see the debt going up. We see that they 
want to sell off the Crowns. That money will be blown through 
mismanagement or scandal; we know that. That’s going to 



978 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2016 

happen for certain, Mr. Speaker. And then just to add more 
problems, Mr. Speaker, to the future of our finances by selling 
off the Crowns, to add more problems, Mr. Speaker, they also, 
the Saskatchewan Party added a new concept to really put the 
nail in the coffin of the future of Saskatchewan. And those 
concepts are called P3s, Mr. Speaker, because we’re going to be 
paying P3s for the rest of our natural lives in this room right 
now, Mr. Speaker. For the next 20, 30 years, for the next 20 or 
30 years we’ll be paying for P3. 
 
And the members opposite know exactly what they’re doing 
when they’re really mortgaging the future of our province 
through expensive P3s. And I’m going to explain a bit later how 
that’s connected to the Crown corporations because it’s all, it’s 
all connected, Mr. Speaker. It is all connected. 
 
So every single year, when a company comes to Saskatchewan 
and says, I want to build a school, and the people of 
Saskatchewan kind of like that idea of having brand new 
schools, but they need to know . . . And that’s exactly what our 
argument is. When the NDP proposed the P3 accountability and 
transparency bill, Mr. Speaker, the NDP wanted to know, what 
were we going to pay for these P3 deals? And accountability 
and interpretation, the interpretation Act for the P3s, Mr. 
Speaker, guess what? It didn’t come out. There is no 
interpretation Act for the P3s. Then we asked for an 
accountability and transparency in the P3s. Well that didn’t 
come out. 
 
And surprise, surprise, a couple of years later, six months, 
seven months after the last election, now there’s an 
interpretation Act for the Crown corporations of the province of 
Saskatchewan. And if they think they’re fooling anyone, Mr. 
Speaker, I would suggest to the backbenchers, talk to your 
constituents; talk to the people out there. They’ll tell how they 
value Crowns. But they won’t even have that conversation 
today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what’s really important is that as you look at the debt, the 
debt that’s piling up under the Saskatchewan Party — and it’s 
piling up, folks — and then you look at the fact that they have 
saddled future generations with expensive P3 deals from out of 
. . . never mind out of province, but out of country, Mr. 
Speaker. They’ve saddled the future of our province, and 
saddled the future generations with debt. And every single one 
of their names on the Saskatchewan Party caucus today will be 
attached to that particular aspect of how they governed in 2007 
to 2016 and counting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That will be the sad legacy for every single member across the 
way. They knew this was happening. They put Saskatchewan in 
this predicament, and they should be ashamed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So now we look at this whole notion, Mr. Speaker. Look at this 
whole notion. The fact is they had the debt piling up. They want 
to sell off the Crowns so the dividends are gone. They got these 
P3 deals that they’re going to saddle us with for a number of 
years in the future. And then you also have your future 
demands. As a community and a province, we really have some 
future demands that we need to meet as we begin the process of 
building a brand new Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So all those factors . . . The dividends are gone. Dividends are 

gone from the Crowns. Well guess what? We’ve got to go to the 
taxpayers to replace those dividends. The debt is there, Mr. 
Speaker. The debt is there. So guess what, people? We’ve got to 
go to the taxpayer to help cover that debt. And you look at the 
P3s, the expensive P3s, and we’ve got to pay for them, right, 
because these deals are signed for 20 or 30 years. Well guess 
what? We’ve got to go to that taxpayer again. 
 
And then there’s, look at future demands and needs that our 
province had. Well we have to go to that taxpayer again, Mr. 
Speaker. And there you have an embattled taxpayer that is 
going to be required to pay more and more and more because 
the Sask Party couldn’t manage their way out of a wet paper 
bag when it comes to the economy, nor the future of our 
finances in the province of Saskatchewan. And that’s an 
absolute shame, Mr. Speaker, in this day and age. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan are finally starting to get it. So 
I say to my conservative colleagues, a lot of them that I talk to, 
I tell them, is this what you guys really want? Because in the 
future, that’s exactly what you’re going to get. 
 
There’s only one taxpayer, Mr. Speaker. There’s only one 
taxpayer and the Saskatchewan Party is making sure that the 
next 10, 15, 20, 30 years that that taxpayer is going to be 
required to pay more and more and more and more, Mr. 
Speaker. And this is one more plan that they have in their 
ill-advised strategy, Mr. Speaker, is to look at selling off the 
Crowns. Why would you sell off the Crowns? Mr. Speaker, 
that’s what we simply cannot understand. 
 
So as you look at all the arguments we’ve made and the 
interpretations, Mr. Speaker, it is quite frankly, it is absolutely 
alarming, Mr. Speaker, that they would propose this kind of 
concept in this day and age. 
 
Now I look at SaskTel. I want to talk a bit about SaskTel. When 
SaskTel first came, Mr. Speaker, came to the North many, 
many years ago, it was actually a tremendous improvement to 
the lives of people in the North. And when we were in 
government, we certainly added dimensions to SaskTel. And 
one of these dimensions we had was, of course, the cell 
coverage. And SaskTel really looked at the North and the 
Aboriginal communities as a good place to invest. 
 
But the fact of the matter is, Mr. Speaker, little did SaskTel 
realize how wanting the Aboriginal communities were of some 
of these services. Not just the everyday consumer, Mr. Speaker, 
but the business people and certainly the emergency 
preparedness people like the police and the ambulance services 
folks, the health care personnel. All these organizations really 
wanted to have cell coverage, Mr. Speaker. And as a pilot 
project, we undertook cell coverage to four communities in my 
area, Mr. Speaker. La Loche, Buffalo Narrows, Beauval, and 
Ile-a-la-Crosse were the first four communities that really were 
looked at as an opportunity for these northern communities to 
have cellphone coverage in my region because I think La Ronge 
enjoyed that already. 
 
Now what SaskTel at the time were thinking, well how much is 
this going to cost to put in these services and how much could 
we recover? Well, Mr. Speaker, on a very limited basis, they 
were very careful not to project the use too high because they 



October 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 979 

wanted to make sure because . . . I won’t use the word 
conservative but, you know, it kind of gives me a headache 
every now and then when I use that word. So they were trying 
to make sure that they were realistic in what they could expect 
and what they could expect for the use of the cellphone 
coverage. But to make a long story short, Mr. Speaker, the 
amount of use that SaskTel projected that the northern 
Saskatchewan community would use on this pilot project for the 
four towns I think was almost quadruple what they anticipated. 
 
So I think it really shows the fact that the Saskatchewan people 
are proud of their Crown corporation. And you look at some of 
the commercials that we have right now, Mr. Speaker, and J.D. 
Power has given numerous awards to SaskTel. So we look at 
how they’ve expanded to the Aboriginal community, look at 
how they’ve served the business community, look at how 
they’ve really given a number of services in some of the areas 
that were underserved and remote. Look at the far North as an 
example, Mr. Speaker. These are valuable economic tools, 
being able to use a cellphone for services and just to use 
technology overall, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And SaskTel has won numerous, numerous awards in a wide 
variety of categories that really I think depicts what our 
argument is, that these Crown corporations are highly valuable 
and they have done something that the Saskatchewan Party 
cannot do. They’ve created jobs, they’ve provided good 
services, and they’ve created profit for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And yet these political masters, so to speak, Mr. Speaker, they 
want to come along and sell some of these Crowns. And how 
are they going to do it? They weren’t bold and brave to do it 
during the election, Mr. Speaker. They were not bold nor brave 
to do this before the election, Mr. Speaker, but seven months 
after the writ has been dropped and they were re-elected, now 
all of a sudden we’re hearing them scream from their seats that 
this is something that is pressing for the future, something that 
we have to do. And, Mr. Speaker, I say shame. I say shame. 
 
So I want to reiterate to the people of Saskatchewan that are 
looking at this particular bill, there’s one thing I think is really 
important that I want to say to the Premier and to the cabinet: if 
you want to sell a Crown corporation, how about the proposal 
that I have? How about we simply wait for another three years 
— in the scheme of time for the people of Saskatchewan, three 
years is not a lot of time — and let’s have an election on the 
matter. Let’s have a general provincial election where you guys 
state with courage, something you didn’t show last time, with 
courage, your position on privatization, and we will state ours. 
And we’ll have the people of Saskatchewan vote on whether 
they want to keep the Crown corporations as they are or 
whether they want to sell them off as the Saskatchewan Party is 
proposing to do through interpretation and bills of this sort, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Why doesn’t the Saskatchewan Party have the courage to call 
an election? Let’s go to the people on this. Let’s call an election 
on this issue. We’ll wait three years, and see if you guys win 
that election. You know you won’t win. So you want to do that 
seven months after the election? You want to do this seven 
months after the election? It’s because you never had the 
courage to talk about this before the election. You lacked the 

courage to tell us about our finances. You lacked the courage to 
tell us about the GTH scandal. You lacked the courage to tell us 
where the cuts were coming. And finally, Mr. Speaker, you 
lacked the courage to tell us what your plans were for the 
Crown corporations. 
 
So I think one of the things that’s really important, Mr. Speaker, 
is the members opposite can sit in their places and do all the 
catcalling they want. But what I say to them: on this side of the 
Assembly, we have been very clear. We have been very 
steadfast. We have been very firm. And we have been very 
definitive that there will be no privatization of any part of any 
Crown corporation under the NDP watch. 
 
And if they want to play on certain words on that side of the 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, go ahead. But I say this to them. I say 
this to them. We had the conviction and the courage to say that 
prior to the last election. They did not. They hid behind a guise 
of deception, Mr. Speaker, and they refused to tell the people 
their true agenda on the Crown corporations. You know why, 
Mr. Speaker? Because they’re afraid that they would lose. 
 
And I would suggest to them, I would suggest to them, 
sometimes leadership is about doing the right thing. It may not 
be the most popular thing, but it’s the right thing to do. And 
that’s why, Mr. Speaker, when we sit here in the Assembly . . . 
Yes, we only have 10 members on this side of the Assembly. 
But rest assured, the 10 members on this side of the Assembly 
are . . . Their convictions around the Crown corporations are 
clear. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party refused to be forthright and direct with 
the people of Saskatchewan on the Crown corporations prior to 
the election. And, Mr. Speaker, they got elected with 51 
members. And I say today that if they had the courage . . . My 
second call for them to come to rise to the challenge of courage 
is, let’s have a debate on this, whether the Crowns should be 
sold or even the interpretations changed, as suggested under this 
Act, to have an election within three years. I think within three 
years, the mandate will be clear for us to go to the polls. Let’s 
have the election in three years. 
 
And how about the whole notion that privatization of our 
Crowns being the central plank on their campaign versus our 
position on the Crowns being the central plank? And I can tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, they know it across the way. They know it 
very well that had they run on this last spring, Mr. Speaker, they 
would have lost because the people of Saskatchewan have 
traditionally and will always, will always support ownership of 
the Crowns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the Minister of Finance chirps from his chair, Mr. 
Speaker. And we had been waiting, we had been waiting for the 
minister to speak in this Assembly about the finances. And 
here’s another example. He was one of the members that was 
very quiet, Mr. Speaker, during the campaign. During the 
campaign he was very quiet. You know why he was quiet, Mr. 
Speaker? Because he knew full well how bad the finances were. 
And they did not have him speak anywhere, Mr. Speaker. He 
was told, you be quiet; don’t talk about the finances because if 
the people find out how bad a shape we’re in, then we’re all in 
trouble, Mr. Speaker. 
 



980 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2016 

[15:30] 
 
And that’s exactly why the Minister of Finance is chirping from 
his chair now, because the election’s over. But the people of 
Saskatchewan, the people of Saskatchewan’s memory will run 
long, Mr. Speaker. And soon after the finances of our province 
become very apparent, Mr. Speaker, then I suggest 
three-quarters of them will either not be elected or they’ll head 
out of Dodge as quickly as they can because that’s going to be 
their legacy, Mr. Speaker, their legacy. That’s going to be their 
legacy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So if you look at this whole interpretation Act, all it is, this is a 
Trojan Horse for them to do what they always wanted. And you 
know why? We can certainly point to evidence, Mr. Speaker, is 
they’ve done this with the liquor stores, Mr. Speaker. They’ve 
done this with the Information Services Corporation. And 
eventually, Mr. Speaker, all Crowns are now open to this 
interpretation. And I would suggest to the people of 
Saskatchewan that the Saskatchewan Party was not honest with 
you when it came to their position around the Crowns, and there 
should be a price to pay for that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again I want to go out to the taxpayers, the people out there 
that are concerned about this. The Crowns make $300 million a 
year, $300 million a year we take out of the dividends of the 
Crown. Let’s set aside the amount of jobs that the Crowns 
create and also the services that they provide and the fact that 
these Crown corporations are on good financial footing. Mr. 
Speaker, let’s talk about what the government takes from them 
each year, 300 million bucks. And that’s a lot of money, Mr. 
Speaker, and once that money is gone, as SaskTel would be 
gone under the Sask Party’s watch, then those profits will be 
gone too. Rest assured, once the Crown corporations are sold, 
they are sold forever. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the Assembly, the 10 that 
have been elected and the many others that should have been 
elected, Mr. Speaker, we will continue holding up the argument 
that the Crown corporations are not for sale. They are not for 
sale, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I’ll say this, I’ll say this, that the Saskatchewan Party didn’t 
have the courage to come forward with their conviction around 
the Crown corporations or how well they’ve managed the 
finances of our province. They were very, very quiet. I suggest 
that 70 per cent of them didn’t know what was going on 
anyway, to begin with. But the 30 per cent that did know were 
very, very quiet. Had they had the conviction, Mr. Speaker, to 
tell the people the true state of our finances or what their intent 
behind the Crown corporations or the truth behind the GTH 
scandal, Mr. Speaker, the makeup in this Assembly would’ve 
been radically different, Mr. Speaker. It would have been 
radically different. 
 
And I think the Saskatchewan Party know that. They know that. 
So they didn’t win on principle. They didn’t win, Mr. Speaker, 
on their agenda. They won on keeping the true facts from the 
people of Saskatchewan, and I can tell you, that has a price to 
pay. And these are some of the examples around Bill No. 40, an 
Act to amend their interpretation of what privatization is all 
about, Mr. Speaker. Well we all know what that means on this 
side of the Assembly. 

Now one of the things that’s really, really important, Mr. 
Speaker, is the Premier made the notion that he was talking 
about the World Bank. The World Bank requires this of us; 
we’ll follow their interpretation. Well why don’t you follow 
what the people of Saskatchewan want? Ask them what the 
people of Saskatchewan want. 
 
So they’re going into this argument: the interpretation of the 
World Bank around privatization is, well anything below 49 per 
cent is fair game. So the question is, why didn’t you talk about 
that stuff prior? Why didn’t you talk about that stuff prior to the 
election? That’s what gets people so upset, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
what gets people so upset that they’re doing this now. 
 
And I say to the folks out there across the way, why didn’t you 
have the courage to tell the people of Saskatchewan what your 
agenda was around the Crown corporations before the last 
provincial election? Why didn’t you have the courage to tell 
people that’s what your plans were? Because you would’ve all 
had some significant problems on your hands. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when I watched on election night the results 
pour in, and you could almost see the Premier was 
shell-shocked at his celebration. He didn’t think he was going to 
win, again, that many seats. He really didn’t, Mr. Speaker. And 
do you know why he was shell-shocked, Mr. Speaker? Do you 
know why he was shell-shocked? Because he knew. The 
Premier knew and 90 per cent of them didn’t know that now 
they had to pay the piper, not only on the finances, Mr. Speaker, 
but all the other problems that he knew were going to be hitting 
Saskatchewan people. But he kept, he kept all that information 
away from the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So to those conservative people that have those issues which 
you want to see our finances run properly, we agree with you on 
the NDP side. Finances should be monitored and managed 
properly. But we also know there’s only one taxpayer. So the 
Crown corporations actually ease the burden on the provincial 
taxpayer because they share the dividends and the profits from 
their operation to help buffer the taxpayer from all these 
challenges. So, Mr. Speaker, I think what’s really, really 
important is that they understand that and we understand that. 
 
So I tell them again, selling off the Crown corporations, no 
matter how the Saskatchewan Party do it, no matter what 
language they create or whatever bill they propose, it’s not in 
the best interest of anyone in Saskatchewan, even those that 
want to see the . . . have this right-leaning or extreme 
right-leaning ideology. They know the value of the Crowns 
because the Crowns provide, as I said, they provide a level of 
stability to many of these people that are concerned about high 
taxation. They also provide what I think is important, a buffer 
for high taxes in the sense of giving us what we call dividends 
from the Crown corporations on an annual basis that really 
displaces the pressure that government need to put on their 
taxpayers. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as you look at all aspects of this bill, it is a 
shame. It is shame. And as long as we stand here in opposition 
each and every day, each and every day, we stand here with 
conviction around the Crowns. We stand here, the fact . . . 
knowing that the government of the day, the Saskatchewan 
Party government, didn’t have the courage to tell the people of 



October 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 981 

Saskatchewan the true state of our finances, and certainly didn’t 
have the courage to talk about their agendas around 
interpretation Acts when it comes to the privatization of our 
Crown corporations. 
 
So as you look at the issues that I’ve raised, Mr. Speaker, it is 
shameful that we’re seeing this particular action occur. And I’m 
glad to see that the Premier has joined us in the sense of 
indicating, Mr. Speaker, that, as he should have done prior to 
the last election . . .  
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the Government House 
Leader on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Point of order, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I ask the House Leader to briefly 
state his point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Point of order. The member from 
Athabasca well knows that he cannot reference who is in or 
outside the Chamber, and I ask him to withdraw and apologize. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The latest edition of the rules that 
have been developed over the years by the members indicates 
that a member may refer to an absence or presence of a 
member, but may not reflect on the reason why. That is 
something that I believe changed with the latest edition. And so 
I take . . . The member’s point of order is not well taken. I 
recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
would ask the Premier this question today, Mr. Speaker. We 
have an election plan for 2020. I would ask the Premier to 
accept the challenge laid down by the NDP around the future of 
the Crown corporations and this particular bill, An Act to amend 
The Interpretation Act. I’m going to ask the Premier of 
Saskatchewan that he accept the NDP challenge to have an 
election — maybe 2019 at the earliest convenience — to have 
an election on the future of the Crown corporations, Mr. 
Speaker, especially around SaskTel and this particular bill, what 
the bill is talking about. That’s the important point that I will 
raise. 
 
The Premier of Saskatchewan, had he had a conviction to tell 
the people of Saskatchewan what his plans were prior to the last 
election, not only around the Crown corporations but the state 
of our finances, Mr. Speaker, the makeup in this Assembly 
would have been radically different today. The Premier knows 
it. We know it, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why I think it’s 
important that we challenge him to the notion that they can hold 
off on your privatization agenda. Don’t go all crazy on us on 
trying to privatize everything, because the bottom line is we 
should ask the people of Saskatchewan if they want that to 
happen. 
 
So I would ask the Premier today: would he accept the NDP 
challenge to have an election on the future of our Crown 
corporations in 2019, which is probably the earliest that he 
could possibly hold an election? And we’ll go back to the 
people. I say, the referendum, to heck with the referendum. 
Let’s have an election on this, Mr. Speaker. Let’s have an 
election on the future of our Crown corporations. 

And I would challenge the Premier to do that, because 
obviously I think, Mr. Speaker, when I look at what happened 
in Alberta, I look at what happened in Alberta . . . And they’ve 
since lost their former premier. Premier Prentice certainly was a 
gentleman that I certainly watched in politics. And he’d done a 
lot of work federally and certainly provincially, and the Alberta 
people made him their leader and thus their premier. And over 
time he certainly stuck by many of the things that he believed 
in, Mr. Speaker. And even though we didn’t share politics, I 
still certainly admired the courage that he had and the 
conviction he had to state a lot of things. And prior to the last 
election in Alberta, Premier Prentice basically told the people of 
Alberta at the time that, here’s where our finances are, and 
we’re in this really tough spot. 
 
So we have a lot of soul searching to do. And, Mr. Speaker, 
Premier Prentice certainly had, I think, the conviction to tell the 
people the full story. And of course, as history shows, he lost 
the election, and certainly the bottom line is he told the people 
of Alberta the exact fact of where their finances were and 
certainly he paid the price for that. 
 
But it came to Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, the Premier and the 
Finance minister knew full well. They knew full well how bad 
the finances were last fall. And if anybody has any experience 
in government knows, typically what happens is around 
December and maybe even November, that pretty much each 
department knows what to expect in the budget. And the 
Finance minister should know and would know exactly what to 
expect next year, in next year’s prices, whether it would be oil 
or agricultural yields, and the list goes on. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the Premier knew, the Minister of Finance 
knew, the entire cabinet knew just how bad our finances were, 
Mr. Speaker, six or seven months before the election. Why? 
Because in order for us to fit the election timetable and the 
election cycle, most of the predictions were on price or the 
anticipated income for the province of Saskatchewan. Well they 
have what they call budget finalization. And my experience is 
budget finalization was usually done in the first part of 
December, and of course you’ve got to print the budget 
document. So I would suspect, Mr. Speaker, and very easy to 
surmise right now that both the Premier and the Minister of 
Finance knew full well just how broke they were. And unlike 
Premier Prentice, this Premier decided not to share that 
information with the people of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s a shame. And what’s really hurtful as well, Mr. 
Speaker, is the 10,000 people that were unemployed as a result 
of the downturn in the economy. There was no discussion 
around that as well. 
 
So now we talk about the Bill 40, The Interpretation Act. And I 
think it’s really, really important that this be part of the 
argument that we’re making around the courage and conviction 
of the Saskatchewan Party on not only maintaining our finances 
but protecting our Crowns. 
 
Now the World Bank, if you go to ask anybody around any 
particular community in the province, and I’m talking about . . . 
This is a good example I use. Many, many years ago I saw this 
commercial where, I can’t remember the actress’s name, was a 
spokesperson for Sprint. I think it’s Murphy Brown, Candice 
Bergen. She was doing a commercial for Sprint, I think it was. 



982 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2016 

And the people of Saskatchewan, rural Saskatchewan, there was 
a number of people I remember coming up to a few of us on a 
few occasions, telling us that, well they don’t see Candice 
Bergen shopping in Spiritwood, that they don’t see Candice 
Bergen buying gas in P.A. [Prince Albert]. But these are the 
people that work for our Crown corporations. These are the 
people that benefit from our Crown corporations. These are 
everyday folks that you’d find in a number of our Saskatchewan 
communities, First Nations, Métis, or municipal communities 
across the board. 
 
And that’s really what’s really important, Mr. Speaker, is that 
the Crown corporations provide a lot of good service to the 
people of Saskatchewan. So what I can’t understand, Mr. 
Speaker, what I can’t understand is the logic behind the 
Saskatchewan Party meddling in The Interpretation Act. If they 
had no intention of selling off these Crowns, why would they 
even meddle in the interpretation, talk about 49 per cent 
ownership? It’s because they do have an agenda, Mr. Speaker, 
and that agenda, they should be very clear and concise as to 
what their agenda is. And they absolutely refuse to do that. 
 
[15:45] 
 
What’s really important, again I’ll point out, is that it shows that 
they don’t have the conviction or the courage to come clean 
with their agenda on the Crown corporations, evidence that 
we’ve seen time and time again, before the last election. And I 
say to you again today, Mr. Speaker, that as a result of the 
short-sightedness of the Saskatchewan Party, looking at selling 
49 per cent of any Crown corporation, is that it affects the 
income of the province of Saskatchewan for years to come. 
 
And whether it is the debt that the Saskatchewan Party have 
placed on future generations or whether it’s the Crown 
dividends that will be gone if you sold any of these assets, or 
the expensive P3s we’ll be paying for 20 or 30 years, Mr. 
Speaker, plus trying to meet the future demands, in many ways, 
in many ways the Saskatchewan Party government has 
mortgaged our future a tremendous amount, Mr. Speaker. They 
have mortgaged our future time and time again. 
 
And I say to the people of Saskatchewan, mark my words that 
three-quarters of them will be gone. They’ll be heading out of 
Dodge, and what they’re going to leave behind is a scorched 
earth policy when it comes to protecting our Crown 
corporations, protecting our environment, protecting our labour 
workers, and certainly, Mr. Speaker, looking after the future of 
our children and grandchildren. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is something that we have to really, really pay 
attention to. We in the opposition are telling the people of 
Saskatchewan that you do have a role to play. You can indeed 
assist this 10-member opposition caucus in holding this 
government to account. You can begin that process very clearly 
by telling the Saskatchewan Party MLAs that you see each day, 
that is not something that they ran on. Every single voter can 
say that to the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Groups and organizations can rally together to tell the 
Saskatchewan Party government that’s not something that 
should be done. The people that felt betrayed by the current 
Saskatchewan Party government on the Crown corporations 

front should actually get organized and start petitions, start 
writing letters, coming to the Assembly, start voicing their 
concerns. 
 
Because once these Crown corporations are sold off, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re sold forever, and what we don’t want to do as 
an NDP caucus is limit this argument and this fight to 10 
members of our caucus. We want the public to get up and rise 
up and to fight back, because these Crown corporations are 
theirs. They are theirs, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t belong to the 
Saskatchewan Party. It doesn’t belong to any political party. It 
belongs to the people of Saskatchewan. So which party has the 
political right to sell these Crown corporations? Absolutely 
none of the parties that I know have a right to sell something 
that they don’t own, or someone temporarily sitting in the CEO 
[chief executive officer] position they call Premier and cabinet 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot of issues that we’re going to raise 
with this particular bill. And I notice that the bill itself is only 
three or four pages, and that’s typical of the Saskatchewan 
Party. They put their intentions in these innocuous bills that 
they think that we won’t be paying attention to them, and, Mr. 
Speaker, we certainly are . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Now 
the Premier chirps from his chair, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to ask 
the Premier, why didn’t he tell the people of Saskatchewan the 
true state of our finances prior to the election? Why didn’t he 
tell the people of Saskatchewan what his plans were around the 
Crown corporations? Him and . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I’d ask the member to make his 
comments through the Chair. I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I would 
ask these members who knew full well, Executive Council 
members, the members of cabinet who knew full well how bad 
the finances were, why weren’t they forthright and basically tell 
the people of Saskatchewan where they were? And that’s why, 
Mr. Speaker, they never had a budget in April which they 
typically should have. 
 
The surprising thing is that they had an election April 4th, Mr. 
Speaker, and that was the day the budget should have been 
released already. But there was no budget until a month later. 
And for what reason that they spouted off to the people of 
Saskatchewan? On the New Democratic side, we were just 
sitting there wondering, well why aren’t the people of 
Saskatchewan being told about our finances? Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the reason they weren’t being told is that I think the 
Premier very well knew that there’d be a different makeup in 
the Assembly today had they been forthright and forthcoming 
with not only our financial information, but more so with what 
their plan is around Bill No. 40, The Interpretation Act, that 
really allows a much more robust interpretation of how they 
could sell our Crown corporations. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we look at some of the Crown corporations 
that have been used by the Saskatchewan Party. A good 
example is SaskPower, where they actually had to fund up the 
money for the GTH land deal. Well the Crown corporations 
weren’t built for that, not built for use for political purposes, but 
they had no choice. Their political master at the time used 



October 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 983 

SaskPower’s money to basically buy land at a much higher 
value than anywhere else in this province, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 
an amazing story of how and why you should never, ever have 
folks that would want to sell the Crown corporations in charge 
of the Crown corporations. And this is what’s really important 
around Bill No. 40, an Act to amend the interpretation of 
privatization. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I think what’s really, really also part of the 
bill is the fact that if you look at the second part of the bill, 
which is a very small but necessary component of the bill, 
where they’re also talking gender-neutral language when it 
refers to the monarchy, whether it’s the king or queen, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s something that obviously if there’s some 
housekeeping amendments that had to be made, well they had 
to be made. 
 
But do you notice how the gender-neutral references to the 
queen or king was part of this whole interpretation Act? Well 
this, Mr. Speaker, is exactly my point, is they try and hide some 
of these little interpretations here and there, try and make them 
as innocuous as possible. 
 
But the fact of the matter is the people of Saskatchewan should 
know that the Saskatchewan Party have been and will continue 
to try and employ their agenda to privatize the Crown 
corporations of Saskatchewan. And these Crown corporations, 
as indicated time and time again, they create jobs. They create 
profit. They create services for the people of Saskatchewan. 
And why in the heck would we try and sell off these things that 
are so valuable to the people overall and that served the 
province for generations in the past, Mr. Speaker, and for 
generations in the future? 
 
This was certainly the vision originally, that we would own 
some of these Crown corporations. And what happens, Mr. 
Speaker, in the future? Who knows where our power bill’s 
going to be coming from and how much these power bills are if 
we don’t have a SaskPower? Who knows what our telephone 
service would be as people of Saskatchewan? Who knows what 
the cost would be for insurance? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, these Crown corporations are ours. The 
people that get the profit from the Crown corporations are us. 
Certain people . . .You look at some of the issues around 
employment, Mr. Speaker, but more so the services. This is 
what’s really key, and it’s very simple. And I encourage the 
people of Saskatchewan to pay very close attention to what is 
happening with our Crown corporations because the people 
ought to know exactly what the plan is for the Saskatchewan 
Party. And that’s exactly what we want to do. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, a lot of questions are going to be asked on this 
particular Act. We have a number of organizations that we’re 
going to employ to try and get their perspective, Mr. Speaker. 
And it’s amazing. It’s amazing, the different organizations that 
are coming forward, and there will be more. They’ll want to 
talk about this particular agenda by the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
And I go back to my earlier comment. The Finance minister and 
the Premier, as well as the rest of the cabinet, knew how bad the 
finances were of our province, and they sat on that information. 
They didn’t have the courage nor the conviction to come 

forward with the people of Saskatchewan. So what do they do? 
The easiest fix in conservative land: have an election before the 
budget. Have an election before the budget. That’s their plan, 
Mr. Speaker. And now the plan has been employed and now 
everything’s kind of falling apart around them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The point I would make to the people of Saskatchewan is the 
voters are always right. The voters are always right. But voters 
do not like to be fooled either, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why I 
think now they’re starting to realize that there were a lot of 
mistakes. And now we’re seeing the Premier begin to plummet 
in popularity. And that’s a really good indicator, Mr. Speaker, 
of how people feel overall, not just about the fact that there’s a 
lot of information withheld, withheld from the people of 
Saskatchewan but the fact that some of their agendas around 
privatization are coming out. 
 
So as we tell the people of Saskatchewan, there’s a lot coming 
Saskatchewan Party’s way. There’s a lot. And it’s not good 
news either, Mr. Speaker. We’re awaiting the budget for next 
year. We think there’s going to be more cuts. I think they’re 
financially in a huge problem, Mr. Speaker, because today now 
the Minister of Finance is quite . . . He’s very quiet in his chair. 
He’s not saying . . . So what other cuts have they got? What 
other cuts have they got? 
 
But I can tell you this, Mr. Speaker, as we spoke about youth 
suicide this morning. If they sell off the Crown corporations, 
Mr. Speaker, if they sell off the Crown corporations and they 
squander that money, either doing some . . . [inaudible] . . . land 
deal or some outrageous P3 deal and that money is gone, then 
what value to the Saskatchewan people, what value do we 
derive out of that sale? Absolutely nothing. 
 
And the taxpayers out there that think it’s going to ease the tax 
burden on you in the future, well that ain’t on either. It’s going 
to be more of a burden, primarily because you have basically 
sold off the one asset we had, called the Crown corporation, that 
was actually buffering the cost of taxation for many families 
across the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to go on a bit more about the 
thing that I think is really important around the finances and 
around the Crown corporations. As you look at SaskPower, let’s 
look at the whole notion around the carbon capture 
sequestration process that the SaskPower’s undertaken. This 
particular government has spent $1.5 billion on the carbon 
capture, which is part of our Crown corporation. We think that 
the Crown corporations have a very valuable role in helping to 
address the challenge around carbon. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, SaskPower has certainly been out and about 
getting advice from people around the whole notion of the 
renewable energies, Mr. Speaker. And I had the pleasure of 
serving on that committee and going to a number of forums and 
public hearings as a member of the Committee on the Economy 
and Crown corporations. And I can tell you the people of 
Saskatchewan had some phenomenal ideas on how we can 
actually begin the process of having SaskPower do the green 
energy and look at the ways and means in which we can 
generate new opportunities and certainly be more 
environmentally friendly. So one of the things I think is 
important is that as you own these Crowns — and SaskPower is 



984 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2016 

a Crown that has been steadfast in terms of building for the 
future, Mr. Speaker — when it comes to the renewable 
energies, some of the ideas we’ve heard throughout our 
province were phenomenal, as I indicated. 
 
We’ve heard all the arguments. The number one argument . . . I 
think the two outstanding arguments that I heard during this 
Crown corporation hearing on how the Crowns could be more 
effective and more dynamic, Mr. Speaker, is around the green 
energies file, is some of the incredible information we shared. 
Two of the more compelling arguments we had, Mr. Speaker, is 
about . . . One area is conservation in which how many people 
turning off your lights or a better insulated home, the incredible 
amount of savings that we as a province could have on energy 
consumption. That was one of the bigger arguments and the 
best arguments we heard through this Crown corporations 
hearing process. 
 
The second argument we heard, Mr. Speaker, was around the 
whole notion of natural gas. Natural gas provided an excellent 
stopgap in terms of becoming another process of creating power 
throughout the province. So between conservation and natural 
gas, there was tons of opportunity to reduce our carbon 
footprint in the climate overall. So I think these are some of the 
things that we spoke about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was all kinds of other discussions, even 
around geothermal. People brought some of the information 
forth. And I think it’s only in the southeast corner of 
Saskatchewan where geothermal really could work well enough 
to recover some of the costs. There are other areas in the 
province that could make the argument as well. But in the 
southeast corner there is more opportunity for geothermal 
options for heating your home and looking at ways and creating 
more friendlier, greener energy needs. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we certainly had a number of people at 
universities make presentations. And I could hear . . . I can 
remember the argument that people were making around cold 
fusion and hot fusion. Like these are some of the things that I 
spoke about and learned about over those number of weeks I sat 
on that committee. 
 
And about all I seen on the Saskatchewan Party side when we 
were doing this joint effort to understand how the Crowns could 
become much more greener, Mr. Speaker — like I said, we had 
a discussion around hot fusion and cold fusion — and all I saw 
on the Saskatchewan Party side was confusion, Mr. Speaker, 
because they had no intent to look at anything beyond what 
they’re capable of, and that is, quite frankly, trying to sell off 
the Crowns. And, Mr. Speaker, that is certainly prevalent to this 
day. 
 
[16:00] 
 
So no matter what is being said, no matter what is being said by 
the Saskatchewan Party, no matter what semantics are being 
indicated to some of their bills even as small as the Bill No. 40, 
An Act to amend The Interpretation Act, Mr. Speaker, we know 
that their plan is to not engage and embrace the future of Crown 
corporations of this province. They want to sell them. There’s 
no question about that, and the reason why they want to sell, 
Mr. Speaker, is because they need the money. They’re in pretty 

bad shape, and we can see it from here, Mr. Speaker, and we’re 
actually hoping to get some kind of indication from the Minister 
of Finance just how bad it is. And the earliest indication that 
we’re going to get from the Minister of Finance is at the end of 
November, is when he suggested that there may be some time 
to give us a financial update. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from a few stories that are 
really important that we quote. And I’m quoting here, Mr. 
Speaker: “Premier Brad Wall says the definition makes clear 
that selling a minority stake in a Crown corporation would not 
equate to privatizing it.” So this is what I think is important that 
I want to follow up. So the opposition interim leader, Trent 
Wotherspoon, and I quote him: 
 

“This would be a massive erosion of control. This is 
privatization and the Premier was not honest with 
Saskatchewan people on this front,” [Trent] Wotherspoon 
said. “It’s a major betrayal and we’ll fight it every step of 
the way.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, that was a quote I’ve taken from the CBC 
[Canadian Broadcasting Corporation] news of October 27th, 
2016. 
 
And it goes on, Mr. Speaker, to another article in the “. . . 
minority interest in Sask. Crowns.” And this goes back to my 
point. Even the media is simply not convinced that this play on 
words is something that’s going to protect our Crown 
corporations. And I quote from this article of Wednesday, 
October 26th. It says here: 
 

CTV News has learned that the new definition allows for 
corporate restructuring, which would make it easier to sell 
minority interests in protected Crowns. The government 
says that would provide some necessary flexibility while 
maintaining the government’s commitment to the Crown 
Corporations Public Ownership Act. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to requote that. It says, “The 
government says that would provide some necessary flexibility 
while maintaining the government’s commitment to the Crown 
Corporations Public Ownership Act.” So, Mr. Speaker, their 
own language says exactly what we’ve been saying all along 
and that’s something that’s really important for the people of 
Saskatchewan to take into account. 
 
So this is my message to the people of Saskatchewan around 
Crown corporations: we need your full engagement. We are 
asking the people, the universities, the technical institutes, the 
workers, the unions, the people that are out there watching what 
happens — these are your Crown corporations. They do not 
belong to the NDP. They do not belong to the Saskatchewan 
Party. We are suggesting as a party that we protect the interests 
of the Crown corporations to our own commitment. Now 
certainly we’ve protected them in the past, but more so in the 
future. 
 
So if you want to allow the Saskatchewan Party to do what they 
want with our Crowns, then you do exactly what has been 
happening to them so far. They have not received the blunt 
message from people of Saskatchewan that know their Crown 
corporations are not for sale. We’re asking groups and 



October 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 985 

organizations and communities to stand up to tell the 
Saskatchewan Party and the current leader, the Premier, that no, 
we don’t want to sell our Crown corporations. Why would you 
sell a Crown corporation? What’s your logic? Why are you 
doing this? This is something that the people of Saskatchewan 
need to ask. 
 
So wherever you’re from, if you’re from Glaslyn, if you’re 
from Kindersley, if you’re from Beechy or you’re from 
Beauval, these are your Crown corporations. These are what 
provide services to the North, to the South, to central 
Saskatchewan, to the East, to the West. These are Crown 
corporations that we’ve owned for centuries, Mr. Speaker, and 
why . . . Not for centuries, but for a number of years. Why 
would we begin to entertain the sale of this? 
 
And what’s really important, Mr. Speaker — this is the crux of 
my argument — this debate should have taken place 10 months 
ago, two or three months before the last election. And now 
they’re bringing the agenda out. And that’s why we say lack of 
courage and conviction because they never had that conviction 
nor courage prior to the last election. And now they’re certainly 
starting to spell out their new-found power to do something 
they said they wouldn’t do, and that’s sell off the Crowns which 
are owned by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I don’t think we have any other notion to tell the people of 
Saskatchewan that they do have a role, that they have a role that 
they should and could play in making sure that their voices are 
heard. So we would ask you to rally. We would ask you to 
fight. We would ask you to sign petitions, to write letters, to 
lobby your own Saskatchewan Party MLA and tell him one 
clear message: leave our Crown corporations alone. Why? For a 
number of reasons that we’ve indicated in this debate and this 
argument. And this argument’s going to continue going on and 
on and on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the final point I’d make to the people of Saskatchewan is 
that if they’re convinced that they have the agenda and the 
mandate to sell these Crowns — the earliest the Premier can 
convene an election is within three years, Mr. Speaker — let’s 
have an election on that. Let’s have an election on this issue 
alone. Three years in the scheme of time is not a lot of time to 
worry about — three years. If he’d give the people of 
Saskatchewan 36 months and then you make the decision based 
on which party wins the next election, I can tell you today that 
the Saskatchewan Party will not be the victor because the 
people of Saskatchewan will tell him no, these are our Crown 
corporations. You leave them alone. We own them. 
 
And the other question I would ask, Mr. Speaker, is who’s been 
talking to the Saskatchewan Party about buying these Crowns? 
We have no idea. We have no idea who they’ve been talking to. 
And I can tell the people of Saskatchewan that if you’d much 
rather pay a power bill to some eastern-based or 
American-based company, then I don’t think that’s what people 
want. I really don’t think that’s what people want, Mr. Speaker. 
And then that we don’t have any power nor control over the 
amount of employees they hire. So we know there’s going to be 
a downturn on that front. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what’s really important, we don’t understand 
how the privatization agenda for our Crowns will impact the 

price of power for our homes and our farms and our businesses, 
the price of insurance for our businesses and our vehicles. We 
don’t know how it’s going to impact the price of our telephone 
service and our cellphone bills. These are all something that has 
to be incorporated when we start talking about the Crown 
corporations, Mr. Speaker. So we have a long ways to go in this 
discussion. So I would encourage people out there to continue 
fighting the fight because we are just beginning that process 
here. 
 
And the final note I would say before I adjourn debate on this 
particular bill, Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 40, is that I want to 
challenge the Premier very, very simply: let’s have an election 
over this if you have the courage. And if you don’t, then we 
know very well that qualifies our argument that you never had 
the courage and conviction to do some of these things prior to 
the election. You can change that, and you can accept our 
challenge and our effort to protect the Crowns. If you don’t, 
then the people of Saskatchewan know, as the opposition 
knows, that they refuse to have that fight. So on that note, Mr. 
Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 40. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 40, The Interpretation 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Carried. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 31 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 31 — The Local 
Authority Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy 
Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I just 
wanted to check the notes and get a reference to the bill that we 
missed, the bill number that the Clerk titled. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Adjourned debates. Item no. 21. Resume 
debate on the second reading motion on Bill No. 31, The Local 
Authority Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy 
Amendment Act, 2016. Mr. McCall.  
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to speak on 
Bill No. 31, the freedom of information protection Act. As has 
been noted, Mr. Speaker, in this legislature . . . 
 



986 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2016 

[Interjections] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I’m having difficulty hearing 
the member. I’d ask the government members to come to order. 
I recognize the member from Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to speak on 
Bill No. 31, the freedom of information Act, 2016. Mr. Speaker, 
I know that several of my colleagues have already had 
opportunity to speak to this bill regarding some largely 
administrative changes to this legislation, and I know that there 
will . . . Just by way of recapping, the bill updates the local 
freedom of information protection Act, LAFOIP [The Local 
Authority Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy 
Act].  
 
There was a 2015 report, Mr. Speaker, called it’s time for 
change. The Information and Privacy Commissioner at that time 
called for a number of changes to information and privacy 
protections in Saskatchewan. As has been noted, and I believe 
I’ve made these comments before, Mr. Speaker, that any time 
that we’re dealing with people’s private information, it is 
important that we take extra care. And I think that, certainly 
given the Privacy Commissioner’s recommendations, that it is 
important that we give this legislation and the proposed updates 
some second viewing. 
 
To recap, Mr. Speaker, some of the proposed changes in this 
bill include police forces under LAFOIP, drawing them under 
that legislation so that police forces, as are other areas, that they 
would be subject to freedom of information requests, Mr. 
Speaker. And that again was the recommendation of the Privacy 
Commissioner. So I think any time that we have officers such 
as the Privacy Commissioner putting their time and thought into 
their recommendations, we would do well to look closely at 
those recommendations. 
 
It also creates new offences for snooping on personal 
information, Mr. Speaker. And as I noted previously, this is 
important so that anyone who is looking up information, we’re 
certain that they have a need to know before they simply look at 
people’s private information to satisfy curiosity. It should 
always be the case that anyone who’s looking at private 
information should have a reason to do so, Mr. Speaker, and as 
noted, that that is again on recommendation of the Privacy 
Commissioner. 
 
This bill, while addressing some of the concerns, doesn’t 
include some of the other recommendations, Mr. Speaker, that 
had been proposed by the Privacy Commissioner. Those include 
changing the maximum time for a response from 30 days to 20 
days, Mr. Speaker. I think that that is important. When people 
put in a freedom of information request they certainly do have 
an expectation to have those answers within a reasonable time 
period. So that is certainly lacking in this legislation. 
 
Also it doesn’t include the requirement that this legislation be 
updated every five years, Mr. Speaker. And certainly with 
modern technology, as any of us here would know, it moves 
rapidly, perhaps more rapidly than any of us could anticipate, so 
having that type of recommendation and having that 
accommodated in legislation is very important. And I note that 
that isn’t included. And that again was a recommendation that 

isn’t a recommendation in this proposed legislation. So with 
that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to conclude my remarks and 
cede the floor to the member from Cumberland. Thank you. 
 
[16:15] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to join in on debate 
on Bill No. 31. The Local Authority Freedom of Information 
and Protection Act makes some changes to this Act and gives 
some changes and I think some authority to the police chief. 
 
And we were having a chance to quickly go over it. And I know 
we wanted a little opportunity, and we’re going to have some 
opportunity to ask some tough questions and go through this 
when it comes towards the committee to find out . . . And like 
everything, every bill that comes to the House, we wonder 
who’s requested this and if it is done with consultation. And we 
. . . You know, government likes to use that they do that so 
much, and we see how little they actually do consult. 
 
But we know that there is an opportunity if the government 
wants to reach out to leaders, to those that would be impacted 
by amendments, changes to legislation. There is an opportunity 
for the government to have an opportunity to reach out, to go 
and talk. And Bill 31, like when you get to the meat and 
potatoes of it exactly . . . And committee, we’re going to have 
an opportunity to have, you know, a good discussion and 
hopefully get some answers. And at this point, we’re not sure 
how this bill came forward but at the end of the day, we’ll have 
an opportunity again, as I’ve said, in committee to ask some 
tough questions. I know my colleagues will have an opportunity 
to ask more questions about this. 
 
But it’s going to give some time to make sure, you know, we go 
over the information correctly, to make sure the proper people 
were consulted, and that this is the best legislation that’s 
coming forward, whether it’s changes, new, amended. We have 
lots of different, you know, work to do on bills, and the 
government’s introducing them. So as we go through it, at the 
end of the day, we’ll make sure that those tough questions are 
answered. And the people of this good province has a right, and 
I think they want to make sure our government’s doing the right 
thing. 
 
And I know my colleague before me was talking about a bill 
that they introduced, you know, and trying to get some 
definition of what it means. And we see when government 
doesn’t consult and it doesn’t go forward . . . Talking to the 
Saskatchewan people, and I’ve heard many referring to 
government trying to sell off our Crowns in any way. And my 
colleague had talked about that, the member from Athabasca, 
has talked very clear and articulated well what we’re hearing 
from a lot of people. 
 
But you know, it’s interesting. Here’s another, a bill coming 
forward that we have an opportunity to ask some tough 
questions, but I want to go back, and I think it’s important to 
talk about bills that come forward. 
 
The government has an opportunity . . . Who, during election 



October 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 987 

time, did this government go out and say, oh yes we’re going to 
look at opening up and selling off the Crowns? What door did 
they knock on telling the good people of this province, who put 
their trust into these Sask Party members that are elected here 
today representing the government of the day . . . And I’ve had 
them heckle, oh, we got 51 seats. We got 51. And they, you 
know, with intent to say, well the good people have spoke.  
 
But as my colleague has said, you’re to come clean with the 
good people of the province about our finances, about your 
intents of selling. Oh no, we’re not going to sell off the Crowns. 
The Crowns will be protected forever. We see the changes 
going on and now the flip-flop back and forth. At one time 
when they were door knocking and asking, they’ll say no, we 
won’t change legislation to . . . That’s protected. Well now 
they’re going to give us what the definition is of that. Well I 
think most people in this good province know the definition of 
privatizing and getting rid of our Crowns, any part of our 
Crowns. They’re not up to it and they don’t want that. 
 
But having said that, there’s going to be a lot of opportunity to 
talk more. And they don’t like this stuff and that’s okay, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. They don’t have to like it. 
 
The reality is the good people of this province know the 
difference when somebody tells them they’re not going to do 
something and they do it. And at the end of the day, at the end 
of the day, we’ll just see exactly what the good people of this 
province have to say. 
 
And you know, they did a lot of work with some of their 
candidates. I give them credit. They went out there. But I don’t 
recall seeing any billboard, any piece of literature that said the 
first thing we get in, after six, seven months, we’ll forget that 
we said we wouldn’t touch the Crowns. We’re going to open it 
up and we’re . . . Because the good people don’t know. We’ll 
give you the definition of what that means. We’ll pass 
legislation that says, it doesn’t mean that; it’s a small window. 
It’s almost like going to the fair, and you had them saying you 
win a prize here, and they keep bringing it down. That’s exactly 
what these guys are introducing. So it’s almost impossible. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think at this point, I’m prepared to 
adjourn on Bill 131. And I know my colleagues will have a lot 
of comments and in committee we’ll ask questions. So on that 
point, I’m adjourned. Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Cumberland has 
moved to adjourn debate on Bill No. 1, the Crown corporation 
public . . . Oh, Bill 31, sorry, The Local Authority Freedom of 
Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016. Is 
it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member from 
Biggar-Sask Valley on his feet? 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 
ask leave to introduce a guest. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member has asked for leave. Is 
leave granted? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Thank you very much. To you and 
through you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to introduce a friend 
of mine from Biggar, Ray Sadler. Give us a wave, please. Ray 
was just recently re-elected for his fourth term as mayor of 
Biggar, and we’re very happy for him. And he’s here for the 
reception that’s going to be held later on. So please join me in 
welcoming Ray Sadler to his legislature. 

 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 

 
SECOND READINGS 

 
Bill No. 1 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 1 — The 
Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 2016 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
too want to take a minute and just recognize the mayor for 
Biggar. It’s always great to see elected officials in the House 
and we wish him well in the future years. People who are 
elected in these positions offer so much for our communities, 
and it’s an important thing. 
 
So with this, Mr. Speaker, this is a relatively simple, 
straightforward piece of legislation. Very, very short but we’re 
seeing the true intention of this government, post election, and 
how they haven’t really set that out in the election, didn’t come 
clean as we’re seeing the bills that are coming forward. My 
good friend and colleague from Athabasca so well enunciated 
our concerns for what’s really seeming to be the way of this 
government and how it’s lost its way. 
 
You know, I’m reminded of a saying that if you throw a stone 
in the garden and you hear a yelp, you know there’s a dog there. 
And I’ve got to say, this really seems to be the situation that’s 
playing out in front of us now. 
 
Well, well, well. Here we are again, and we’re debating 
something now. I know that this really, this really specifically 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . I hear the pup. I hear the pup 
yelping, and so it seems I’ve caught their attention over there. It 
seems to have caught their attention. They’re yelping from that 
side and we have thrown the stone, and it is what it is. You 
know, their plans are coming forward and it’s rolling out as we 
thought it would . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — After the election. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — After the election. Not before the election, you 
know. We had the Finance minister keep all that information 
quite secret, quite secret. No budget, no budget, and here we see 



988 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2016 

him continue, continue the process of . . . Where is that first 
quarter report, the first quarter report? It’s not around. 
 
And then they put this bill out, Bill No. 1 which effectively 
takes the 40 stores or, well the Liquor and Gaming Authority 
out of the way from The Crown Corporations Public 
Ownership Act. But really it’s much more than that. It’s really 
much more than that. 
 
And we see that playing out just last week when we got the next 
Bill No. 40, the Act to amend The Interpretation Act, and really 
what they meant. And of course, there you’d say, oh it’s not 
what we mean. It’s not what we mean. It’s not privatization. 
But it’s sure . . . You know that old saying: if it walks like a 
duck, quacks like a duck, and swims like a duck, then it’s got to 
be a duck. And this is like . . . This is privatization. And this is 
all part of the grand scheme. 
 
And they are clearly becoming more evident to the people of 
Saskatchewan every day, what their intention is. And it is 
because of their mismanagement of the boom years, those boom 
years when we were doing so well in this province and where 
they could have really set the stage for us as a province to do 
really well through lean years. 
 
And here we are. We’re seeing the cuts, seeing the mean, 
mean-spirited cuts of this government, and whether it’s really 
upsetting the people on SAID who were really concerned this 
summer about what the minister meant. And of course, there 
was a change in ministers. And we hear that it’s only on pause, 
only on pause. And we worry that what’s going to happen is 
they’re going to find out the bad news in February, what’s 
going to be happening in terms of if you’re on SAID, if you’re 
somebody unfortunately living with a disability that makes life 
a little more challenging for you, and you have to have those 
supports to make sure that they can live with dignity. And we 
saw this government do a test run, try it out this summer. And 
there was such an outcry that people said, you can’t do that. 
You can’t do that. 
 
And then of course we saw this government do the same thing 
with the homeless folks who are looking for shelter in our 
cities, and particularly in Saskatoon in my riding with the 
Lighthouse in Saskatoon, and also in North Battleford. And we 
have people really concerned about, what does this really mean? 
What does this really, really mean? 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, when you have a government that has 
mismanaged, mismanaged the resources of this province and 
we’re facing some really difficult choices that we really 
shouldn’t had to have had because, you know, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this government had the great privilege of serving 
when we were experiencing such resources, incredible wealth in 
this province up to the budgets, provincial budgets about $14 
billion, $14 billion. 
 
But yet they are so mean-spirited. I mean I can’t believe it when 
it comes to cutting back on NORTEP-NORPAC. They were 
fine to sign the contract, the five-year contract before the 
election, and then shortly after the election they informed the 
folks, no, they’re taking another look at what it really means. I 
don’t know what really happened between in the month or two 
intervening between the signing of the contract and then the 

notice that they were going to abandon the whole thing. I don’t 
know what that really means. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when we have such a short bill before us like 
this, it is really worrisome. And it’s Bill No. 1. It’s Bill No. 1, 
and this is the kind of vision this government sets forward. This 
is what they’re doing in the first year after the election. And, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we recognize on this side they have a 
mandate. They clearly do have a mandate. 
 
But is this the kind of province that we want to have where they 
balance the budget on the backs of those who are more 
vulnerable, who are going to be facing some tough times this 
winter? And we are . . . particularly when we ask questions and 
particularly around the mental health issues that we see that. 
And very unfortunately, it’s a tragic situation in the North. We 
really need to be focusing on that. But here we have a 
government that’s trying to balance their budgets on the back of 
working men and women and those who are out in tough 
situations. 
 
And so when we see this bill . . . And I just want to take a 
minute to reflect on the member from Regina Lakeview who 
served on the committee that looked at the impact of what this 
would mean when we privatize these 40 liquor stores. And I’d 
be curious to know what has been the progress of this. And 
really, you know, we had meetings with some of the folks who 
were going to be losing their jobs because they were workers in 
one of those 40 stores that were throughout the province, many 
of which were in rural Saskatchewan. And of course the deal 
was that store had to be completely closed down. That had to be 
a brand new facility that the store was going to be in. What was 
going to be the impact of that? 
 
[16:30] 
 
Those were good, good jobs in our communities right 
throughout the province, with some decent pay and decent 
hours, and now they’re going to be losing that. And I don’t 
know . . . The short-term gain for maybe the selling of the 
licences and what all . . . But it really, this is what this 
government is seeming to be looking for, short-term gain, 
short-term ways of balancing a budget that is of their own 
making, of not setting aside money, not preparing for the tough 
times. 
 
And here we are. We’re looking at this interpretation Act that 
now puts out that you can sell up to 49 per cent of any Crown 
corporation. And what that means is the hollowing out of some 
of these Crowns and their first steps to major privatization. But 
you know, these Crowns have delivered significant resources to 
our General Revenue Fund. And if we start saying, you know, 
we’re okay with losing up to half the revenue, losing up to half 
the revenue, that’s several hundred millions of dollars. And 
that’s a huge impact. That’s a huge impact. 
 
Over the years these Crowns have contributed in significant 
ways to our provincial budget that pays for our highways, that 
pays for our health care, that pays for our education. And we 
see all of those areas under stress. We see Social Services under 
stress. They’re doing a major review. 
 
As we’re heading into the winter months, and I think this is a 



October 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 989 

time . . . And you know, I still think . . . And it’s interesting 
because we’ve talked about changes to the coroner’s report, and 
we’ve had a call for an inquest into the fellow that died in my 
riding. He was sleeping in an abandoned semi cab. And we 
haven’t yet heard what’s happening with that. Nothing. It’s 
been two or three years. The Minister of Social Services said, 
we’ll just let it play out. But that homeless man died out in the 
cold and nothing was ever really done about that, as far as we’re 
aware of. And these are the kinds of questions that we have. 
 
And we see the kind of legislation that’s coming forward that 
has no vision, no sort of responsibility to the social good of our 
communities, and really avoiding responsibility. Here we have 
a minister who, one of the first things he didn’t do after the 
election was no first quarter report. So how does this add to the 
credibility of this government? 
 
And so here we have a situation before us, as I said, a short bill. 
All it does is it repeals subclause 2(b)(ii) of The Crown 
Corporations Public Ownership Act, and all that is, is . . . 
2(b)(ii) is the Liquor and Gaming Authority. So it’s eliminating 
that. 
 
So it’s not just about the 40 stores; it’s about all the other stores. 
It’s about all the other stores and the ability now for them to just 
cherry-pick . . . You know, it’s so ironic. They’re going to be 
cherry-picking, pulling out individual Crown corporations that 
they want to get rid of completely. And now they’ve got a new 
idea: well maybe we don’t want to do that. We’ll just get rid of 
or sell off 49 per cent. But that leads to so many, so many other 
issues. And we really do see this as a first step or one of the 
second or third or fourth steps of this government towards 
privatization. And some might call privatization by stealth. 
Some might call privatization by wordplay, but it is 
privatization and it’s along that road. So when it’s 49 per cent, 
you’re losing 49 per cent of the income, 49 per cent of the 
control. 
 
And you know, we can start to see that, you know, how deals 
can be made in boardrooms where they say, we want this to 
happen; we want to see more work taken out of the province 
because our revenues will grow if we do more out of . . . work 
out of the province. And we saw that on the P3s. We see where 
the P3s are contracting out of province, even multinational 
corporations not even in North America. And yet this 
government goes out of its way to portray those folks as being 
local people when we all know, we all know that in fact many 
of these P3s are large multinational corporations based 
elsewhere in Canada, if not in the United States, and one or two 
I think is from France. And so we have a real issue. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I do have a real concern with this bill. And I 
know my colleague from Lakeview . . . I just want to go on and 
consider that what she had talked about, what she had talked 
about because she was there in the committee. Unfortunately I 
wasn’t there, so I do want to reflect for the folks at home about 
what’s happening. And she said that it would be easier for 
further privatization to occur without the oversight and 
opportunity for input that this committee has provided. And she 
was talking about the committee that she is sitting on, and I 
would believe that that is the Standing Committee on Crown 
and Central Agencies. And she’s talking back on June 13th 
when we had presented the draft first report of the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 
 
And she talked about another main point of the election with 
regard to privatization of the liquor stores — and we heard it in 
the Throne Speech as well — was the assertion that this move 
would be revenue neutral. And there have been repeated 
assertions from the minister that this will not come at a net loss 
of the General Revenue Fund, so I’m going to find this very 
interesting. We go forward in the months and years ahead to 
find out that this was revenue neutral, that somehow this had no 
impact. 
 
How can you possibly sell off 40 stores, and not see a loss of 
income? That’s a hard one to believe. Now there may be a 
bump up because there’s revenue created from the actual sale. 
There might be revenue created from the licenses involved, and 
of course there’s the purchasing of the liquor. But to say that 
it’s going to be not a net loss to the General Revenue Fund, this 
will be interesting. 
 
Now of course this is a Finance minister who, as I’ve said 
before, has failed his homework and has not delivered his first 
quarter report so he might be able to prove that there was no net 
lost revenue. He would be the one to prove that, and he might 
be able to work that to show that there’s been no net loss. But if 
we sell off this 49 per cent of the Crowns and then that’s not 
privatization, it’s just business as usual for the folks over there. 
And they’re going to show us — I can hear it now — that there 
won’t be any net loss, just like the liquor stores, no net loss, no 
net loss. Well you know there’s two parts to that. We really 
hope there’s no net loss, but there won’t be any of the revenue 
that we usually count on. We’ll be losing up to half the revenue. 
 
So this is the problem. It’s not just about not losing money. It’s 
about where did the money go that we were really counting on, 
that, as I said before, paid for the health care, the hospitals, the 
specialists. And we had a question today about specialists and 
how it’s some, up to 80 weeks, the waiting list — it’s 80 weeks. 
And this government says that their goal is three months; that’s 
12 weeks. So here you have a situation where it’s like seven 
times worse than what they’re promising. And yet this little girl 
is in a tough, tough strait. 
 
So we see these concerns that we have because people . . . 
When we’re in such a blessed province because we have this 
tradition, this strong history of Crown corporations stepping up 
to provide basic services, basic services and providing those 
services that we feel it’s in the social interest, the social good. 
Like liquor stores, that they should be able to continue on and 
be competitive, be competitive with the private stores. 
 
And it’s quite, you know . . . It’s been our position that we 
should modernize the liquor stores and make them as attractive 
as possible. And of course, this government in its ways of doing 
that makes them less competitive, less successful, and really 
causing situations where we know that if you do that, that’s 
another way, by stealth, to create a situation where people go, 
well maybe we should be selling off some of our Crowns. And 
we see this with the SLGA [Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority] stores. 
 
One of the other issues that my colleague talked about, and I’ll 
quote here: 



990 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2016 

Another issue is ensuring that there’s benefit for all 
Saskatchewan people. With the passage of this bill there 
will soon be 40 valuable, profitable liquor stores on the 
market and 12 new licences, and I think it’s important to 
get this right for the people of Saskatchewan and to 
provide opportunities to Saskatchewan people. With the 
inclusion of appropriate procurement policies, we could 
ensure that Saskatchewan businesses are prioritized for the 
private ownership of these stores. 

 
So we can do it. We can do it in the correct way but it’s 
important that we have public participation and we make sure 
that it’s laid out clearly. Now we know we’re well on our way. 
It’s October 31st; this was back in June. But we need to make 
sure that again that it’s not hindering or stopping or making it 
difficult for SLGA to carry out its mandate. It’s very important 
that they can be competitive in the marketplace, that they do 
have a role; they do have a role. And the people who are the 
owners, the real shareholders of our Crown corporations, want 
to see them flourish to be as competitive, be as modern as 
possible. 
 
Now it’s interesting. She talks about in communities that . . . 
The member from Regina Lakeview talks about, in 
communities of less than 2,000 people, as was noted with some 
of the submissions, new private retailers will be allowed to sell 
liquor from existing businesses, and this can be done with the 
staff they’ve already got. So there’s some concern about the 
potential for job growth or losses. We also heard about potential 
impacts to employment for those under 19 who are currently 
working in establishments that may sell liquor in the future. 
 
So there’s all these considerations that you have to have, and it 
was relatively, it was relatively straightforward. And we knew 
what the playing fields were, especially in our smaller 
communities where you might be using a smaller venue 
because, you know, if you’re in a community of 3 or 400, it 
would be the local grocery store, the local gas station. 
 
And so . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well I’m glad that in 
spite of the heckling that we . . . people are interested in this 
topic because it is one that we’re going to be speaking an awful 
lot, an awful lot about. And I’ll just . . . It is important, and I’m 
glad that people are listening. And I know the people at home 
are listening too, and they’re wondering, now where did this all 
start from? Where is this drive to privatize? 
 
And you know, we saw this back in the ’80s. And we saw that 
that was just a . . . well, you know, the ethos of the right to 
believe that somehow public ownership cannot get it right. But 
yet in Saskatchewan, we’ve seen a situation where actually it 
does work and it does work really, really well. And it meets the 
social mandate that people are expecting from the Crowns. And 
whether it be SaskPower to deliver electricity, SaskEnergy to 
deliver the gas to heat our homes, or SaskTel that really in so 
many ways — and we can be so proud of it as a Crown 
corporation — that meets our communications needs and 
actually has been a leader, I think in Canada and around the 
world in terms of the innovation. 
 
And I often talk about the innovation that’s here in 
Saskatchewan, that if you look at SaskTel who’s keeping on top 
of such a fast- and quick-moving world of telecommunications. 

And whether it’s with cellphones, whether it’s with security, or 
whether it’s with the Internet, it’s right on top of what’s 
happening. 
 
And I think we are . . . I just have to say that it would be such a 
loss if we went the route of . . . You know, I mean, they’re 
really putting out two ways of privatizing. It’s Bill No. 1, the 
way of just simply eliminating, taking off the list the ones that 
they do want to sell. And I wonder now if they’re sitting back 
and saying well, we should’ve taken route number two, which 
is outlined in Bill No. 40 where it gets into the definition. And 
my colleague today spoke so well, and so eloquently about the 
impact of, you know, up to 49 per cent and really what do you 
mean when you say that? 
 
[16:45] 
 
And you know, the people over there would criticize us when 
we put this bill forward. In fact, they stood up alongside us, if I 
remember that day, and voted in favour of that bill, voted in 
favour of that bill. They didn’t have a problem with the 
language we were using that day. They said it was fine. 
Everybody knew what we meant; everybody knew what we 
meant. It meant that we should keep our Crowns and not 
privatize them, do not sell them. And they were very happy to 
stand up and say, yes, we’re with you. We’re for the Crowns 
and we don’t want to privatize them. 
 
And now we’re seeing, yes there’s a little something different. 
Well we want to be able to sell 49 per cent of that. That’s a big, 
big deal and to say, oh it’s just clarifying. It’s not clarifying. It’s 
changing the game, changing the game completely. 
 
So, you know, when we get into committee, this small Bill No. 
1, it may seem like there’s not going to be very many questions 
about it. But of course, it’s going to be something we’re going 
to ask a lot of questions about because in many ways it’s like 
the Trojan Horse and we’re starting to see what’s coming out of 
the belly of the Trojan Horse. It’s Bill No. 40 and many others 
that I probably see over the course of the weeks ahead about the 
tool kit these folks are starting to create with their tools to 
dismantle the Crowns of Saskatchewan. And they’re very clear 
about it. That’s their goal; that’s their aim. 
 
They want to have as many different tools as they can to create 
a cash flow, a quick cash flow for the Minister of Finance so he 
can balance the budget that they’re working on as we speak, as 
we speak. And we know that all of them are very much engaged 
in this, and they need cash. They really, truly need a lot of cash 
and instead of ways of looking at how they can control the 
scandals over there . . . They need to control the scandals over 
there and not put it on the backs of the homeless and those 
people who are living with disabilities. 
 
And we can talk about the scandals and the bad choices they’ve 
made, whether it’s lean or GTH, you can just go down the list. 
You go down the list, go down the list of the issues, the bad 
management that they’ve had over there, that can really add up. 
That can add up.  
 
You know, the out-of-province, in fact I think they were 
out-of-country consultants that they were paying . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Oh well, now they’re chirping. I must have 



October 31, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 991 

thrown a stone, I must have thrown a stone and hit a . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . You’re yelping over there for sure. 
Something really . . . They’ve got a sore spot somewhere, I tell 
you. We’re starting to hear the yelping, you know, especially 
about lean. That lean stone hit a couple of them, and they don’t 
want to talk about lean because they know, and they know that 
was a pretty bad mistake that they made that is not helping 
anyone, not helping anyone, and lean is not. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have to tell you, they’re trying to 
figure out a way to get out of their mess. And here we have a 
couple of tools in the tool kit of how they’re going to fix their 
problem. But it’s going to be at the expense of the people of 
Saskatchewan in the long run if we see Crown corporations like 
SaskTel sold for up to 49 per cent for a quick buck. And what 
that will mean for the working women and men at SaskTel, 
what that will mean for our communities, whether they be large 
or whether they be small, the impact of losing that. 
 
Because, you know, when we get other people on the boards, 
when we get other people on the boards, they’ll soon lose their 
social mandate. They’ll soon lose their social mandate that they 
should be acting for the people of Saskatchewan, and they’ll be 
acting for other interests because it will be all about making as 
much money as possible. 
 
And what the impact that will be on small businesses in 
Saskatchewan who might count or take into . . . As part of their 
businesses, we know many, many small businesses throughout 
Saskatchewan think of the Crowns as a valued customer 
because they shop locally as much as possible, or they should 
be. Now we know this government actually in many ways 
changed that mandate in their early years because they wanted 
to create this level playing field. So they created a situation 
where Crowns don’t necessarily shop as locally as they might. 
 
And I remember that day, I remember that day when we 
brought that bill forward about shop local, and how those folks 
over there got very, very upset about that bill because what that 
meant, what that meant to their free-market thinking. It really 
rocked the boat when it came to free-market thinking. And 
we’re thinking, no let’s shop locally at least one day, one day a 
year. And that was something that got them so upset that, well 
again, it was one of those things where it really exposed the 
underbelly of the Sask Party, what they’re really all about. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a bill like No. 1, well as they say, 
is relatively straightforward. In many ways it’s more than 
straightforward because it is so clear, it is so clear what their 
intentions are. And it’s a bit of a Trojan Horse, as I said, 
because there’s much more to come, I suspect. And I worry 
about that. We hear about that because, as I said, they are 
looking for some real quick ways to fix their problems that are 
of their own making, their own making. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that should not be on the backs of people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We think about the Crown corporations and their social 
mandate which has served us so well, served us so well through 
the decades. And we think that they’ve been innovators. They 
have really stepped up, whether it’s being able to provide those 
much needed dividends in the General Revenue Fund and 
budgets that do provide for our health care, that do provide for 

our schools, do provide for those who are in need. 
 
And if we’re willing to start with Bill No. 1, how much further 
down the list do we go? Do we take out the Crown Investments 
Corporation? Do we take out the Sask Gaming Corporation? Do 
we take out SGI? Do we take out SaskPower Corporation? Do 
we take out SaskTel Communications? Do we take out STC 
[Saskatchewan Transportation Company]? Now we know that 
one has been under attack a lot. Do we take out Sask Water? 
These are on the list: SaskEnergy and Trans Gas, SG holdings 
company. 
 
You know. I find it interesting. You know what I find very 
interesting? What I find very interesting is this government has 
not done anything in terms of actually adding any . . . If they 
were to add one to this, then all of a sudden I would say maybe 
this is a government that’s interested in governing for the 
people of Saskatchewan. But they’re not going to add any, 
that’s for sure. . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Yes. Yes, we 
know what they’ve added. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is so clear what their intention is. 
And maybe I’ve been unfair to them. Maybe I’ve been unfair, 
you know, because I’ve said they’ve had no vision. I’ve said 
they’ve had no vision. Their vision is very clear. Bill No. 1 is to 
repeal the Crowns. This is their vision. This is their vision. This 
is straightforward. This is what it’s all about. So it’s only fitting 
that it was Bill No. 1.  
 
And they can laugh about it, but maybe . . . You know, other 
governments would say, we want to have — and with meaning 
— the first bill should have some sort of value or some sort of 
way of saying look at what . . . This is what we’re all about. 
This is what we’re all about. Bill No. 1, this is what we’re all 
about. 
 
Is this what you’re all about? I have to say, is this what the Sask 
Party government is all about? Dismantling the Crowns, you 
know. And clearly we see what they’re doing. They’re building 
a tool kit, different ways of tearing apart, tearing down our 
Crowns. They’re not doing anything to strengthen the Crowns. 
 
And really, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do think that, you know, we 
can all think of personal stories about when we were very glad 
. . . You know, I think about SaskTel and the fact of what they 
provide in terms of services, and whether it’s the ability to have 
a cellphone that works so well, covering most of the province if 
not, you know . . . And you can count on it. It’s reliable. 
 
The Internet is just a fantastic thing that they’ve got going. And 
the technical skills to make that happen, I could go on a bit 
about the Internet and seeing how it’s evolved over the course 
of time from its early days, and how SaskTel has been right 
there from the very beginning with Sympatico and moving it all 
the way up. 
 
And I don’t know how many people would remember the 
Archie and Gopher days, and Veronica, of Internet. Do any of 
you remember? That goes back, back days. Archie and 
Veronica and Gopher . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . and 
Bruce? Bruce? Bruce was . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Okay. 
No, there was no Jughead. It was just those ones, you know, 
and so I don’t think there was a Jughead involved. But at any 



992 Saskatchewan Hansard October 31, 2016 

rate, Mr. Speaker, I do digress. I’m moving off the topic. I’m 
moving off the topic. 
 
I want to get back on this important one, The Crown 
Corporations Public Ownership Act and the amendment and 
how this is clearly, clearly an important bill. And I see how it, I 
was going to use the word “bookends,” but it’s like we’re going 
to have a whole bookshelf of different ways these folks . . . 
Now they’re going to focus on how they’re going to gut, 
dismantle our Crown corporations of what we are so very, very, 
very proud of, you know. And while this bill is very short and 
really only speaks to one Crown corporation and only part of it, 
and only one part of it. Forty stores, they’re after. They’re 
selling off these 40 stores, but yet they felt the need to pull that 
out of the Act entirely. This doesn’t seem to make a lot of 
sense. But many of their bills, many of their bills don’t make a 
lot of sense. 
 
And you know, it will be interesting. And I would hope, I 
would hope in many ways, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they would see 
the error of their ways and want to repeal or amend this bill 
because it just is unfortunate that we’re going down this track. 
SLGA can be competitive, can do its job, you know. And I 
think that if in a modern climate we can see this be so much 
stronger, that it is unfortunate that we’re going down this path. 
And I think it’s not just for the big markets, not the big markets 
in Saskatoon but also the smaller markets in the small 
communities. 
 
And I will want to talk more about this. I’m very happy to talk 
longer about this because I’ve just had a bit of an introduction 
to this topic because I do think that we could talk further about 
this. I know that as we’re getting ready for the supper hour, and 
many people are turning to what they’re going to be having for 
supper, they should be thinking about the good work that the 
Crown corporations have provided, whether it’s heat in their 
homes through SaskEnergy, electricity through SaskPower.  
 
But I think we should be concerned, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I 
would say to the folks at home and across the way, be 
concerned. Be concerned; it’s a bit of a Trojan Horse here. And 
we’re sorry to see this government looking for ways, looking 
for ways that they can shore up their budget that they know that 
they’re in trouble for. And I wouldn’t be surprised if Bill 40 
was part of that because of the treasury board meetings that 
have come about, and they now know that they are short of 
cash. And so . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I am pleased to inform members that 
we have now . . . The clock is now 5 o’clock, and this House 
stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 961 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 961 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................... 962 
  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 962 
  Ross ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 963 
  Moe ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 965 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 965 
  Weekes ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 987 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Young ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 963 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 963 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 963 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 964 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 964 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 964 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 964 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Action in Response to Tragedy 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 965 
 Diwali Celebrations 
  Ross ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 965 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 965 
 Breast Cancer Awareness Month 
  Wilson ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 966 
 New Physicians Choose to Stay in Moose Jaw 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................... 966 
 SaskBuilds Wins Silver at International P3 Awards 
  Steinley ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 966 
 Hindu Temple Hall Opening 
  Parent ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 966 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Prevention of Youth Suicides 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 967 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 967 
 Support for Northern Communities 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 968 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 968 
 Global Transportation Hub and Land Acquisitions 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 969 
  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 969 
 Provisions of The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 969 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 969 
 Wait Times for Child Surgery 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 970 
  Reiter ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 970 
 Coroner Examinations of In-Custody Deaths 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 970 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 971 
 Measures to Reduce Impaired Driving 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 971 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................... 971 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 42 — The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous Enforcement Measures) Amendment Act, 2016 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................... 971 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 42 — The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous Enforcement Measures) Amendment Act, 2016 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................... 972 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 972 
 
 



 

 Bill No. 40 — The Interpretation Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’interprétation 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 974 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 974 
  Merriman (point of order) ....................................................................................................................................................... 981 
  The Deputy Speaker (point of order) ...................................................................................................................................... 981 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ON BILLS 
 Bill No. 42 — The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous Enforcement Measures) Amendment Act, 2016 ........................................... 973 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 42 — The Traffic Safety (Miscellaneous Enforcement Measures) Amendment Act, 2016 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................... 973 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................... 974 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 31 — The Local Authority Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Amendment Act, 2016  
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 985 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 985 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 986 
 Bill No. 1 — The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 2016  
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 987 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


