






















































Hansard: October 25, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 30A  TUESDAY, OCTOBER 25, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (Ind.) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10; Independent (Ind.) — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 851 
 October 25, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Leave for an 
extended introduction? 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, I’m pleased to 
introduce some very important guests in the Legislative 
Assembly today. Primarily they represent our province’s finest 
first responders who put their lives on the line on a daily basis 
to protect all of us, as well as others who do some very 
important work in regard to mental health and in providing a 
safe and secure province. They have joined us for the 
introduction of some legislation a little later today. 
 
In no particular order, we are joined by Casey Ward, president, 
Sask Federation of Police Officers; Dr. Nick Carleton, associate 
professor, psychology, University of Regina; Clive Weighill, 
chief of police, Saskatoon Police Service; Evan Bray, chief of 
police, Regina Police Service. People may know Evan Bray as 
probably the newest police chief in the province, so we 
welcome him to his rookie year. 
 
Morley Desmarais, president, Saskatoon firefighters; Doug 
Lapchuk, president, Sask Volunteer Fire Fighters Association; 
Lloyd Zwack, president, Saskatchewan Professional Fire 
Fighters Association; Kyle Sereda, president, Saskatchewan 
Emergency Medical Services Association; Paul Hills, 
Saskatoon Paramedic Association; Tracy Zambory, president, 
Sask Union of Nurses; Denise Dick, first vice-president, Sask 
Union of Nurses; Julius Brown, coordinator, OSI-CAN 
[Occupational Stress Injury — I Can] project of the Canadian 
Mental Health Association, Saskatchewan division; Cathleen 
MacPhee, PTSD [post-traumatic stress disorder] Saskatchewan, 
Regina; Hazel Ritchie, PTSD Saskatoon; Leanna Korevaar, 
PTSD Sask; Derek Snow, trainer with Citadel Canine Society; 
Gord Hewitt, president, Moose Jaw Firefighters association; 
Bill Howes, vice-president Local 553, Moose Jaw Firefighters; 
Kevin Tetlow, president, Regina Professional Fire Fighters 
Association; Brian Seidlik, vice-president, Regina Professional 
Fire Fighters Association; Rossel Marion, provincial service 
officer, Royal Canadian Legion; and finally, from the Workers’ 
Compensation Board, we have Peter Federko, CEO [chief 
executive officer], and board members Larry Flowers and Garry 
Hamblin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members join me in 
welcoming these individuals to their Assembly today. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
join with the Minister of Labour in welcoming these esteemed 
guests to their legislature today. Today, the minister pointed 
out, we’ve got leaders from labour. We’ve got folks who do a 
really wonderful job in advocating and building better mental 
health supports here in Saskatchewan, folks who lead and 
support their employees or their members. Many people in the 
gallery today who are always willing to share with both sides of 
the House how things could be better here in Saskatchewan, 
taking the time to sit down with all of us to share your thoughts 
and ideas. 
 
There’s some in the gallery who I count as friends. So I’m very 
glad to see you here all today. And thank you for all that you do 
in your community across Saskatchewan in creating better 
workplaces and ultimately a better province. So thank you for 
all that you do, and I’d like to welcome you on behalf of the 
official opposition. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from The Battlefords. 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And to you and through 
you, to all the members of this Assembly, I’d like to 
acknowledge and welcome the members of the Association of 
Saskatchewan Realtors up in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. We 
have realtors here today from Yorkton, Estevan, Swift Current, 
Lloydminster, Moose Jaw, Regina, Saskatoon, and from my 
own constituency, the Battlefords. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had the opportunity to meet with them this 
morning as well as at their MLA [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] reception. I would just ask all members of this 
Assembly to join me in welcoming them to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And on behalf of the 
official opposition, I want to join the member opposite in 
welcoming those folks from the real estate community here to 
their Legislative Assembly. We understand you’ve had 
meetings with government and we really appreciate the 
advocacy that you bring forward. The issues that you bring 
forward are important. They are long-standing issues that need 
attending to so we’re very hopeful that your conversations were 
fruitful and we wish you all the best. But particularly we want 
to thank you to your Legislative Assembly or welcome you to 
your Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 
Ms. Carr: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you I’d like to 
introduce, in your gallery, my sister Lynda. Lynda, give a wave 
to everybody. Lynda is my much younger sister of 11 months 
and she’s always been a great support and helps me throughout 
everything I’ve done in my life, so I just wanted to introduce 
her and say thank you for being my sister, and welcome. And 
I’d like everybody to welcome her on behalf of this Assembly. 



852 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2016 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Gardiner 
Park. 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks a lot, Mr. Speaker. Once again it’s 
my pleasure to introduce a group of students from F.W. 
Johnson Collegiate again this afternoon. There’s grade 10 
students this time. There’s 34 of them, and their teacher is once 
again Mr. McKillop. It’s good to see him again. I had a good 
meeting with them yesterday. And Ms. Matic is accompanying 
this group of students. I look forward to meeting them after 
question period. I ask all members to help me welcome them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While I was on my 
feet, I failed to mention someone that I think is very important. 
We have many guests in the gallery who are very important, but 
as a resident of Saskatoon and as the Health critic, I’d like to 
give a special shout-out to Chief Clive Weighill. As a daughter 
of a police officer, a police officer who is very proactive and 
supportive of community policing . . . Chief Weighill has done 
a remarkable job in making that service, I think, what people in 
Saskatoon want, Mr. Speaker. But I’d also like to commend him 
for the work that he has done on the Action Accord on 
supporting the stabilization unit at the Lighthouse. So thank 
you, Chief Weighill, for all the advocacy and work that you do 
in ensuring that people in Saskatoon get the supports that they 
need. So thank you. And I’d ask all members to welcome Chief 
Weighill to his Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
know the entire Assembly is aware of the impact that the 
Regina bypass is having on the local economy. It’s the single 
biggest job creator Saskatchewan has seen since the railway. 
It’s supporting 8,200 construction jobs in this province, and I’m 
proud to introduce one of those 8,200 people here today. 
 
Seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is Will Williams. Will, can 
you give us a wave? Thanks. He’s a project coordinator with 
the Regina bypass design partners. And he’s accompanied today 
by Reagan Seidler from SaskBuilds. Mr. Speaker, Will was 
born and raised in Regina and attended Campbell Collegiate, 
which isn’t far from here. This spring he graduated from the 
College of Engineering at the University of Saskatchewan and 
now he’s come home to start his career on the bypass and 
contribute to the economy and the community that raised him. 
 
Will, on behalf of the Minister of Highways and myself, thank 
you for joining us today. We’re so pleased projects like the 
bypass are providing opportunities for young people to stay, 
work, and raise their families right here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. So I’d invite all members to welcome Will to his 
Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise again today to present a petition to improve PTSD coverage 
for Saskatchewan workers. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point 
out that post-traumatic stress disorder can severely impact the 
lives of Saskatchewan workers. They point out that delay in 
diagnosis and treatment for PTSD can be detrimental to 
recovery and that PTSD is not on the list of workers’ 
compensation illnesses presumed to be work related in 
Saskatchewan. They also point out that many workers suffering 
from work-related PTSD are burdened by lengthy investigations 
and approval processes. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Saskatchewan government to 
make the necessary changes to ensure that if Saskatchewan 
workers are exposed to traumatic events on the job and are 
then diagnosed with PTSD, it is presumed to be caused by 
the worker’s employment and the worker will subsequently 
be covered under workers’ compensation and receive the 
same benefits as others with work-related injuries. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens from 
Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm River. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have petitions here 
from the good citizens of Saskatchewan opposed to carbon tax 
that king Trudeau is forcing on the people of Saskatchewan, a 
tax that’s going to be a threat to our economy and make 
unaffordable increases to the cost of living to each and every 
citizen: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan to cause 
the government to take the necessary steps and actions to 
stop the federal government from imposing a carbon tax on 
the province. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Davidson and Kenaston. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition to stop the redirection of funding of 
the Northern Teacher Education Program Council, Inc., 
NORTEP. As a recent report shows that 94 per cent of 
NORTEP’s grads found employment in the North, and 
NORTEP has improved the teacher retention rates in the North 
as well, NORTEP has a positive economic impact in northern 
Saskatchewan and they also provide high quality, face-to-face 
instruction and services to students. 
 
And the province’s financial deficit cannot be fixed by cutting 
indigenous education in the North and a program that has 
served the North for well over 40 years, Mr. Speaker. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

We, in the prayer that . . . respectfully request that the 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to immediately restore 



October 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 853 

their five-year agreement to fund the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council and to continue to fund 
NORTEP-NORPAC programs in La Ronge. 

 
It is signed by a number of people throughout the province, Mr. 
Speaker. And the three pages that I’m presenting today are 
people that are primarily from Air Ronge, La Ronge, and I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition regarding cuts to the Lighthouse program. The people 
who signed this want to bring to our attention the following: 
that this government has repeatedly indicated that the 
Lighthouse stabilization unit in Saskatoon keeps individuals out 
of hospital emergency rooms and jail cells. The estimated 
savings for the government with the announced cuts in 
September is under $1 million, but the subsequent ER 
[emergency room] costs alone could be several million dollars. 
 
In 2015, the Provincial Auditor called upon the Ministry of 
Social Services to provide the correct amount of assistance, not 
to revoke this essential service and thereby putting the most 
vulnerable at extreme risk. And these ministers are now trying 
to place the responsibility for repairing budget deficits on those 
experiencing addictions, unemployment, and poverty and who 
are living from day to day without proper services. 
 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

They request that the Government of Saskatchewan 
immediately reverse their recent cuts to funding that allows 
extremely vulnerable people to access the services of the 
Lighthouse stabilization unit in Saskatoon, and revisit their 
imposition of a strict and narrow definition of 
homelessness in November of 2015 which forced the 
Lighthouse to cut back its hours of essential service in 
February of 2016, and to take immediate steps to ensure 
that homeless people in Saskatchewan have emergency 
shelter, clothing, and food available to them before more 
lives are lost. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Saskatoon. I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition in support of Wakamow Valley 
Authority. And we know that as a result of the passage of The 
Wakamow Valley Authority Amendment Act, 2016 this past June 
30th, the Wakamow Valley Authority lost its statutory funding 
of $127,000 from the Saskatchewan government in addition to 
the $30,000 in supplementary funding. And this loss of annual 
funding negatively affected the ability of Wakamow to maintain 
and conserve its lands and repair its facilities and provide 
services to its community. And of course there were job layoffs 
as a result as well. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately repeal The Wakamow Valley Authority 
Amendment Act, 2016 and reinstate statutory funding to the 
Wakamow Valley Authority. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the people signing this petition come from Yorkton and 
Moose Jaw. Thank you so much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present to you a petition condemning the Sask Party’s cuts to 
the SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for disability] 
program. After nearly a decade of wasting the economic boom 
and blowing through the savings, the government is now 
forcing the province’s most vulnerable people to pay for the 
Sask Party mismanagement. That the Sask Party’s latest 
cold-hearted cut will take money away from people who are 
unable to work due to a disability; that the government’s 
heartless decision to cut funding to the SAID program will hurt 
hundreds of Saskatchewan residents with disabilities; that many 
people who are being hurt by the Sask Party cut live with 
serious illnesses such as multiple sclerosis, cancer, autism, and 
many other illnesses; and that contrary to the Minister of Social 
Services’ claims, the government underfunds clients in regards 
to shelter allowance; and that shelter allowance should be 
reflective of the current rental costs. I will read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to stop their plan to cut 
the SAID funding and immediately restore funding for 
those living with a disability. 

 
This petition is signed by residents of Regina, and I do so 
present. 
 
[13:45] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
the following petition on early learning and child care. Mr. 
Speaker, the residents who have signed this petition wish to 
draw our attention to the following: across Saskatchewan, 
licensed non-profit child care centres are taxed inconsistently. 
Many of our licensed non-profit child care centres pay 
commercial property taxes, and this is not done in Alberta, 
Manitoba, Ontario, BC [British Columbia], or New Brunswick. 
 
Child care is essential to our economy yet most centres struggle 
to balance their budget. This issue threatens both the number of 
child care spaces and the quality of care. Child care centres are 
institutions of early learning and childhood development, and it 
is appropriate that they have the same tax treatment as schools. 



854 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2016 

I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognize 
that licensed non-profit child care centres provide 
programs that are foundational to a healthy society by 
including them in The Education Act and exempt all 
licensed non-profit child care centres in Saskatchewan 
from property tax through changes to the appropriate 
legislation. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents in Yorkton. I do 
so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling for a halt to the Sask Party’s sell-off of 
SaskTel. The petitioners point out that, in the recent campaign, 
the Sask Party promised that they would not privatize SaskTel. 
They point out that instead of the Sask Party looking at their 
own waste and scandal, the Sask Party is now talking about 
breaking that promise and looking to sell off SaskTel to make a 
quick buck. The petitioners point out that SaskTel is owned by 
all of us, that it was built with Saskatchewan hard work, 
innovation, and pride. Mr. Speaker: 
 

In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners 
respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan call on the Saskatchewan Party government 
to keep their promise, stop their plan to sell off SaskTel, 
and keep our valued Crown corporation in the hands of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by individuals 
from Carrot River and Saskatoon. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 

Donation to Children’s Hospital Foundation 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, we all know very well the incredible generosity of 
Saskatchewan people, and the people of Swift Current, my 
constituency, are no exception. Mr. Speaker, today it’s a great 
pleasure for me to recognize two of these very special people 
from my hometown of Swift Current: Duane and Bev Smith. 
They are successful business people in southwest 
Saskatchewan. They’ve recently donated $500,000 to the 
children’s hospital of Saskatchewan. 
 
This very generous gift will support a family playroom in the 
day medicine unit in the new hospital. It is a special place 
where parents and caregivers and families can relax with their 
kids that might be going through therapy for treatments like 
cancer or other serious illnesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Duane and Bev made their first contribution of 
$100,000 at last year’s children’s hospital radiothon in Regina, 
and then they decided to go even higher to boost their 
commitment to what we see today — a total of a half a million 

dollars. It’s one of the biggest donations to the hospital to date, 
and the Smiths have very good company, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Children’s Hospital Foundation has received 4,700 
donations from individuals, 990 corporate donations, and 47 
donations from foundations. Fifty million has been raised so far 
to the goal of 75 million, and there can be no doubt at all that 
that objective will be met to coincide with the government’s 
investment so that Saskatchewan will have a modern, 
well-equipped children’s hospital in Saskatoon. Thanks to 
Duane and Bev Smith. I’d ask all members to join with me in 
recognizing all the donors to the children’s hospital. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Prince Albert Celebrates 125 Years of  
Ukrainians in Saskatchewan 

 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On September 26th 
I was pleased to attend the flag-raising ceremony at Prince 
Albert City Hall Memorial Square in recognition of the 125th 
anniversary of the arrival of the first Ukrainians to 
Saskatchewan. I know my friend the Leader of the Opposition 
also attended events here in Regina to mark this important 
milestone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, several people of Ukrainian descent were present 
for the flag-raising ceremony and the kickoff to their special 
week. It was wonderful to see children in traditional Ukrainian 
clothing in attendance. There’s no doubt that Ukrainian youth in 
Prince Albert embrace their culture and heritage and have not 
forgotten their roots. These young people make me optimistic 
that Ukrainian traditions and knowledge will be passed on and 
that future generations will be aware of their heritage. 
 
There are many people of Ukrainian heritage in my 
constituency of Prince Albert Northcote. Many of these people 
work hard at keeping their traditions and culture alive, from 
dance competitions held each year to sold out perogy suppers 
held by local churches each month. There’s no doubt that in 
Prince Albert, Ukrainian culture and traditions have become 
interwoven with all the other cultures and traditions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 
acknowledging the 125th anniversary of Ukrainians in 
Saskatchewan and in Prince Albert. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 

Community Living Fourplex Opens in Lloydminster 
 
Ms. Young: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I had the 
privilege representing the government at the grand opening of 
an amazing new community resource in Lloydminster last 
month, the Bea Fisher Centre’s new community living fourplex. 
This new facility is an assisted living complex that provides the 
supports necessary for their clients living with intellectual 
disabilities. It provides them the opportunity to live 
independently. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud that our government had a big part in 
making this project possible. We provided a quarter of a million 



October 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 855 

dollars in funding as well as a $900,000 mortgage — this in 
addition to the funding we provide the Bea Fisher Centre on a 
yearly basis to offer needed supports to the Lloydminster 
region. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a great story for the Bea Fisher Centre and 
will be an invaluable addition to the already three group homes 
and day programs for more than 100 individuals. 
 
It was a great event, but the aspect that stood out the most was 
meeting some of the new residents who now call the new 
complex home. In speaking with one young man, he was 
excited to purchase kitchen utensils and furniture for the first 
time in his life. He was thrilled to be moving into his very own 
place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 
congratulating the Bea Fisher Centre for the opening of this 
new assisted community living fourplex and congratulate all the 
new residents on moving into their new homes. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Students Hold Fundraiser for Residential 
School Memorial 

 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week students at 
George Lee School in Regina held a carnival to raise funds for a 
memorial and to raise awareness about a dark chapter in 
Saskatchewan’s history. 
 
From 1891 to 1911, more than 500 children were stolen from 
their families and taken to the Regina Indian Industrial School. 
Many of those children died while attending the school and 
were buried in unmarked graves near the school building. 
 
After learning about the Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission’s call to action and after visiting the cemetery 
where dozens of children are buried in unmarked graves, Shelly 
Reed’s grade 7 class decided to organize a fundraiser to help 
pay for a memorial at the residential school cemetery site. Mr. 
Speaker, we thank these students for their leadership and their 
commitment to reconciliation. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Canora-Pelly. 
 

New Physicians in Preeceville 
 
Mr. Dennis: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Dozens of physicians 
have recently begun practising in Saskatchewan, improving 
access to health services for residents across the province. This 
month 10 new international medical grads are practising in 
Saskatchewan, thanks to the most recent results in the 
Saskatchewan international physician practice assessment 
program. SIPPA is a made-in-Saskatchewan program that opens 
the doors for family doctors trained in countries around the 
world. Since SIPPA began in 2011, more than 190 new family 
physicians have completed the assessment and are practising in 
our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am very happy to announce through the SIPPA 
program, the community of Preeceville, which is in my 

constituency, has a new physician: Dr. Shamsher Singh. Dr. 
Singh has joined another new physician, Dr. Catharina Meyer, 
at the facility with Dr. Morteza Shahrestani and nurse 
practitioner Dawn Kennedy in providing health services to 
Preeceville and surrounding area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan is also making progress in more locally trained 
family medical graduates in the province. Since completing the 
postgraduate program, 40 new family medicine graduates from 
the University of Saskatchewan are practising in Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, I ask my colleagues to join me today in 
welcoming these new doctors to Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Melville Student Wins Gold at Skills Canada 
National Competition 

 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the House today to congratulate Dallas Schutz from the 
Melville Comprehensive school on winning the gold medal in 
welding at Skills Canada National Competition. 
 
Moncton, New Brunswick played host to this national skills 
competition on June 6th and June 7th, where the competition 
brought together more than 500 secondary and post-secondary 
students from across the country. Participants showcased their 
skills in 45 different trades while competing against exceptional 
students from across the country in an Olympic-style 
competition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dallas Schutz was in grade 12 at the time when he 
showed the country his talent. His winning projects were a 
lighthouse and a grain elevator that were incredible examples of 
his welding talent, especially the grain elevator that is 
reminiscent of the iconic prairie buildings that are often seen in 
rural Saskatchewan communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dallas Schutz acknowledges much of his success 
is due to his Melville Comprehensive School welding 
instructor, Dennis Muzyka, who spent hours with him honing 
the tricks of the trade. It is evident that MCS [Melville 
Comprehensive School] is doing an exceptional job at preparing 
its students for the future, as they have also sent students to 
compete nationally in carpentry, outboard power equipment, 
cabinet making, cosmetology, photography, and TV video. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly to join 
me in congratulating gold medal winner Dallas Schutz and his 
teacher Dennis Muzyka on this amazing accomplishment. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Gardiner 
Park. 
 

Violence Prevention Week in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks. I’m pleased to rise today to inform 
members that this week is Violence Prevention Week in 
Saskatchewan. The aim of this week is to raise awareness on 
how gender and interpersonal violence and abuse is an issue 
that impacts everyone. This week is proclaimed at the request of 



856 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2016 

the University of Regina, through their Man Up Against 
Violence initiative. The minister referenced this program just 
yesterday when the U of R [University of Regina] Rams 
Football Club was here. 
 
This initiative focuses on the leadership role of men in 
addressing all types of violence through education, training, 
partnerships, and awareness. Mr. Speaker, our government is 
committed to reducing interpersonal violence and abuse, and to 
build upon existing work occurring between all levels of 
government and with community partners. 
 
Our government offers various programs to help prevent or 
intervene in response to violence through victim and child 
protection services, mental health and addiction services, 
therapeutic domestic violence courts, and indigenous-specific 
training programs. An online course aimed at preventing child 
abuse is now available through the Ministry of Social Services. 
 
We also support STOPS to Violence, an acronym which means 
Saskatchewan Towards Offering Partnership Solutions. This 
organization brings together a network of individuals, 
communities, organizations, government, and the private sector 
to promote healthier communities and to reduce interpersonal 
abuse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we take the issue of interpersonal violence and 
abuse very seriously and believe that we are all part of the 
solution. Thank you. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transaction 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, day after day the Premier 
has failed to answer serious but basic questions about the Sask 
Party’s GTH [Global Transportation Hub] land scandal. We 
hope today that that’ll finally change. 
 
In her report, the auditor pointed out that the land speculator 
who supported the Sask Party had access to the decision of 
cabinet on the land purchase before it was public. The auditor 
exposed this. It’s also been exposed through investigation. 
 
To the Premier: what has he done to find out who leaked this 
confidential information? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, that is not what 
the auditor says in her report. Moreover, Mr. Speaker, consider 
this. The document to which the Hon. Leader of the Opposition 
is referring points to the fact that cabinet authorized a purchase 
price from this individual of 105,000 per acre. He says that this 
document was leaked to that purchaser. Why then would that 
purchaser accept an offer of $103,000? The offer that he 
accepted was $103,000. The leaked document would have 
shown that cabinet authorized more money than that. As has 
been reported, I think on CTV [Canadian Television Network 

Ltd.], that individual left money on the table.  
 
Mr. Speaker, there was no leak of the document. Cabinet 
authorized agents of the government to begin negotiations. That 
part would have been known to the purchaser because the 
negotiations were under way. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — This is getting more outrageous by the 
day. The Premier gets to his feet and tries to claim that he saved 
$2,000 in a deal that’s become abundantly clear to 
Saskatchewan people that he wasted, paid three times more than 
he should have and wasted tens of millions of hard-earned 
Saskatchewan people’s dollars. My question back to the 
Premier that wasn’t answered: has he investigated this 
confidential cabinet leak? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there was no leak. Had there 
been a leak, the leak would have been of a document that said 
the government’s prepared to pay 105. The guy settled for 103. 
I think the facts are pretty clear in this case. It’s, by the way, 
why the auditor doesn’t reference this as a leak. She might have 
said it’s notable, but it’s not a leak. Often, Mr. Speaker, 
government will authorize an agent to go ahead and begin 
negotiations. That part would have been known to the other 
party because he was involved in the negotiations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this doesn’t fit the narrative over there. It doesn’t 
fit what the NDP [New Democratic Party] desperately want this 
case to be. The fact of the matter is that same Provincial 
Auditor’s report that he quoted from says there was no 
wrongdoing. There were no fraud. There were no red flags as a 
result of her report. Will he accept the auditor’s findings in that 
regard? Does he agree with the auditor when she makes that 
conclusion, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The Premier can’t make up the facts. 
Page 16 of the auditor’s report clearly highlights this 
information, the information that was in the hands, the cabinet 
information that was in the hands of the land speculator, the 
land speculator that this government paid way too much for this 
land for.  
 
What is the question, you know, to the Premier? Does he even 
think this is good practice? We know he likes to flip cars. 
Would he ever let the seller of a car that he’s purchasing know 
that he’s intent, that he’s going to purchase it before he 
negotiates a price? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — No, Mr. Speaker, I wouldn’t. In fact if I 
knew I was prepared to sell a car for $105,000 — it would 
probably have to be like a Hemi ’Cuda, I would probably say — 
but if I was prepared to sell a car for $105,000, I wouldn’t let 
the other person know that. And I certainly wouldn’t leak them 
the documents, which is precisely what’s happened here. 
 



October 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 857 

Mr. Speaker, in the press release that accompanied the 
Provincial Auditor’s report that the Leader of the Opposition is 
now quoting because I know he believes the work is good, she 
says in the press release, and I quote, “The audit did not find 
evidence of conflicts of interest or indications of fraud or 
wrongdoing by the GTH management or board of directors.” 
She went on to say to the media on July 4th, “We’re always 
looking for red flags, and because this is a land transaction, we 
did look for conflicts of interest. And we didn’t find any 
evidence of . . .” 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — It goes on to say, the auditor does, “We 
didn’t find evidence of conflict of interest [and I’m quoting] or 
indications of fraud or wrongdoing in the course of our work, so 
there were no red flags there.” 
 
To the Leader of the Opposition: does he disagree with the 
Provincial Auditor’s findings? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The Premier of Saskatchewan needs to 
read that report. It was scathing. It exonerated no one, and the 
very fact of the information in question here today is on page 16 
of that report. Let’s be clear. This is confidential cabinet 
information. This was a leak. And the Sask Party’s actions defy 
Saskatchewan’s common sense. 
 
To the Premier: why would he tell anyone that you’re going to 
be buying their property before they’ve ever negotiated a price? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — There was a negotiation to purchase 
the property, Mr. Speaker. Of course we expressed an intention 
to purchase the property. And as far as his contention, there was 
no leak, Mr. Speaker. There was no leak. The negotiating . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — There was no leak, Mr. Speaker. If the 
buyer had the cabinet document in question authorizing the 
property to be purchased for $105,000 an acre, why in goodness 
name would he accept $103,000 an acre? Just as a point of 
logic, Mr. Speaker, their contention doesn’t make any sense. 
 
The Provincial Auditor fully canvassed the matter. The 
Provincial Auditor concluded that there was no leak. She 
concluded there was a notable transaction along with many, 
many others that she examined in that report. And at the end of 
the day, her conclusion was that there was no wrongdoing, there 
was no fraud, and there was no conflict of interest. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The question was to the Premier, not to 

that minister. And the Premier can yuk this up all he wants, but 
Saskatchewan people whose dollars were wasted certainly 
aren’t laughing. This deal cost Saskatchewan people millions of 
dollars. This leak of information and that money went straight 
into the pocket of a donor. 
 
I’ll give that Premier one more shot to change his mind and 
come clean. Is this Premier sure that he wants to stay with his 
defence on this inexcusable leak? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, we have answered every 
question directly that has been put to us with regard to this 
matter. The Provincial Auditor addressed every single one of 
the matters being raised by the members opposite. The 
Provincial Auditor’s conclusion was that there was no 
wrongdoing, that there was no fraud, and there was no conflict 
of interest. The members opposite seem to continuously be 
questioning the conclusion that was come to by the Provincial 
Auditor. 
 
My question for the Leader of the Opposition is, do you accept 
the report, the investigation done by the Provincial Auditor? 
Yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — This is inexcusable. And we have the 
question again that went to the Premier with no answer. And I 
guess the question is, how does the Premier think that he can 
simply brush off a confidential leak of this sort of information 
that clearly compromised taxpayers. The Premier yuks it up, a 
deal that’s wasted millions of dollars of hard-working 
Saskatchewan people’s money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
How can the Premier justify that it’s somehow appropriate for 
that land developer to have that private, confidential cabinet 
information before the deal is done? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — You know, Mr. Speaker, this is a very 
good illustration of what happens when you come into question 
period unprepared, unprepared to ask questions based on 
answers that you received. The member opposite received very 
clear answers. There was no leak, Mr. Speaker. Logic would 
point that out. We’ve already explained why. Why would the 
developer take less than was . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member from Athabasca please 
come to order? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Logic would dictate, why would the 
developer take less than which cabinet had approved if they had 
advance information of that? It doesn’t make any sense, Mr. 
Speaker. There was no leak. 
 
The auditor fully canvassed these matters. The auditor had 



858 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2016 

access to all of the documents, all of the individuals. The 
auditor did a very, very thorough audit with full authority to 
examine all of these matters. And once again, Mr. Speaker, her 
conclusion was that there was no wrongdoing, there was no 
conflict of interest and there was no fraud — a conclusion that 
doesn’t seem to be agreed with by the members opposite. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The fact is that the Premier and the Sask 
Party paid almost three times as much for this land as they 
should have. How can the Premier claim that that information in 
the hands of that developer didn’t compromise Saskatchewan 
taxpayers? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. The auditor had full authority to canvass all of these 
matters and her conclusion was that there was no wrongdoing. 
 
The auditor did identify challenges in terms of communications 
between the ministries of Highways and Infrastructure and the 
Global Transportation Hub. She made 10 recommendations. 
Those recommendations have been fully accepted by the 
Government of Saskatchewan. We’re working very hard on 
implementing those recommendations. That’s where our focus 
is, is making sure that we can move forward with these 
recommendations in place to ensure that we have a successful 
resolution, a successful outcome, and the GTH moves forward 
and is the great success that we know it’s going to be. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, instead of distancing themselves 
from their colleague from Lloydminster’s unacceptable and 
unfounded attacks on school boards, it’s been noted that her 
colleague had heckled that it’s school boards’ “choice” — their 
choice, Mr. Speaker — to cut students’ supports, cut educators. 
 
This is far from a choice for school boards. This government 
has them over a barrel. And when students aren’t getting the 
education that they deserve, and educators are out of work, this 
government offers flippant responses. In the last year, over 
1,200 Saskatchewan jobs were lost from education. 
 
Why don’t the members opposite care about that? And why 
don’t they care about kids getting the support that they need in 
the classroom? And, Mr. Speaker, why doesn’t the minister care 
enough to admit that underfunding education is his choice? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Well, Mr. Speaker, here we go again. 
We will have to stand in this House on a regular basis and 
correct the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when told that the operating grant to school 

divisions had increased by 33 per cent, which is an accurate 
statement, Mr. Speaker, the Education critic responded by 
saying, “A large portion of that is capital.” Mr. Speaker, that’s 
wrong. The 33 per cent is the increase to the operating and does 
not include any portion of capital. The $1.4 billion we’ve 
invested in capital is over and above our operating. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to give the member opposite the ability 
and the opportunity to stand in the House today and correct the 
mistakes that she made when talking to the Leader-Post 
yesterday, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, the minister doesn’t like my 
comments, so let’s try comments from someone else. For a third 
year in a row, Saskatoon Public School Board had to dip into 
their reserves just to balance their budget. And as the board 
Chair said, “None of the cuts that we made are sustainable in 
the long term.” He goes on: “The big part of what we do affects 
the classroom.” And again: “We don’t have the final say on 
funding that school divisions get, and we certainly don’t control 
the number of students that come into our system.” 
 
That doesn’t sound like much of a choice to me, Mr. Speaker. 
Besides, the budgets are submitted to the minister for approval. 
Since the government is solely responsible for funding 
education in every way, how can the minister stand there and 
not accept responsibility? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
appears to be saying that somehow this is all the government’s 
responsibility, that there is no role for the boards in trying to 
have some kind of autonomy. If the member opposite wants to 
stand in her place and advocate for doing away with school 
divisions, let her take that position and stand up and be 
accountable for having said that. Mr. Speaker, I would also like 
to give her the opportunity to stand in her place and correct the 
mistakes that she made when speaking to the media yesterday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re a government that increased spending on 
capital like never before in this province. The $1.4 billion that 
we invested in capital is over and above everything that we 
spent on operating, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like the member 
opposite, who is an honourable person, to stand in her place 
today and acknowledge that. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Funding for the Northern Teacher Education Program 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, we heard last week from both the 
Premier and the Minister of Advanced Education that they want 
to support the North. In fact the minister has said, “We need to 
champion a strong North so that people can go to school, train 
for jobs, and live and build families in a vibrant northern 
community.” 
 
The sad thing is that’s exactly what the NORTEP-NORPAC 
[Northern Professional Access College] program has been 



October 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 859 

promoting — schooling, jobs, and strong communities — and 
this minister wants to take that away, take away autonomy from 
the North and from indigenous communities. And when the 
minister was asked about how much money the supposed 
efficiency measure would save them, she had no idea. So what 
will it take for this government to keep its promise and honour 
the five-year agreement they signed in 2015 to ensure that 
NORTEP-NORPAC carries on its vital work in the North? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, NORTEP 
Council is not NORTEP programming, Mr. Speaker. Our 
intention is to broaden the umbrella of opportunities and 
accessibility for northern students, not to shrink them. And as I 
have said, this is about finding the best northern-based solution 
for the delivery of teaching and professional access programs 
for both NORTEP, Mr. Speaker, and all northern students.  
 
And I was very, very heartened to hear that NORTEP council 
has decided to move forward with stakeholder meetings and 
submissions from potential partners. It has submitted timelines 
for going forward. That’s great news for everybody. That’s 
great news for the North, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:15] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a study in doublespeak from 
that minister. This issue needs a straight answer. One thing the 
minister got wrong last week is the fact that there is a chronic 
shortage of teachers in the North. We know that the Northern 
Lights School Division started out this school year with six 
vacancies, and they still have three unfilled teaching positions. 
 
We know that over 80 per cent of graduates from this program 
stay in the North, so they are cutting a program that would help 
train community teachers when there is a need for community 
teachers. That is not building a stronger northern Saskatchewan. 
It is certainly not keeping Saskatchewan strong. When will this 
minister get the facts straight and honour the commitment that 
this government made to the students, to the teachers, and to the 
northern communities that are counting on the vital work of 
NORTEP-NORPAC? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What I said, Mr. 
Speaker, was that there were more students interested in 
pursuing teacher education than there are spots. That’s not 
inconsistent with the comment by Ken Ladouceur, director of 
education for the Northern Lights School Division, that there’s 
a chronic shortage of teachers, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we 
have to make sure that there’s sustainability and growth in the 
North and that needs are being met. 
 
And there’s always more work we can do, Mr. Speaker, but the 
success rates speak for themselves. We’ve seen a rise in 
enrolment in post-secondary institutions by First Nations and 
Métis students across this province: 29 per cent since 2007-8, 

Mr. Speaker. Let’s build on that in northern Saskatchewan. 
Sixteen thousand new learners enrolled in post-secondary 
institutions by First Nations and Métis students — let’s build on 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, perhaps the minister or the 
Premier can tell the House how it is that they signed the 
five-year funding agreement for NORTEP-NORPAC before the 
election, and then mere weeks after the election — an election 
which saw a graduate of NORTEP run for that party in La 
Ronge and in Cumberland, Mr. Speaker — how it is that mere 
weeks after the election, they come in under the aegis of 
transformative change to say that our signature on the 
agreement wasn’t worth the paper the signature went on? 
 
How is it that they said one thing before the election, Mr. 
Speaker, that the North counted on and something very 
different after? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, this is about 
finding the best solution, the most sustainable solution for the 
future of the North so that northern students can continue to 
thrive, build lives, have jobs, and train in the North, Mr. 
Speaker, for the betterment of all communities. And again I am 
so heartened that NORTEP council . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — I’m so heartened, Mr. Speaker, that 
NORTEP council has agreed to move down this road and meet 
with prospective post-secondary partners to secure that 
sustainable, high-quality delivery of northern education 
teaching programs for the best of the province, Mr. Speaker, for 
the best of the North. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Funding for Lighthouse Shelter 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday we heard the 
minister say that the Lighthouse didn’t receive any cuts. But the 
Lighthouse says they now have $700,000 less to provide their 
funding, their programming. Can the minister explain what 
happened? Can she explain this to the people the Lighthouse 
now has to turn away? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
would say again, as I said yesterday, that we are funding the 
Lighthouse in the exact same way that we did last year. And 
we’re funding the Lighthouse in the exact same way that we 
fund every other emergency shelter in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 



860 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2016 

And further to that, if there are individuals who don’t have a 
place to sleep in cold weather, we have a cold-weather strategy 
whereby any individual who presents themselves to a shelter, if 
there’s no space at that shelter, can go to another shelter, Mr. 
Speaker, and if they cannot find any place to stay there, are 
provided with a meal voucher and a hotel for the evening so 
that they can stay out of this cold, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Well it seems like the Minister of Social 
Services is more than willing to throw the Lighthouse under the 
bus as well. Yesterday when the minister was asked if the 
Lighthouse was confused about the cuts, she said, “Well that’s 
one of the reasons we are meeting with them.” Mr. Speaker, the 
minister is more than happy to insinuate that the Lighthouse is 
confused about how much money they are getting. This is pretty 
rich coming from the new Social Services minister who seems 
to have as much trouble as the last minister keeping her facts 
straight. 
 
Yesterday the minister denied that they had connections to the 
Lighthouse in North Battleford. But then she talked about 
funding the Lighthouse in the same way that they fund every 
other emergency shelter in the province. So which is it? Will 
the minister admit that they provide provincial money and have 
a connection to the Lighthouse in North Battleford or not? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, we 
don’t have a contract with the North Battleford Lighthouse, 
which I did also say yesterday. Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I would 
go on to say that we have created 252 shelter spaces here in the 
province of Saskatchewan as a government. We’ve increased 
per diem rates at least eight times since we formed government. 
And in addition to that, people who are homeless or at risk of 
homelessness are those who we’d categorize as hard to house. 
We’ve invested 332 new housing units for precisely those folks, 
to the tune of $34.4 million, Mr. Speaker. I think we’ve got the 
facts quite right here. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Support for Children in Care 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, she’s not making any sense. 
Yesterday she said instead of letting people stay at the 
Lighthouse, they are putting people up in hotels. This is 
interesting. Instead of the Lighthouse, which saves the 
government over $20 for every $10 invested in its programs, the 
government thinks it makes sense to put people up in hotels. 
 
Well I think the people of Saskatchewan would like to hear 
more. Do they really think that hotels are the solution for 
homelessness? And since we know the Sask Party loves to use 
hotels as a stopgap for all kinds of their shortfalls, can the 
minister tells us how many kids in care are currently staying in 
hotels? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — I thank the member opposite for 
the question about kids in hotels. As of last night, there were 
nine children in hotels in the province of Saskatchewan. This is 
an issue which I take very, very seriously, and the ministry 
takes very, very seriously. Having children in hotels is not the 
option that we would like to ever see. And our government is 
working very hard to make sure that we provide options for 
families and children in care outside of that, including foster 
families, which we have done in a recent campaign to promote 
awareness for foster families in Saskatchewan, which we’ve 
talked about in this House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, even the Children’s Advocate 
says that having children in hotels is irresponsible and shouldn’t 
be done. It’s not the right place to put kids in care. So what 
exactly is this Ministry of Social Services doing to avoid having 
kids in hotels? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Mr. Speaker, I would again say 
that this is an issue that is near and dear to me, and so I thank 
the member opposite for the question. There are a higher 
number of children in our care, and it’s a significant concern to 
me, not only as the Minister of Social Services, but as a mom. 
 
We’ve increased the budget for child and family services by 
175 per cent since we formed government. We are committed to 
keeping children in their homes. When they’re not able to keep 
children in their homes, we are looking for extended family 
members for them to stay with, or persons of sufficient interest. 
We are trying to raise the number of people who have foster 
homes in our community, Mr. Speaker.  
 
I would agree 100 per cent that hotels are not the place for our 
children, but there are an increasing number of incidents, Mr. 
Speaker, where we have to apprehend children, unfortunately in 
the middle of the night in criminal circumstances. And that 
makes a short-term stay in a hotel an unfortunate reality. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 39 — The Workers’ Compensation 
Amendment Act, 2016 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 39, 
The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act be now introduced 
and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Labour 
Relations and Workplace Safety that Bill No. 39, The Workers’ 
Compensation Amendment Act, 2016 be now introduced and 
read a first time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 



October 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 861 

Principal Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace 
Safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to consider 
all stages of the bill immediately. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Leave has been granted and I 
recognize the Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace 
Safety to move second reading. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 39 — The Workers’ Compensation 
Amendment Act, 2016 

 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 
great pleasure to move second reading of Bill 39, The Workers’ 
Compensation Amendment Act, 2016, which establishes a 
rebuttal presumption for workers claiming workers’ 
compensation benefits for a psychological injury. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a priority of this government to keep workers 
safe and protect them from harm. Often people must turn to the 
WCB [Workers’ Compensation Board] for support when they 
suffer physical or psychological harm. Our goal is to reduce the 
barriers workers may face when seeking support for these 
injuries.  
 
Saskatchewan will be the first jurisdiction in Canada to legislate 
a presumption for all forms of psychological injuries. Some 
jurisdictions have legislated that they recognize only 
post-traumatic stress disorder; however, that did not go far 
enough. This amendment establishes a presumption for workers 
who are suffering or have suffered from psychological injuries 
that stem from traumatic events at work. 
 
Under this legislation, the worker is provided the benefit of the 
doubt that a psychological injury such as PTSD occurred during 
the course of employment unless there is evidence to the 
contrary. A worker will continue to have to be diagnosed as 
having a psychological injury by a psychiatrist or psychologist 
and provide that information to the Workers’ Compensation 
Board. The onus will not be on the worker to prove that the 
injury is work related. 
 
Earlier this year the members opposite tabled legislation to 
establish a presumption for those who are suffering PTSD 
because of trauma they have experienced through their jobs. 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments that we’ve introduced expand the 
presumption to include all psychological injuries suffered at 
work. We’ve also heard from groups representing first 
responders in our province — police, firefighters, medical 
profession, and others — who are regularly exposed to trauma 
as a regular part of their jobs. While presumption is not limited 
to individuals working in these fields, we know that they are at 
a greater risk of suffering the emotional and psychological 

impact of dealing with trauma on the job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment allows us to better protect those 
who protect us. In recent years there has been greater public 
awareness of the impact psychological injuries such as 
post-traumatic stress disorder have on those who suffer, their 
families, their friends, and their colleagues. As we learn more 
about PTSD and similar injuries, we learn more about the 
stigma that is attached to mental health issues. A fear of the 
possible reaction from others prevents many from seeking the 
help that they desperately need. Establishing this presumption is 
an assurance to anyone suffering that they will be believed. It is 
my hope that this change to the law will encourage people to 
feel comfortable and confident enough to come forward and 
seek support from the WCB. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the members opposite and the 
groups in the province that came forward to stress how 
necessary this legislative protection is. Mr. Speaker, one of 
those individuals is Jennifer Chouinard, who worked at a crisis 
nursery, who suffered grave harm because of this type of injury. 
Many of the individuals that are affected put their lives at risk 
for you and for me. For that we owe them an enormous debt of 
gratitude and we thank them. That is the least that we can do to 
protect those who protect us. 
 
I want to thank the representatives from the many groups that 
are here with us today. Among them are the Saskatchewan 
Federation of Police Officers, Saskatoon Police Service, Regina 
Police Service, Saskatchewan Professional Fire Fighters 
Association, Saskatchewan Volunteer Fire Fighters Association, 
Saskatchewan Emergency Medical Services Association, 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, Saskatoon Paramedic 
Association, Canadian Mental Health Association, PTSD 
Saskatoon, Workers’ Compensation Board. I hope we can 
continue to work together to help those in their personal 
struggles with the impact of trauma. 
 
[14:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know the member opposite wants to make some 
statements and I understand that at the time when she is on her 
feet, she will be applying for leave to withdraw Bill 601 that 
was introduced in the last session. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise in the House to speak to Bill 39. I’m very glad to see the 
government move on this. Shortly after we conclude business 
on this bill, I will be withdrawing my own private member’s 
bill. 
 
Bill 601 was an amendment to The Workers’ Compensation Act 
which would have also seen all workers who are exposed to 
traumatic events on the job who then receive a diagnosis of 
PTSD get prompt treatment and support for their illness because 
their illness would have been presumed to have been caused by 
the traumatic events or event. 
 
I was proud to put this bill forward and I’m proud to be part of 
an opposition who not only works on holding this government 



862 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2016 

to account but one who is more than eager to provide solutions 
as well. 
 
I want to start by thanking all the organizations and individuals 
with whom I’ve had an opportunity to work on this issue for 
some time, some sharing their policy ideas and many simply 
sharing their own stories of hoop jumping through WCB to get 
support for their psychological injury, and even those who have 
chosen not to file with the WCB because they feared the 
process at a time when they were already struggling mentally 
and vulnerable. 
 
Some are here today and many are not. You know who you are, 
and thank you. Your stories have moved me, sometimes to 
tears, and helped me realize that as a legislator, we could and 
should do better for our citizens. 
 
Better coverage for psychological injury is not a new topic to 
this legislature. The Saskatchewan Professional Fire Fighters 
Association brings us concerns on behalf of its members from 
across Saskatchewan every year and this has included PTSD 
and the need for presumptive coverage for first responders. 
 
In 2015 my colleague from Saskatoon Centre called on the 
Minister of Labour to include PTSD immediately in a list of 
presumptive illnesses. Provinces across this country have been 
making these changes to their workers’ compensation Act in 
recent years. Alberta, Ontario, and Manitoba have moved on 
presumption and New Brunswick and BC are in the process. It’s 
important for us in Saskatchewan to move in that direction too. 
And again I thank the minister and commend him for his work 
on this. 
 
Mental health and addictions issues are important to 
Saskatchewan people as evidenced by the number of people 
who participated in consultation with the government’s task 
force that led to its mental health and addictions 10-year action 
plan, which sadly has yet to see very much action. Mental 
health and addictions issues are also important to the 
opposition, hence the reason the NDP included presumptive 
coverage for PTSD in our election platform. 
 
As the Health critic and a member of a caucus of individuals 
who believe strongly that mental illness and mental health 
issues should not be treated any differently than physical 
illnesses, we saw presumptive legislation for PTSD being an 
important tool to reduce stigma and to speed up treatment for 
those affected by experiences on the job, as well as an 
opportunity to help people get healthy and able to carry on, 
living full and productive lives. 
 
I’ve heard stories from social workers, nurses, police officers, 
firefighters, paramedics, late-night workers, mine workers, 
folks frankly from across all sectors who have talked about their 
experiences they’ve had. For some, it was one incident that 
triggered their illness; an armed robbery or watching a 
colleague injured and killed on the job. For others, it was a 
cumulative process of witnessing many tragic and difficult 
events over the course of their employment. Whether it’s one 
incident or many incidences that caused the injury, a 
psychological injury is an injury nonetheless and all workers 
deserve to receive the appropriate supports. 
 

I know that there are people who are doing remarkable work 
across the province on supporting those who have suffered 
psychological injuries. Thanks to folks like Jen Chouinard who 
couldn’t be here today and Cathleen MacPhee with PTSD 
Saskatoon. I’ve heard of good work going on in the Saskatoon 
Fire Department on identifying and supporting those with 
mental health concerns. I’ve also heard of action around helping 
prevent PTSD and other psychological injuries in the first place; 
like the efforts around building resiliency in the members of the 
Saskatoon Police Service. I commend these organizations and 
the many others who are helping prevent injuries in the first 
place and those who are standing with employees when they are 
injured. 
 
But for all those people who need treatment and support right 
now, this bill cannot come soon enough. The opposition will 
support the quick passage of this bill today on the expectation 
that it will not be a bill that lies dormant on passage, but that it 
will come into force within weeks. We understand that the 
regulations are ready to go and we want to see it in force, 
frankly, by November 1st. We look forward to the Minister of 
Labour making this happen. With that, I move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
[Interjections] 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
indicated that she wishes to adjourn debate. I think she may 
wish to withdraw that. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 
clarified that she is removing the adjournment of the debate so 
that we can carry on. The question before the Assembly is the 
motion moved by the Minister of Labour Relations and 
Workplace Safety that Bill No. 39, The Workers’ Compensation 
Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — To which committee shall this bill be 
committed? I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I designate that Bill No. 
39, The Workers' Compensation Amendment Act, 2016 be 
committed to the Committee of the Whole on Bills and the said 
bill be considered in Committee of the Whole on Bills 
immediately. 
 
The Speaker: — This bill stands committed to the Committee 
of the Whole on Bills. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Committee of the Whole on Bills. 
 



October 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 863 

The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair for the House to go 
into Committee of the Whole on Bills. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ON BILLS 
 

Bill No. 39 — The Workers’ Compensation 
Amendment Act, 2016 

 
The Chair: — Members, the item before the committee is Bill 
No. 39, The Workers' Compensation Amendment Act, 2016. 
Clause 1, short title, is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[Clauses 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to.] 
 
The Chair: — Her Majesty, by and with the advice and consent 
of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, enacts as 
follows: Bill No. 39, The Workers’ Compensation Amendment 
Act, 2016. 
 
I recognize the minister of workplace relations and worker 
safety. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — That too, Mr. Chair. I move that the 
committee report the bill without amendment. 
 
The Chair: — The minister has moved that the committee 
report Bill No. 39 without amendment. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Chair, I move that the committee rise, report progress, and ask 
for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — The Government House Leader has moved that 
the committee rise, report progress, and ask for leave to sit 
again. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Chair of committees, the 
member from Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the committee to 
report Bill No. 39, The Workers’ Compensation Amendment 
Act, 2016 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a third time? 
 
I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 39 — The Workers’ Compensation 
Amendment Act, 2016 

 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that Bill No. 39, The 
Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2016 be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — The next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 
I recognize the member from Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to withdraw Bill 
No. 601, The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2016 
from the order paper. 
 
The Speaker: — The member of Saskatoon Riversdale has 
requested leave to withdraw Bill No. 601, The Workers’ 
Compensation Amendment Act, 2016 from the order paper. Is 
leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The member may proceed to move 
her motion. I recognize the member from Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 

BILL WITHDRAWN 
 

Bill No. 601 — The Workers’ Compensation 
Amendment Act, 2016 

 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, pursuant to rule 15(3), I move 
to withdraw Bill No. 601, The Workers’ Compensation 
Amendment Act, 2016 from the order paper. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has moved to withdraw Bill No. 
601, The Workers’ Compensation Act, 2016 from the order 
paper. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 



864 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2016 

The Speaker: — Carried. Pursuant to rule no. 15(3), in order 
for the Bill No. 601, The Workers’ Compensation Amendment 
Act, 2016 is withdrawn from the order paper. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Position on Climate Change and Carbon Tax 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Hon. Mr. Wall: 
 

That this Assembly supports the Government of 
Saskatchewan’s position on climate change as outlined in 
the climate change white paper released on October 18, 
2016; and further 
 
That this Assembly opposes the federal government’s plan 
to impose a national carbon tax.] 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 
want to take this opportunity to thank the Premier, Mr. Speaker, 
for raising the conversation over the last number of days and the 
last number of weeks, Mr. Speaker, on what is a very, very 
important discussion for the people of the province of 
Saskatchewan, the people across the province and industries 
across the province. Mr. Speaker, it’s an important discussion. 
It’s one that needs to continue, and it’s one now that he has 
brought to this legislature, Mr. Speaker, and I think it’s an 
important discussion for us to have here as we all represent 
people across the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to take a moment to thank colleagues 
on both sides of the House for entering into this debate. As I 
said, it’s an important debate and it’s important for us to 
represent the people of the province, Mr. Speaker. And I want 
to thank all of those colleagues, both on the opposition side as 
well as on the government side, Mr. Speaker, for taking part in 
this debate in representing their constituents. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, just a quick note to thank the members of 
. . . the people across the province of Saskatchewan that have 
reached out, I know, to myself, to the Premier, and to members 
of the government, Mr. Speaker, appreciating that where our 
stance is and what we’re doing to combat climate change here 
in the province of Saskatchewan and, in particular, our stance 
when it comes to a federally imposed carbon tax and the effect 
that that would have on people in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no denying this: we have a problem. And 
it’s not just a problem in this province of Saskatchewan. It’s not 
just a problem in our nation of Canada. Mr. Speaker, climate 
change is real and it’s a global challenge. 

And make no mistake, Mr. Speaker, this debate about a 
federally imposed carbon tax, despite the potential jurisdictional 
challenges that it may have, if this federally imposed carbon tax 
is imposed on the provinces and the nation of Canada, in 
Saskatchewan it will be the single largest tax increase ever 
experienced by the people of this province. The largest tax 
increase, I might add, with quite questionable results when it’s 
with regards to actual carbon reductions in the province, Mr. 
Speaker, and across the nation for that matter. 
 
This federal carbon tax will directly impact Saskatchewan 
businesses, it will directly impact Saskatchewan jobs, and it will 
be felt by Saskatchewan families and household incomes. And 
it’s for these reasons, Mr. Speaker, that I will not be supporting 
the motion, and I strongly urge the opposition members to drop 
your amendment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the amendment, and I 
urge those opposition members to drop their amendment, stand 
for Saskatchewan people, and let’s send a unified voice to our 
federal government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to listen to a number of 
speeches yesterday with respect to this very important motion. 
In particular, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity to listen to the 
member from Nutana, the NDP Environment critic, Mr. 
Speaker. And I noticed in her speech, and I picked this up, that 
she said the best indicator of future behaviour is past behaviour. 
Well, Mr. Speaker . . . And she made it in reference to the 
emissions in the province of Saskatchewan rising about 8 per 
cent since 2005. 
 
I would point out that it’s during the same period of time that 
the GDP [gross domestic product] in the province of 
Saskatchewan rose 24 per cent and over 150,000 people moved 
into this province, Mr. Speaker. BC, Mr. Speaker, since 2010, is 
up over 4 per cent with their emissions, and they have a carbon 
tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this compares, this compares starkly with the 16 
years that the NDP had the opportunity to make a difference 
with respect to emissions here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
And it’s during those years of NDP reign in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, that they were making policy decisions such as 
increasing taxes 21 times, Mr. Speaker. They increased the PST 
[provincial sales tax] three times. They increased income tax 
twice. And they increased the fuel tax three times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s these types of NDP policy decisions that 
resulted in job loss in the province. People were leaving the 
province in droves. They had no future here, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
during this time that many of the friends that I graduated with 
left this province. Mr. Speaker, it’s also during this time of 
NDP reign, 16 years in the province of Saskatchewan, where 
our greenhouse gas emissions in Saskatchewan rose 70 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, given an opportunity . . . And the amendment that 
the NDP put to this motion, Mr. Speaker, proved this, as well as 
a motion, I might add, at their provincial meeting this weekend 
made by the Leader of the Opposition’s constituency with 
respect to the amendment, Mr. Speaker. But given a moment’s 
opportunity, the NDP would implement this federal carbon tax 
on Saskatchewan people. It would affect Saskatchewan jobs and 



October 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 865 

Saskatchewan families because, as the member from Nutana 
states, the best indicator of future behaviour is past behaviour, 
Mr. Speaker, and they’ll do it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the way of background, a little bit on just what 
got us to this here today, to this point of working with our 
federal government on, or not working with them on, a 
federal-imposed carbon tax, Mr. Speaker. If we back up about a 
year, to COP [Conference of the Parties] 21 in Paris, France, 
Mr. Speaker, where the climate change conference was held, 
which is rather ironic as France is now one of the nations in 
Canada that is looking at removing their carbon tax on their 
coal-fired electricity. Very ironic indeed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But we had the Premier of this province as well as the previous 
Environment minister of this province, the member from The 
Battlefords, attended that conference in France, and upon 
returning it was the Prime Minister that asked the first ministers 
to meet in Vancouver, Mr. Speaker, to talk about how we can 
address climate change here in the nation of Canada. And it’s at 
this Vancouver meeting that the Vancouver declaration was 
signed, outlining the collaborative work that would occur 
between the provinces, between the territories, and between the 
federal government in this new era of collaboration with our 
federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that Vancouver declaration outlined efforts and 
discussed efforts so that each jurisdiction can contribute, so that 
we can contribute to our Canadian commitment of reducing 
emissions here in Canada by 30 per cent by the year 2030. The 
Vancouver declaration identified four working groups, Mr. 
Speaker, and they were to focus on areas to address climate 
change, understanding that efforts, challenges, and successes 
may be different in respective regions of the country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the first few days of this past month, there was 
Environment ministers that were to descend on Montreal to 
look at some of the work and to clarify some of the work that 
these working groups had performed, and to pass on 
recommendations from those working groups through the 
Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment from across 
the nation back to the first ministers’ table later this year so that 
we could actually clarify a pan-Canadian climate change plan 
here in the nation of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, sadly this entire process was circumvented. It was 
circumvented when our Prime Minister, as our Environment 
ministers met in Montreal, our Prime Minister rose in the House 
of Commons and he acted and he indicated that the federal 
government will act and impose a unilateral carbon tax on all 
provinces across the nation of Canada. It’ll start at $10 a tonne 
in 2018 and move to $50 a tonne in 2022. Mr. Speaker, what 
that means to Saskatchewan, a carbon tax of $50 a tonne is a 
two and a half billion dollar impact to our economy here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. It’s 11 cents on a litre of fuel and to 
each family it increases their taxable bill each year by $1,250. 
 
And I know there’s been some indications, Mr. Speaker, by 
federal counterparts that this tax could be revenue neutral, if 
you will, and the province could give it back. Well the fact of 
the matter is, Mr. Speaker, is many of those individuals, 
through carbon leakage and other job losses that we may 
experience in our economy here, aren’t going to have a job. So 

they aren’t going to be here to give it back to, to begin with. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s also prudent for us to recognize 
that this government, over the last 10 years, that through 
prudent governance and great efforts, that we have already 
taken 112,000 people off the tax rolls here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We’re doing that already, Mr. Speaker. We 
don’t need a carbon tax to make these kind of efforts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this pan-Canadian approach will not work for the 
province of Saskatchewan and I think I’ve indicated, how could 
this possibly be a revenue-neutral exercise? Mr. Speaker, it was 
at this point when the Prime Minister rose in the House and 
indicated that he was going to unilaterally impose this carbon 
tax on the people of the province, including the people of 
Saskatchewan, it’s at this point that I thought that this new era 
of federal-provincial collaboration just wasn’t going to work 
out that well for us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the territories, Nova Scotia, as well as 
Newfoundland and Labrador, I think they seemed to agree at 
that point in time that this collaboration wasn’t just all it was 
cracked up to be. Mr. Speaker, the members opposite, their 
retort to this, Mr. Speaker, and I do encourage them to drop 
their motion and join with us with a unified message to our 
federal government, but they say that Saskatchewan should 
have already acted on this file. Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m here to 
inform this House and inform those members and inform the 
people of Saskatchewan that the Government of Saskatchewan 
and the people of Saskatchewan have acted on climate change. 
We’ve acted mightily and we’ll continue to do so. 
 
And I think what the NDP mean when they say that we should 
have acted on this file, and again the amendment displays this, 
the Leader of the Opposition had a motion this weekend that 
displays this or his constituency association did, Mr. Speaker, 
but what they mean is when the Government of Saskatchewan 
should have acted already is that we should already have a 
carbon tax here in the province of Saskatchewan. And given a 
breath of opportunity, don’t kid yourself, Mr. Speaker: the NDP 
would impose that the very first thing. And you don’t have to 
look very far west here to understand what they would do, 
given a day in government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal NDP, their federal NDP family has 
already indicated that a $50-a-tonne carbon tax is not high 
enough on Saskatchewan families. They’d like it to be higher, 
Mr. Speaker. These members want it implemented earlier. It’s 
quite an alarming state of affairs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even more alarming, even more alarming is for 
some of the members opposite, this type of economic suicide 
that we’re talking about is not fast enough for their unrealistic 
ideology. In addition, in addition to a carbon tax, Mr. Speaker, 
they want to discuss things like shutting down the entire coal 
industry here in the province of Saskatchewan. If they can’t do 
it directly, they want to knee-cap that industry, along with other 
industries such as mining, such as manufacturing, such as pulp, 
such as oil and gas and even agriculture, through their 
misguided ideology. Mr. Speaker, they want to discuss policy 
such as the Leap Manifesto, for crying out loud. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this would attempt to tax and regulate industry 



866 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2016 

into moving away from our province. With that, they would 
take their jobs and, Mr. Speaker, they will use all tools at their 
disposal to succeed in this, including imposing a federal carbon 
tax on the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, two and a half billion dollars removed 
from our economy, 11 cents a litre on fuel, and a family of four 
will increase their taxable rate by $1,250. These are the costs 
that the federal government would like to impose on 
Saskatchewan business, Saskatchewan jobs, and Saskatchewan 
families. The NDP think it should be implemented quicker and 
it should be higher. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are told, usually by some entity such as the 
Ecofiscal Commission or someone like that, that the carbon tax 
is the cost that is required to change behaviours here in the 
nation and here in the province. And unfortunately I fear that 
that may be an accurate description of what a carbon tax will 
do. 
 
In an economy such as Saskatchewan, where we have over $32 
billion worth of exports — those exports are agriculture goods 
or natural resources that we have here, energy and 
manufactured goods — my fear is that it most certainly will do 
just that. It’ll change behaviours. Saskatchewan companies may 
choose to operate in other regions of the world and they may 
move Saskatchewan jobs away with them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week I was up at the Saskatchewan Mining 
Association’s environmental forum and I had the opportunity to 
walk through and look at some of the items in the trade show. 
And I had the opportunity to talk to a number of people 
involved in the energy sector, Mr. Speaker, involved in the 
mining sector. And I asked them directly, I said, what effect 
will a carbon tax have on the industry that you work in? And I 
heard a couple of answers. Mr. Speaker, the first answer I heard 
is, companies will simply go away. They didn’t say they’d go 
broke; they said they’ll just go away. And they’ll take their jobs 
with them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also heard from another individual there that we are already, 
with respect to drilling energy wells, Mr. Speaker, down in the 
Bakken oil play, that we’re already at a competitive cost 
disadvantage with south of the forty-ninth parallel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, oil drilling in the Bakken is a real risk that that is 
going to move just south of the border. Potash developments 
will consider other areas of the world with a federally imposed 
carbon tax on Saskatchewan and a carbon tax in our province 
will reduce the competitiveness of our agricultural producers 
relative to their counterparts in the USA [United States of 
America] and in Australia where they don’t have a carbon tax. 
 
And I think of Gerrid Gust up at Davidson with the quote that 
he made, Mr. Speaker. As a farmer up in the Davidson area, I 
think he’s in around the 16,000 acres, and he said, “A carbon 
tax in Saskatchewan will literally bite the hand that feeds you.” 
And I think that sums it up in the way of agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my fear is this: with a federally imposed carbon 
tax on the province of Saskatchewan, the behaviour that is 
going to be changed is that Saskatchewan people will lose their 
jobs that were once available right here in the province and in 

our community. That’s carbon leakage, Mr. Speaker, and that’s 
a concern that this government has, and we’ll continue to stand 
up and fight for the people of Saskatchewan on that account. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not an opinion that I hold solely. Carbon 
leakage is a fact. It’s a proven fact and it was identified in a 
working groups report that we were looking at in Montreal, 
quite frankly, in the carbon pricing mechanisms working group, 
as a risk to carbon-intensive regions of Canada like 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the report goes on to state this, and I quote, “This 
will create a period of transition where some firms will need to 
change production processes and some individuals may need to 
change employment.” Mr. Speaker, I want to repeat that last bit 
again, “. . . where some individuals may need to change 
employment.” It’s no wonder I left the meeting, Mr. Speaker, 
on behalf of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, carbon leakage is already occurring right here in 
Canada. It is not that long ago Ontario and Quebec had virtually 
all of their natural gas supplied from Canadian sources, 
predominantly Western Canadian sources. Mr. Speaker, 
recently this has changed with only 30 per cent of their supply 
now coming from Canadian sources and this has been due to (1) 
a carbon tax, or (2) the planned implementation of a carbon tax. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re pleased to be here today because there 
is another way. There’s a way that’s been discussed and put 
forward in the white paper not too long ago. And there’s a way 
that does not pull two and a half billion dollars from the 
economy in the province of Saskatchewan. There’s a way that 
does not take jobs from Saskatchewan communities. There’s a 
way that does not pull $1,250 from each family across the 
province and doesn’t move Saskatchewan jobs to other regions 
of the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a way for our province that includes 
moving to 50 per cent renewables, unlike NDP Alberta that’s 
committed to moving to 30 per cent renewables. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s why we released the wind siting guidelines the other day, 
so that proponents are able to put those . . . so that we can 
achieve that goal of 50 per cent renewables. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a way in our province that includes 
investment and adaptation in research of crop varieties at the 
Crop Development Centre at the University of Saskatchewan, 
investment in things like the Global Institute for Food Security. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a way in our province that includes the 
recognition of potential offsets in uranium exports and in 
agricultural carbon fixation. Mr. Speaker, there’s a way in our 
province, and there’s a way globally for us to enhance and 
utilize technology that will allow us to clean up transitional fuel 
sources, transitional fuel sources like coal. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, right now as we speak, Turkey is planning to 
double its coal power capacity by the year 2019. That’s the 
addition of 60 000 megawatts. Twenty-four hundred coal-fired 
electrical generators are to be added worldwide in the next short 
while. And there is a way, Mr. Speaker, thankfully, with 15, 15 



October 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 867 

large-scale carbon capture and storage projects that are now 
operating worldwide. One of them is at Estevan, Saskatchewan 
at our Boundary dam 3 by our Crown corporation, SaskPower. 
Mr. Speaker, worldwide there’s 15 operating. There’s another 
seven that are under construction right now with the potential to 
fix 40 million tonnes of carbon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, carbon capture and storage technology is being 
recognized worldwide, and it’s part of the solution in reducing 
our industrial emissions globally and it’s part of the solution 
globally in addressing climate change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, exporting technology in agriculture. Small nuclear 
reactors and carbon capture and storage give us the opportunity 
to broaden the conversation far beyond Saskatchewan’s 10 per 
cent of Canada’s 2 per cent of global emissions. Mr. Speaker, 
working with our federal government and other nations to 
champion technology efforts that we already have here in place 
in agriculture, in carbon capture and storage technology, in 
nuclear research at the Fedoruk Centre. We need to utilize our 
research and development capability that we possess right here 
in the province of Saskatchewan and in the nation of Canada. 
This will allow our province and our nation to really contribute 
meaningfully to the global effort of climate change, much more 
meaningful than any carbon tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing, I will not be supporting the NDP 
amendment. In no way does it stand for Saskatchewan jobs and 
Saskatchewan communities or for Saskatchewan families. I 
simply cannot support that. I will be supporting the main 
motion. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The question before the Assembly is the 
proposed amendment moved by the Leader of the Opposition: 
 

That all words in the motion after “supports” be struck out 
and replaced with the following: 

 
the implementation of The Management and Reduction 
of Greenhouse Gases Act so that Saskatchewan can, 
once again, show leadership in reducing carbon 
emissions and earn back credibility on this file; and 
further 
 
That the Assembly condones the Premier for his failure 
to address climate change after nearly a decade in power 
and for giving up Saskatchewan’s voice and credibility 
when it comes to protecting Saskatchewan’s interest and 
our environment; and further 
 
That this Assembly opposes the federal government’s 
plan to impose a national carbon tax. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Yes. 
 
The Speaker: — All right. Those in favour of the motion say 
yea. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Yea. 

The Speaker: — All those opposed say nay. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 
 
The Speaker: — The nays have it. Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 15:03 until 15:08.] 
 
The Speaker: — All those in the favour of the motion please 
stand . . . amendment motion. 

 
[Yeas — 8] 

 
Wotherspoon Chartier Belanger 
Sproule Forbes Rancourt 
Beck McCall  
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed to the amendment motion 
please stand. 
 

[Nays — 47] 
 
Wall Moe Stewart 
Wyant Reiter Morgan 
Harpauer Doherty Duncan 
Beaudry-Mellor Hargrave D’Autremont 
Heppner Boyd Cheveldayoff 
Marit Eyre Merriman 
Harrison Ottenbreit Ross 
Weekes Brkich Hart 
Kirsch Bradshaw Steinley 
Makowsky Phillips Lawrence 
Docherty Michelson Doke 
Cox Olauson Steele 
Young Fiaz Dennis 
Parent Bonk Carr 
Nerlien Lambert Buckingham 
Kaeding McMorris  
 
Principal Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the 
amendment, 8; those opposed, 47. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion lost. 
 
It is my duty pursuant to rule no. 54(3) to warn the Assembly 
that the member is about to exercise his or her right to close the 
debate. Afterwards all members will be precluded from 
speaking to the question; therefore, if any member wishes to 
speak, let him or her do so now. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thanks very much, Mr. 
Speaker. And I want to thank members for joining in the debate 
and for the vote that just happened to defeat the amendment, the 
vote that is about to happen whereby we hope there’s support 
for the main motion. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there’s something I wanted to get on the 
record, in light of the fact that some news coverage from 
yesterday’s events, I think needs to be presented perhaps more 
broadly in this debate, and perhaps is actionable. And the 
coverage I’m referring to, I think it was on the CTV news 
coverage of yesterday’s events on this issue, wherein towards 
the end of the story the federal minister, Mr. Goodale, was 



868 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2016 

asked for his response to the concern expressed by this 
legislature . . . [inaudible] . . . on both sides of the House with 
respect to a nationally imposed carbon tax. And Mr. Goodale 
again said, for the second time, said that, well the government, I 
guess, once we fully impose the carbon tax on the provincial 
government, they’re going to get all the money back. And that’s 
about $2.5 billion, and they could eliminate income tax. And it 
was left at that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I have a concern for those who would have watched the 
coverage or have heard this response from the federal 
government, which really does need some clarification. It bears 
some further discussion. It is the second time Mr. Goodale has 
said these things, that once this carbon tax is fully imposed, 
there’s going to be enough there — 2.5 billion — that you can 
eliminate your provincial income tax. And for some, that might 
sound pretty appealing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s remember where the carbon tax is coming 
from. Let’s remember who would be paying that $2.5 billion 
out of our economy. It would be those carbon-intense industries 
that we talked about yesterday. It would be companies like 
Evraz. It would be the mining industry in this province who 
already face tough competition from places like Russia and 
Belarus. It would be our oil and gas sector, Mr. Speaker. It 
would be our agricultural sector, not just the primary producers, 
but those who are engaged in value added. 
 
Yesterday I think I put on the record that COPA [Canadian 
Oilseed Processors Association], the association that represents 
canola crushers in this province, have indicated that the cost of 
the Liberal carbon tax when fully implemented would be $15 
million per plant. 
 
[15:15] 
 
Does Mr. Goodale or any of the other federal Liberals truly 
believe that any of those jobs at that plant — after levying a $15 
million tax on the plant — that any of those jobs would still 
exist to benefit from the elimination of income tax? That is the 
point that Saskatchewan is trying to make to the country. 
 
We have, in our economy, sectors that we’re very proud of that 
are carbon intensive. They will pay, they will pay the lion’s 
share of this $2.5 billion in taxes. So perhaps if it all were to 
come back, Ottawa sent us all back to our government for us to 
give out, Mr. Speaker, in the way of income tax relief, there just 
aren’t, there won’t be the people working in Saskatchewan to 
benefit from that. 
 
So I want to indicate to members of the House that I’m going to 
be sending a letter to Minister Goodale on this narrow issue — 
well not just only on this issue — asking him to represent the 
interests of Saskatchewan. We have found him to be 
co-operative. We have worked with him on a number of files, 
and we know Minister Goodale has Saskatchewan’s interests at 
heart. I think it’s very important that there will be a 
manifestation of that commitment, especially on this issue of a 
carbon tax that would very much harm the province’s economy. 
 
So we want to send him a letter. I’ll be making it available to all 
members if they’re interested, and I’m hoping that the Leader of 
the Opposition would co-sign the letter. He hasn’t seen it yet, so 

no one should ask him immediately. That wouldn’t be fair. But 
if he sees the letter, and if it speaks generally to the 
Saskatchewan interest and specifically to refuting this case, this 
thing that’s been thrown out there, that we can eliminate your 
income tax with what we’re going to take out of the carbon tax, 
I hope that he might sign it. 
 
I know we couldn’t come to an agreement on the motion, you 
know, Mr. Speaker. I understand why that might be. They’re, 
for the reasons they’ve laid out, unwilling to support that 
second part of the motion. And we can’t support the second part 
of the amendment. That’s the way this place works sometimes. 
 
But I think we can find some common ground with respect to a 
letter to our federal minister that represents the province’s 
interest, asking him to do so in the matter of the carbon tax, and 
moreover to lay out very clearly for all that would read the letter 
that this notion of revenue neutrality is not applicable to 
Saskatchewan. It is not germane to this discussion because 
carbon tax may be revenue neutral, I guess, but it is not sector 
neutral, and it is not jobs neutral. It’s not investment neutral. 
And those that will pay the most, those sectors that will pay the 
most, those families that will pay the most, are in the industries 
in this province. And that case needs to be made very, very 
clear to the federal government as a result of the debate we’ve 
had. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with that I would again want to thank all 
members for participating in the debate we’ve had and for their 
ongoing vigilance on this particular issue. We need to be 
defending Saskatchewan’s interests here. This is a very, very 
important matter before our province, and I look forward to the 
support of members, regardless of where they are on the 
political spectrum, in the defence of those interests. 
 
The Speaker: — The Premier has moved: 
 

That the Assembly supports the Government of 
Saskatchewan’s position on climate change as outlined in 
the climate change white paper released on October 18, 
2016; and further 
 
That this Assembly opposes the federal government’s plan 
to impose a national carbon tax. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — No. 
 
The Speaker: — Those in favour of the motion say yea. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Yea. 
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed say nay. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Nay. 
 
The Speaker: — Yeas have it. Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 15:18 until 15:19.] 
 



October 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 869 

The Speaker: — All those in favour of the motion please stand. 
 

[Yeas — 48] 
 
Wall Moe Stewart 
Wyant Reiter Morgan 
Harpauer Doherty Duncan 
Beaudry-Mellor Hargrave D’Autremont 
Heppner Boyd Cheveldayoff 
Marit Tell Eyre 
Merriman Harrison Ottenbreit 
Ross Weekes Brkich 
Hart Kirsch Bradshaw 
Steinley Makowsky Phillips 
Lawrence Docherty Michelson 
Doke Cox Olauson 
Steele Young Fiaz 
Dennis Parent Bonk 
Carr Nerlien Lambert 
Buckingham Kaeding McMorris 
 
The Speaker: — All those opposed to the motion, please stand. 
 

[Nays — 8] 
 
Wotherspoon Chartier Belanger 
Sproule Forbes Rancourt 
Beck McCall  
 
Principal Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 
48; those opposed, 8. 
 
The Speaker: — I declare the motion carried. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 

TRANSMITTAL MOTION 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
move the following motion: 
 

That Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 
transmit copies of the motion as well as verbatim 
transcripts of the debate to the Prime Minister of Canada 
and all federal opposition leaders. 

 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted first? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I’ll recognize the Government House 
Leader with his motion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move the 
following motion: 
 

That Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 
transmit copies of the motion as well as verbatim 
transcripts of the debate to the Prime Minister of Canada 
and all federal opposition leaders. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has moved 

the motion: 
 

That the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly, 
transmit a copy of the motion as well as verbatim 
transcripts of the debate to the Prime Minister of Canada 
and all federal opposition leaders. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 2 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. McMorris that Bill No. 2 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Crown Corporations’ Fiscal Year 
End Standardization) Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise this afternoon and continue on into the 
adjourned debates part of the day. And of course this a very 
important part because this is the chance we have to reflect on 
the bills that the government has brought forward. And of 
course the bill I have before me today is Bill No 2, An Act to 
amend certain Statutes to Standardize Provisions respecting the 
Fiscal Year End of certain Crown Corporations. And it’s a 
pretty short bill, and it talks and refers to Saskatchewan Gaming 
Corporation, the Saskatchewan Government Insurance, the 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation, the Saskatchewan 
Telecommunications Holding company, and the Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation. 
 
And so it is straightforward. And it is one thing to say that we 
want to standardize, after all these years, the year-end of the 
fiscal year. And after all these years of something’s working 
well, now this government has decided that this is an issue, and 
it’s Bill No. 2 of their post-election session, which is incredibly 
ironic that this is the biggest deal they had before. But it isn’t 
because, you know, this is an issue that we talk a lot during the 
debate, is around this government not being forthcoming with 
the true state of affairs when it comes to the budget. And of 
course they wanted to delay that, delay that.  
 
We all thought we should have the election and people should 
have a clear accounting of what’s happening in this province 
and what the government plans were, and we all know that as 
the budget. And the budget they did not want to release, of 
course they said they had done no work, no work at all. But we 



870 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2016 

all know no work at all leading up to the election, in the months 
leading up to the election, that in fact they were all standing by 
as they watched this province in the one of the toughest years 
it’s had in terms of its resource revenues and different issues 
like that. And of course we don’t buy that for a minute. We 
know they were working hard. They knew what was going on 
in this province. They were making plans. 
 
And we saw that with NORTEP as a prime example of where 
they signed a contract before the election for five years and then 
right after the election their signature wasn’t worth the paper it 
was written on. They cut that and now they’ve got some 
doublespeak going on about how they want to make it more 
equitable, but we know that when you have good programs like 
that, that you can’t cut them. 
 
And we saw it with the Lighthouse where for some reason, 
facing hard times, they’d rather put people up in a hotel room 
than in a building, a facility that’s already prepared for 
homeless at a much reduced cost. But it’ll be interesting to see 
how this government, again through some sort of doublespeak 
saying they never had . . . that they’re not cutting, but it sure 
looks like a cut. You know, when it walks like a cut, talks like a 
cut, it probably is a cut. And this is what this government is 
doing. 
 
So they knew, they knew before the election what the true state 
of affairs were here in this province of Saskatchewan, but they 
hid it from the people of Saskatchewan. And then right after, 
right after we got back . . . Right after the election we had them 
come back with the budget. In fact it took them six weeks, 
because I think in their planning they wanted to have the 
session in the month of June, just leading up to the summer 
months when people are away on holidays and people were not 
going to be paying attention to the tough issues that we had at 
hand in the province in terms of cuts and the reality that this 
government had mismanaged the provincial budget and the 
provincial Crown corporations over the eight years plus, almost 
nine years of Sask Party rule. 
 
Here they were, they couldn’t withstand the tough times and 
they didn’t really, frankly, Mr. Speaker, have the courage to go 
to the people to say, this is what’s happening in the province; 
this is the state of affairs. They didn’t have the courage, didn’t 
have the guts to stand up and tell people what was really going 
on. 
 
And so we see how they, through this kind of innocuous bill on 
one hand, to say well we’re going to standardize the year-ends. 
So the year-ends . . . And how good fortune it happened to be 
that they were able to tack on three months to the Crown 
corporations. And by doing so, the net effect of that, moving 
their year-ends from December 31st to March 31st and gaining 
three months, they were able to collect as much as $100 million 
extra in terms of dividends from the Crown corporations. What 
good luck that was in terms of helping, softening the blow of 
this province’s budget. 
 
[15:30] 
 
And of course we know the Minister of Finance, who is . . . 
And I can’t believe it, you know. One of the things that I have 
to say is he is not very good at doing his homework. And he 

loves to holler over at us and he seems to be reading all our 
stuff, but really he should focus on his own homework, has 
failed this province in terms of delivering a first quarter report. 
And he said the media reports were . . . that there wasn’t much 
to see. Well maybe because he hadn’t done his homework there 
wasn’t much to see. You know, I’ve heard that before, not 
much here. And then you start to say hey, where there’s smoke 
there is fire. And it may not be a lot of smoke but the fire is 
pretty hot. 
 
So here you have an ability . . . because you have three more 
months of income, and that three more months of income came 
out to be about $100 million. But as well, you could then soften 
what the deficit looked like and that had a huge effect. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan see 
through that kind of work. They have big question marks, 
because when they start to see these things, all these little things 
adding up . . . And you know, you just kick the can down the 
road when you take three months out of last year and add it on 
to this year. This year is going to be short by three months when 
they come around, you know. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, this is all going to come home to roost. 
And so I have a lot of questions about this. And while this will 
be something that I know we’ll all want to speak on over here 
. . . But I think they’re important points to raise to the people 
who are watching at home. 
 
We’ve seen this government delay, delay, delay taking 
responsibility. And as the Premier says — and my colleagues, 
we all remember this — he says the greatest indicator of future 
performance is past behaviour. And here is one of these things 
where they want to change things up, change things up so we’re 
not getting the accurate picture. Either they delay the release of 
the budget . . . And everyone was saying, you’ve done your 
work. We all know you do your work. 
 
Everybody knows the budget cycle here in Saskatchewan. The 
budget cycle starts early in September, where the Minister of 
Finance . . . And I’m sure they did it over there. They released 
what the expectations were for the different ministries, what the 
thresholds were, and where there was going to be a 1 per cent 
increase or 2 per cent increase or holding budgets to a negative 
2 per cent. 
 
All those messages would have gone out. Those directives 
would have gone out from the Ministry of Finance early in 
September. People would be already working within the 
ministries to prepare budgets, and they would be meeting in 
October and November with the treasury board to say, these are 
our budgets or tentative budgets. How do they fit into the big 
picture? 
 
To say that there was very little work done would be inaccurate, 
inaccurate. And people of Saskatchewan should have been able 
to see what the state of affairs were, the true state of affairs, in 
Saskatchewan. But this government instead chose to put all of 
that aside and say, no, let’s wait until later, in late spring if not 
June, to have the budget presented. 
 
And when you have a bill like Bill No. 2 which starts to clean 
up the mess that they’ve created, there will be lots of questions 



October 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 871 

about this and the impacts, because we have Crown 
corporations that have been working very, very well. SaskTel, 
SaskPower, SGI, all of those, they have people who do this 
work and we’ve never had issues about aligning their year-ends. 
 
And you know, it does take a long time because in our 
committees we have them present their annual reports, and it’s 
very important that they’re timely. That’s one of the more 
pressing issues is their annual reports and the ability to meet 
and make sure we’re current on their annual reports. And this 
bill doesn’t really address that, and the minister at the time who 
brought this forward really didn’t see that was a concern. He 
just . . . [inaudible] . . . just wanted to, as they say over there, 
standardize. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, I am deeply, deeply concerned 
about their use of language. When they say one thing you really 
have to wonder if they mean something else and something 
gravely different, gravely different than . . . And I mean gravely 
because I am deeply concerned. This is not a light matter. This 
is a huge issue, and it’s one that we should take seriously. And 
in committee we will have questions about why the rush. Why 
Bill No. 2? You know, No. 1, No. 2, No. 3, No. 4 should be the 
vision for the four years going ahead. It shouldn’t be the 
Finance minister’s fixing up his first big mistake, his second big 
mistake, his third big mistake, his fourth big mistake. I’m 
wondering about whether he’s going to eliminate . . . 
 
It’ll be interesting to see when we get the second quarter report. 
Will we see that? My prediction here is it will be released 
Thursday, December 1st, the day after we leave. The day after 
we leave, the Minister of Finance will have the second quarter 
report. Sounds like . . . Yes, well I just have to say the Minister 
of Finance suffers from a serious credibility issue, and he every 
day gets weaker and weaker and weaker because he just can’t 
deliver reports and budgets on time. He just can’t deliver 
reports and budgets on time. You know, what happened during 
the election, he refused to bring the budget forward. And then 
he just didn’t do the first quarter and he definitely will be trying 
to get out of the second quarter. So mark your calendar, 
December 1st, or it could be in the next week of December, but 
that’s what I’m thinking. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is an important bill. Small as it is, it really 
is an indicator of where this government is and where it’s 
heading over the next four years. Very minimal vision about 
where we want to go forward, but trying to fix up their mistakes 
of eight years of mismanagement of our province’s finances. 
 
So with that, Bill No. 2, An Act to amend certain Statutes to 
Standardize Provisions respecting the Fiscal Year End of 
certain Crown Corporations, I would adjourn debates on that. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Centre has 
moved adjourned debate on Bill No. 2, The Miscellaneous 
Statutes (Crown Corporations’ Fiscal Year End 
Standardization) Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 

Bill No. 4 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 4 — The Queen’s 
Bench Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur la 
Cour du Banc de la Reine be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m honoured 
today to stand up in the House and talk about The Queen’s 
Bench Amendment Act, Bill No. 4. This was presented by the 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General. 
 
So this Act, it’s a really important Act for the province here. It 
really has a lot of structure for our court system and a lot of the 
people who work in the court system rely on things that are in 
this Act to ensure that things go smoothly. 
 
And so the amendments to this Act, some of it is to like, enforce 
decisions made by dispute resolution panels under free trade 
agreements to make that a little bit easier. And so that’s 
important because we know how important free trade is within 
our province, and we want to ensure that that language is a little 
bit better and easier to resolve. 
 
This also allows the minister to keep a list of lawyers who can 
be appointed as court-ordered or appointed lawyers, regulating 
their compensation. First of all, I think it’s very important that 
we look at regulating compensation for private lawyers that are 
being contracted to do work for the province. We know that we 
have Legal Aid here and Legal Aid does an excellent job with 
providing legal services for people who don’t have the financial 
resources to afford their own legal representation. But we also 
do know that our legal aid workers, they have really heavy 
caseloads and that they’re oftentimes overworked. And I 
believe we need maybe more of these lawyers in these 
departments. 
 
But I’ve been hearing more and more about cuts to legal aid 
which I don’t think is the right direction to go because we know 
that legal aid, you know, provides a necessary service in our 
community, and we have . . . Oftentimes, people who are 
involved in the legal system don’t have the financial means to 
pay for their own legal representation but that the government, 
in order to compensate for that and help out with those 
caseloads, they oftentimes contract other lawyers out. And 
there’s been a lot of dispute about the compensation that they 
receive, and so I think it’s really important that we have some 
regulating rules on how that compensation is going to be done. 
 
Also like keeping a list of the lawyers that are able to do that, 
that’s also important so that when we need to find out who can 
provide that service, then everybody’s well aware of who in 
those different communities are able to do that work. 
Oftentimes, getting a court-appointed lawyer can be a challenge 
to get. I know that applying for a lawyer . . . Like, we have 
people who are in our justice system: they oftentimes have a 
lack of education; they have literacy challenges. And I’m 
worried about some of the amendments to this, that it might 
make it even more of a challenge for them to be able to apply 
for legal representation. And so we’ve got to ensure that when 



872 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2016 

people need legal representation that the fact that they maybe 
have a lack of education or literacy issues isn’t a barrier for 
them to be receiving their rights of getting that legal 
representation. 
 
And another issue that I was concerned about with regards to 
this Act is, will clients be able to have their choice for a lawyer. 
I know sometimes having that legal relationship — it’s an 
intimate one, and you need to feel comfortable that your rights 
are being represented. And sometimes, there might be a conflict 
of some sort. And oftentimes in smaller locations such as, I’ll 
give the example of North Battleford or Prince Albert, a person 
might not feel comfortable with the very few lawyers that we 
might have representing, you know, especially in legal aid, so 
being able to have the ability to say, I’m not comfortable with 
this. Legal representation is a right for people, and they should 
be able to have that ability to choose who their legal 
representation is. And so I hope the amendments to this Act 
don’t provide a barrier for that, and I hope there’s a lot of 
discussion with regards to that when this hits council. 
 
Also, how can this government ensure the individuals who 
cannot access legal aid but require counsel are not unfairly 
hindered by the procedural requirements when applying for 
court-appointed counsel? So again like, we want to make sure 
that the process to apply for a lawyer is not going to be a barrier 
for people who are in these situations. 
 
And one thing . . . Like, if people don’t have that confidence in 
their counsel or they lose their ability to pick a counsel that they 
feel confident in, that could provide a waste of resources and 
could be a challenge that results with trials going up for appeal. 
And so that might become more of a waste per se, you know, in 
the court system and having things being done repeatedly. 
Because it’s really important that the defendant feels 
comfortable with who is representing them, so I think that needs 
to be considered as well when reviewing the amendments to 
this bill. 
 
And I also think that the removal of the right to choose counsel 
is a Charter of Rights issue so we’ve got to ensure when we’re 
making amendments to bills that it’s not going to be a Charter 
issue. Because if it does become an issue with regards to that 
then we’ll be back at this table and making amendments again 
because we’ve got to ensure that people’s rights are being 
respected. And that’s what the Charter of Rights and Freedoms 
is there for, is to ensure that we have rules and regulations that 
are going to be representing people and ensure that things are 
going in a respectful manner. 
 
So again I would want to make sure that we look at the 
amendments here. And my colleagues, we have a couple of 
legal representatives here, and so they’re very competent in 
being able to review these kind of bills and the amendments 
with regards to them. And I have a lot of confidence that they 
will review these with a fine-tooth comb and assure that they 
ask the appropriate questions in council with regards to that. 
 
[15:45] 
 
So I am sure my colleagues will have more information that 
they’ll want to add with regards to this bill and some of the 
potential concerns or maybe the good things about the 

amendments that are happening with this bill. So with that, I am 
going to let them have some more discussion with regards to 
this bill, and I move to adjourn this debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Prince Albert Northcote 
has moved adjourned debate on Bill No. 4, The Queen’s Bench 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 5 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 5 — The 
Electronic Information and Documents Amendment Act, 2016 
be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to enter 
the debate on Bill No. 5, The Electronic Information and 
Documents Amendment Act. Mr. Speaker, this is a fairly 
straightforward and simple bill. This particular bill makes it 
legal for real estate transactions to take place using electronic 
documents without the requirement for paper documents which 
in 2016, Mr. Speaker, I think is a pretty important thing to be 
able to do. 
 
I think some minor things to note: it changes references from 
department to ministry. That was a change that this government 
had implemented when it came to power in 2007, taking 
departments and turning them into ministries. It also repeals 
section 4 so the Act now includes: 
 

documents that create or transfer interest in land and that 
require registration to be effective against third parties.  

 
This is a fairly simple bill, Mr. Speaker, and as such . . . Often 
housekeeping bills come before us, and we’ve actually seen, in 
this legislative session, there isn’t a particularly heavy 
legislative agenda on the part of this government. I must say 
though today, we had the opportunity to pass a very important 
bill on post-traumatic stress disorder and other psychological 
injuries. So I would say that that was one of the government’s 
more pressing pieces of legislation, and we were happy to give 
it quick passage. But generally speaking, it’s a fairly light 
legislative agenda at the moment, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And we often see, obviously over time, bills needed changing 
for language purposes, those kinds of reasons, and this is one of 
those around moving from department to ministry. But what 
we’ve also seen in my time here as an MLA which has been 
almost seven years now that we often see bills come before us 
not for those little tweaks around language that’s outdated but 
because the government didn’t quite get it right on previous 
bills. And we’ve seen sometimes bills before us in a very short 
period of time two or three times, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So with respect to Bill No. 5, The Electronic Information and 



October 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 873 

Documents Amendment Act, 2016, the minister points out in his 
remarks that the real estate and credit union communities 
actually requested some of these changes. And I have a letter 
from SaskCentral that says that this amendment would put 
Saskatchewan on a level playing field with several other 
jurisdictions in Canada, pointing out that, reading from this 
letter from SaskCentral dated August 5th, 2015 to the Hon. 
Gordon Wyant: 
 

Bringing this amendment forward would also put 
Saskatchewan on a level playing field with several other 
jurisdictions in Canada. On July 1st, 2015 the Ontario 
government implemented similar changes to its Electronic 
Commerce Act. We are also advised that Manitoba, 
Quebec, New Brunswick, Newfoundland and Labrador, 
and Prince Edward Island also allow electronic signatures 
to facilitate real estate transactions. 

 
So I’m very glad to see that the government has sought input 
and has input from stakeholders who will be impacted. That is 
absolutely critical because you catch unintended consequences 
of legislation when you actually talk to people who are 
impacted by bills, Mr. Speaker. That is very important to do, 
and this hasn’t been something that we always see this 
government do. For example, right now they embark upon 
consultation processes that are often not particularly lengthy or 
particularly robust in the parties with whom they’re engaging, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. So I’m glad to see that there is some 
support for this bill from people . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Why is the member on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. McCall: — With leave to introduce a guest, Mr. Speaker, 
and with apologies to my colleague. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member has asked 
for leave to introduce guests. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the 
Opposition House Leader. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. McCall: — But just barely. No, just kidding there, Mr. 
Chair of Committees. Anyway, again thank you very much, Mr. 
Chair of Committees, and to my colleagues, and certainly to the 
member from Saskatoon Riversdale for enabling me to say a 
word of hello and welcome to an individual that served in this 
Chamber with dedication and some distinction. Mr. Chair of 
Committees, I’m speaking of course of Mr. Kim Trew, first 
elected in 1986 I believe, in the riding of Regina North and 
then, you know, a few elections later finished up 25 years of 
service to the people of Saskatchewan in the riding of Regina 
Coronation Park. As you know, Mr. Chair of Committees, 
sometimes the names change on these things, but certainly a lot 
of the terrain remains the same. And certainly when I was able 
to arrive in this Assembly, it was having known the good work 
of Mr. Kim Trew and had a lot of respect for him over the 
years. 
 

This is an individual that comes from Beechy country 
originally, Mr. Chair of Committees and is not exactly back in 
Beechy but has moved out to that neck of the woods. And he 
and his wife, Lorna, are now resident in the community of 
Elbow where they’re enjoying their retirement and spoiling 
their grandkids and all of those good things. 
 
But, Mr. Chair of Committees, again thank my colleagues for 
allowing me to say a word of welcome and congratulations. 
This is his first time back on the floor since he had retired in 
2011. So please join me in welcoming Mr. Kim Trew. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Electronic Information and Documents 
Amendment Act, 2016 

(continued) 
 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to again enter the discussion on Bill No. 5. And I just 
too want to join with my colleague in welcoming Mr. Trew to 
his Legislative Assembly. I only had the opportunity to serve 
with Mr. Trew for a couple of years, but it was indeed a 
pleasure to do so. So welcome, Mr. Trew, to your legislature. 
 
Back to Bill No. 5, The Electronic Information and Documents 
Amendment Act. So as I said earlier, this bill makes it legal for 
real estate transactions to take place using electronic documents 
without the requirement for paper documents. And again, this is 
2016 and is something that is really important.  
 
As the Health critic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I recognize very well 
the importance of electronic documents and the need to move 
more thoroughly to electronic health records. So we’re talking 
about electronic information here and this is a government who 
has spent a great deal of money moving to electronic health 
records but hasn’t been able to get the job done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know in my own health region of Saskatoon not every hospital 
has the capacity to share records. It always amazes me when I 
go see my own doctor, my general practitioner, and her office 
has been on the leading edge of using electronic health records. 
And I could see her and then show up at St. Paul’s Hospital 
after perhaps waiting in the ER for many, many hours because 
of over-capacity issues, and they wouldn’t in fact know that I’d 
ever seen my doctor just a few short days because we don’t 
have a seamless system of electronic health records. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, with respect to this bill . . . So I had 
mentioned earlier that SaskCentral had been consulted on this, 
so part of our work as the opposition going forward, we need to 
reach out to other organizations to see if the realtors, other 
folks, to see if they feel like these are the right changes or if 
there are other things that could look a little bit differently. Do 
we need amendments? So that will be the work that we’ll be 
doing going forward as the bill seems fairly straightforward. 
But sometimes things that seem so straightforward aren’t 
always such, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 



874 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2016 

I know that I’ll have colleagues along the way who will also 
weigh in to this debate. So with that, for the moment I would 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale has moved amend to Bill No. 5. Is that 
agreed? . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . The member has moved 
adjournment to Bill No. 5. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

Bill No. 6 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 6 — The Statute 
Law Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Prince Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Deputy Speaker. I’m honoured 
to stand today to talk about Bill No. 6, The Statute Law 
Amendment Act. This was presented by the Minister of Justice 
and . . . This is Bill No. 6 and this bill was last revised in 1978, 
it said, so I do believe that it is really time to look into these 
bills. I believe that we should regularly make sure that language 
in bills are updated and 1978 . . . Well I was just a young gaffer 
at that time. 
 
So I think that was a long time ago to be able to change the 
language, and a lot of language has changed since then. We 
oftentimes will change descriptions of things, like there was a 
lot of changes here from ministry to department. It used to be 
department; now they’re going to become ministry. They’re 
going to be changing wording such as provincial magistrate to 
Provincial Court judge. That was previously how we would 
refer to judges but now we’ve changed that language. 
 
So it’s important to, you know, reflect that, like I said before, in 
our Acts. And so this particular Act, though with changes with 
regards to the language and the grammatical changes and some 
of the references to the errors that might be presented in there, 
it’s going to have an impact on a variety of different Acts and 
they’re listed all in these Acts here. And there’s such a list of 
them that I could go on and on and on and talk about all the 
Acts that’ll be affected with some of the changes from this one, 
but I won’t go through that today. I’ll leave that maybe for 
someone else to discuss. I think once this hits committee that 
maybe they’ll want to discuss this a little bit more about how 
that language changing on this particular Act will impact some 
other Acts here too. 
 
And it looks like the Acts that it’ll impact go . . . a variety. It’ll 
impact some of the Ministry of Social Services Acts, some of 
the Ministry of Justice, and a variety, like I said before. So it’ll 
be important to discuss a lot of these changes in council but I 
agree that it’s really important that we update the language and 
ensure that grammar is correct. And I hope we don’t wait 
another 38 years to review this, but I probably won’t be around 
at that time if we do so. Oh, maybe. Who knows, apparently. 
 
So like I said before, you know, I think a lot of my colleagues 
will have a lot more to add with regards to some of these 

changes, and a lot of this discussion will probably be had on 
committees’ agendas. So with that, I am going to move to 
adjourn this debate. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member from 
Prince Albert Northcote has moved to adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 6. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

Bill No. 7 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 7 — The Statute 
Law Amendment Act, 2016 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2016 modifiant 
le droit législatif be now read a second time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Prince Albert Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Deputy Speaker. I’m proud to 
stand here and discuss Bill No. 7, The Statute Law Amendment 
Act (No. 2), and this was brought in by the Minister of Justice. 
 
[16:00] 
 
And I just had the pleasure to talk about Bill No. 6, which is 
really closely related to both Bill No. 6 and 7. Basically, from 
my understanding, Bill No. 6 is the English Act and Bill No. 7 
is the bilingual one. So of course it makes sense, if we’re going 
to be making some changes to Bill No. 6, that we should make 
the appropriate changes to Bill No. 7, just in the different 
language. 
 
So I said before, Bill No. 6 wasn’t updated since 1978, so 
there’s a lot of different language that needs to be changed and 
the grammar needs to be changed and there are some reference 
errors. And some of these changes are going to impact some of 
the other Acts, and so again this will need to be discussed in 
committee. But this will obviously be the bilingual Act, but it 
should be reflective and be the same as what the English Act 
also looks like. 
 
So I think there’ll be a lot of discussion in committee with 
regards to this, and I’m sure a lot of my fellow members and 
colleagues here, they’ll have a lot to add. And so, like I said, 
this will have a lot of changes to some of the other Acts. And 
I’m really proud that we do have some of these Acts in both 
languages. Like it’s really good that we represent both the 
English and the French language. 
 
And I was reading here something to do with . . . I think it was 
the Minister of Justice that said that there was three languages. 
I’m not quite sure what he meant by that and which exact 
languages that would be, but I think that would be interesting to 
find out a little bit more. Should have some interesting dialogue 
and questions in committee. And so I’m looking forward to 
finding out what the end result will be with regards to the 
changes to this Act. And so I’ll be talking to my colleagues and 
other members with regards to that. 
 
So at this time though, I believe that I’m going to move to 
adjourn the debate with regards to this bill. 



October 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 875 

The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member from 
Prince Albert Northcote has adjourned debate on Bill No. 7. Is 
that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

Bill No. 8 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 8 — The Summary 
Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and am 
pleased to be able to enter into the debate once again as we 
proceed through the legislative agenda for this session. 
 
This particular bill is An Act to amend The Summary Offences 
Procedure Act from 1990. And once again I would like to begin 
with a reference to the comments made by the minister in the 
preface to the introduction of the bill. In this case, the minister 
indicated very thoroughly the types of changes that this bill is 
attempting to achieve. As he points out, since the introduction 
of traffic tickets through . . . It’s the pilot project, I guess, for 
automated speed enforcement photo laser project. 
 
Having been the recipient of one of those tickets, Mr. Speaker, I 
can attest to you that it is working. And it certainly has changed 
my behaviour when I drive through Martensville. I’m very 
aware of the location now of that and I . . . Of course I always 
try to follow the speed limit, but in that particular case I was 
reminded and received one of those tickets in the mail. 
 
And what’s happening here is, because it’s a summary offences 
procedure, currently under the existing law you can plead 
guilty. But if you can’t immediately pay the fine, then you have 
to apply through a judge to get an extension on the fine. And 
that is clogging up the court systems, quite frankly. And I 
believe that the intention here is that because this is an 
administrative matter, it makes more sense for there being a 
process by which these fines can be extended, or the payment of 
the fine can be extended, through someone else other than a 
justice of the court because as you know, their dockets are 
incredibly full already. So I think obviously the number of these 
tickets that are coming in and the number of people asking for 
extensions to payment has caused a significant issue for the 
courts. So this is a response to that. 
 
Another thing that this is doing is incorporating . . . There is a 
provision in the Criminal Code. This is really on a different 
subject. But under the Criminal Code, at this point in time 
there’s a provision that allows people to swear an information 
by means of telecommunication. Now when you swear an 
information, normally that’s done by an informant like a police 
officer. And what it does, when a police officer will swear an 
information, it means they’re swearing that it is their belief that 
a crime has been committed. 
 
And so at this point in time, this must be done before an official 
of the court. Normally it’s done before a peace officer. And I 

certainly remember in my articling days showing up in court 
and waiting for all these informations to be sworn in front of a 
peace officer before they could actually go out and charge the 
person with that crime. So what’s happened under Criminal 
Code, modernization provisions have been made so that it can 
be done through telecommunication rather than attendance 
personally. 
 
And this, under The Summary Offences Procedure Act, will 
actually facilitate the work of the peace officers much more 
practically. So what they’re doing in the amendments in that 
regard are just incorporating that particular section in the 
Criminal Code to allow for the swearing of an information 
through telecommunication. 
 
So very simple kind of changes and ones that reflect some 
developments in the Criminal Code, and certainly reaction to 
some of the problems that have come up because of the 
enforced photo radar traffic tickets. 
 
So what we see is the first change is in section 4(4) of the 
existing Act, and this is where we’re adding section 508.1 of the 
Criminal Code. So that’s the one that relates to the swearing of 
an information through telecommunication. And then the rest 
. . . A lot of these changes to strike out where the judge can 
include an extension of time for payment, that’s no longer 
required. So I think section 21(1) is changed to strike that out. 
Section 32.62(1) is changed by striking that out, and I think that 
is basically the extent of that, to make . . . 
 
But the big, big change in this bill is under section 26. So what 
happens there is that was the section of the Act that currently 
talks about how the justice is allowed to make extensions for 
payment. So section 26 — I’ll just pull that up quickly — 
currently the fine is due and payable 15 days after its 
imposition, and the justice may ask the offender if they want an 
extension. If they do want an extension, the judge can inquire 
about that, why, and then they don’t have to answer if they 
don’t want to. There’s a whole bunch of things here that the 
judge may do. 
 
The entire section’s being struck down, and in this case now 
we’re going to put in a director. So it’s a new administrative 
position that will have to be made. I’m not sure if every court 
will have to do that, and I’m not sure who will be appointed as 
these directors, but it’s being converted from the responsibility 
of the judge to the director. So that’s basically what’s 
happening in section 26. And that is the meat and the heart of 
this particular bill. 
 
A couple of other amendments that are being made, section 
32.1(1) is being amended. I guess that’s in reference to striking 
out the justice, the reference to the judge. 32.83 is being 
amended and basically this is just a typo, and kudos to the folks 
in the Ministry of Justice who are picking up on these ones. It’s 
just a typo referring to section (8) and that doesn’t exist. It’s 
actually section (6). 
 
Again on section 52(2) and 52(3), a couple of mistakes there 
where they referred to section 139, and that was an error. It was 
actually supposed to refer to section 149. 
 
So from time to time we see these types of corrections coming 



876 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2016 

forward. They’re housekeeping amendments and obviously as 
people read through . . . I remember doing drafting and 
sometimes when you change the numbers on one clause, you 
forget to change all the numbers on the other clauses. So that’s 
probably what happened here and it’s easy to miss and hard to 
find. So again, kudos to the court officials and the justice 
officials for making those changes. 
 
The last change, and this is probably the extent of my 
comments on this particular bill, is changes to section 55. And 
in that case we need to have the ability for the rules around 
extension being placed into the regulations. So what’s 
happening here is rather than have them all as they are 
prescribed in section 26 right now, they are actually going to 
allow the Lieutenant Governor to make changes to regulations 
regarding the applications for extension or further extension of 
time for payments of a fine. So that’s section 55. 
 
And that’s the typical regulations clause that you find in pretty 
much every bill. So there’s a good long list in section 55, 
almost two, well over two pages of things that can be done by 
regulations. So this is just adding to that and it’s giving a little 
more flexibility for the ministry to be able to set the rules on 
applications for extension of time or further extension of time. 
So this would allow people to ask for not one extension but 
more than one extension. 
 
Again this is nothing earth shattering here, Mr. Speaker. This is 
just clerical stuff, but it’s also a response to the changing in the 
way we are issuing tickets. For example, these photo radar 
tickets are now becoming more commonplace and obviously 
the reaction to them is putting more work on the courts. There’s 
an attempt to lessen that work although we will need to have 
another person doing these extensions. It’s not like they go 
away. 
 
And then secondly, of course, the ability for peace officers to 
swear an information through telecommunications with the 
peace officer. And as the minister indicated when he gave his 
comments, many of our peace officers are in northern parts of 
the province where it’s very difficult to appear before a judge or 
other court officials to swear these informations. So this is 
making their lives a lot easier and a lot more practical as well. 
So I don’t think there’s much further comment that is required 
but, as always, I’m pleased to be able to provide these 
comments. 
 
At this point then I would like to adjourn the debate on Bill No. 
8, An Act to amend The Summary Offences Procedure Act, 
1990. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member has moved 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 8. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 

Bill No. 9 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Wyant that Bill No. 9 — The 
Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 
2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’exécution des jugements 
canadiens be now read a second time.] 

The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the 
Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair of 
Committees. Always good to take my place in this Chamber 
and join debate on, in this case, Bill No. 9, An Act to amend The 
Enforcement of Canadian Judgements Act, 2002. Always good 
to see when a bill is also brought forward en français in accord 
with the two official languages of Canada. And certainly with 
reference to the Canadian judgments, it would make all kinds of 
sense to have the French version of the bill here alongside. 
 
This particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, comes to us 
courtesy the good work of the good folks at the Uniform Law 
Conference of Canada, recommending these changes to provide 
greater certainty with respect to the enforcement of Canadian 
tax judgments. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of things that this piece 
of legislation sets out to accomplish, but I’d refer you to the 
Minister of Justice’s second reading speech of May 30th, 2016 
wherein he’d gone through the highlights and lowlights of this 
particular piece of legislation. Again as my colleague from 
Saskatoon Nutana had said in regards to her piece of legislation, 
not exactly earth shattering, but these things are important and 
certainly, you know, given the certainty of death and taxes, 
that’s got to have tax judgments in there someplace, Mr. 
Speaker. So it’s good to have these things clarified. 
 
So what this piece of legislation does: 
 

This Act currently provides a registration procedure for the 
enforcement of civil judgments between Canadian 
provinces and territories, and between Canadian and 
foreign jurisdictions that does not require reciprocity or 
court supervision as a prerequisite to enforcement. 

 
And that’s coming from the minister’s second reading speech, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
[16:15] 
 
In terms of, you know, this particular bill will add a definition 
of Canadian tax judgment to the Act, again from the minister’s 
second reading speech where he states: 
 

The new definition will include both a judgment for the 
recovery of money under a tax law and a certificate of an 
amount payable under a tax law that has been registered as 
a judgment in a court of a province or a territory. 

 
Carrying on, Mr. Speaker, the minister talks about how the Act 
will: 
 

. . . currently requires that an application for directions 
respecting enforcement be made to the court for enforcing 
any judgment that was obtained without notice against a 
judgment debtor. An exception to this requirement will be 
added to the Act so that an application to the court for 
directions respecting the enforcement of a Canadian tax 
judgment will only be required if one of the parties 
specifically requests it. 

 



October 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 877 

Again, Mr. Speaker, always good to be clear on these things, 
and that the Uniform Law Conference has seen fit to have these 
matters clarified and that the government has seen fit to follow 
along all the good work of jurisdictions such as Manitoba which 
has recently implemented these amendments. I guess we’ll 
await further intelligence on how this particular piece of 
legislation works out. 
 
It’ll be good to check in committee, Mr. Speaker, in terms of, 
you know, what’s the applicability of this, what sort of 
frequency of use of this legislation will be provoked, if there’s a 
particular case that is prompting this amendment above and 
beyond the urging of the Uniform Law Conference of Canada. 
And certainly those are questions that we’ll seek greater clarity 
upon in committee. 
 
But I know that there are other of my colleagues that will be 
looking to share a few thoughts on this particular piece of 
legislation, though I’m suspecting not too many of them. I think 
this is one that will possibly be moving to committee sooner 
rather than later. But for the meantime, Mr. Chair of 
Committees, I’d move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 9, The 
Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — The member has moved 
to adjourn debate on Bill No. 9. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 10 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cox that Bill No. 10 — The Forest 
Resources Management Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Deputy Chair of Committees: — I recognize the member 
from Regina Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Today I will be 
speaking to continuing debate on Bill 10, The Forest Resources 
Management Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
When moving the second reading in May, the minister noted 
that amendments in this Act would streamline processes for 
industry while enhancing government’s ability to ensure that 
forests are sustainably managed and that our environment 
remains protected. Certainly the goal of protecting the very 
important ecosystem and resource that is our northern forest is a 
worthwhile endeavour and something that should be regularly 
updated and modernized. 
 
I do note that when speaking to this bill, my colleague from 
Nutana noted some concerns about . . . you know, some 
cautions, I guess, about the processes of streamlining and 
ensuring that when we are endeavouring to streamline 
processes, that we’re not looking at cutting corners. Certainly 
there is a balance. And I think we’re constantly aware of that 
balance between ensuring that we have economic development 
and a balance with ensuring that we put measures in place to 
have long-term sustainable natural resources and that we are 

strong stewards over those resources. So I do share some of the 
issues, share concern about some of the issues that my 
colleague from Nutana and my colleague from Athabasca noted 
when they were speaking to this bill initially. 
 
This streamlining is part of a larger results-based legislation 
move by this government, and one of the goals, I understand, of 
that sort of shift in legislation is to move towards some 
increased industry regulation for those who are deemed to be 
low risk. And I think it’s very important that when we’re 
striving to create that balance that we don’t let it tip too far into 
the realm of self-regulation. Certainly you don’t want to inhibit 
sustainable and thoughtful and meaningful development of 
those resources, but you want to ensure that they are not 
overharvested and that we have this resource for many years to 
come. 
 
The goal of ensuring a strong and vibrant management of our 
forests is important to everyone, Mr. Speaker. Of course to 
those north of the treeline, they would understand more 
intimately the value and the importance of these northern 
forests, but it is a resource that benefits all of us in 
Saskatchewan. Our northern forests have a role to play certainly 
in tourism. We know lots of folks from within the province and 
within the country and certainly from out of the country marvel 
at the beauty and pristine nature of our northern ecosystem. And 
it’s very important that we treasure that and recognize that and 
ensure that those who come after us will also have that beautiful 
resource to enjoy as well. 
 
The role in tourism of course that goes along is also the fact that 
we have the northern forest as a very important habitat for 
countless species of plants and animals. And like all 
ecosystems, it’s incumbent upon us to ensure that we don’t 
overdevelop and tip that balance to a point that it can’t be 
recovered. Sometimes the impacts of overusing a resource are 
immediately evident and sometimes not so evident. 
 
I’ve sort of digressed I suppose a bit, but I’m thinking of a story 
that I heard about why, you know, the impacts of an island like 
Haiti — of course very removed from Saskatchewan — but 
underwent a huge deforestation at the turn of the last century, 
and it’s impacted all sorts of things today like the impact of 
floods. You look at the other half of the island, it still has its 
forests. They don’t have near the same impacts when we have 
floods and hurricanes and now cholera. So once you tip the 
balance and you go too far in those ecosystems, it’s very 
difficult to go back and can have catastrophic impacts for a long 
time to come. But anyway I digress. 
 
We do know, and I think that we’ve been talking about this a 
fair amount in this House, is the importance of the role that our 
northern forests play in carbon sequestration. And I think kids 
very early in school learn the role that trees play in removing 
carbon from the atmosphere and releasing oxygen. 
 
And that certainly is something that we’re going to increasingly 
need in this province and in this world, frankly, to ensure that 
we can meet the challenges that lie ahead with regard to the . . . 
with climate change, and ever so much important that we ensure 
that we are replanting trees at a rate that is sustainable and 
ensures that we are not overharvesting that resource. 
 



878 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2016 

So I understand that a number of the stipulations within this bill 
are aimed at that goal. I’ll just flip to some of the minister’s 
comments on this bill. He noted back in May when he 
introduced this bill that in addition to streamlining processes, 
the goal of this bill was to enhance the government’s ability to 
ensure that forests are sustainably managed and that our 
environment is protected. And I certainly know that you’ll get 
no opposition on the latter goals there for sure from this side of 
the legislature. 
 
One of the goals is to deal with forest roads and trails that are 
left when forestry activity goes into certain areas and roads are 
created to go in and harvest the lumber. Often those roads, once 
that project has been completed, there are a number of roads 
that are left abandoned and those of course can cause a hazard 
for those in the area. They also, when left open, can disrupt the 
ecosystem. 
 
I was looking for it in the comments from both my colleagues 
and I couldn’t find it, but I can’t say that . . . I don’t want to 
attribute it to the wrong source, but hearing a story about how 
wolves will find those roads and follow them down, and it 
makes it a little too easy for them to hunt caribou, and it has an 
impact on the caribou population. So I do believe that the 
minister did mention the role that this bill could have in helping 
to sustain those caribou populations. 
 
Another big part — maybe one of the more substantial parts of 
this bill — is around the forest management fees and speaking 
specifically to a . . . The Provincial Auditor noted in a report in 
2009 that reforestation and the forest management fees needed 
to be sufficient to cover the actual cost of reforestation in the 
harvested areas. And I think that’s a good point, Mr. Speaker. If 
that company were to become insolvent and those fees were not 
sufficient to complete the reforestation, it would be the people 
of Saskatchewan who would be left on the hook for that 
reforestation, that very important part of the cycle. So I do think 
that on the surface at least — and I’m sure my colleagues would 
like to look further into that — that seems to be a reasonable 
proposal. 
 
As noted in the minister’s comments: 
 

In the event that a licence holder becomes insolvent, the 
government is the beneficiary of the fees held in the forest 
management fund established for that licence area and 
becomes responsible to ensure that they are spent 
responsibly. 

 
So I think it’s important that we do ensure that there’s enough 
money in that fund in order to be able to complete the job of 
reforestation if for some reason the company that holds that 
licence is not able. 
 
One of the things that I learned in preparing for this bill is that 
there are two types of licences that are applied in the North to 
harvested areas. One is a 20-year forest management agreement 
which has a fairly large component requiring a plan for 
reforestation and often, I understand, is taken by larger players 
in the forestry industry; and then the five-year, area-based term 
licences. 
 
And the terms and conditions of these forest management 

agreements, the aim of them is to ensure that fees are set at a 
level, again, as has been mentioned, to cover reforestation. And 
this bill, I understand, would allow for some adjustment of 
those fees to address actual costs which, I suppose, if it’s 
reasonable that at some times it may be more or less expensive 
to undertake the important role of reforestation as it’s needed. 
And I think that that’s important. 
 
[16:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, in going a little further into the remediation of 
roads, the minister noted that the legacy of roads and 
unreclaimed access remaining on provincial forest lands were 
the result of, in many cases, past industrial activities, sometimes 
very long ago activities. Culverts and bridges associated with 
access are in various states of disrepair, and certainly that is 
something that I have heard from my colleagues in the North, 
and of course that does pose a safety risk. I know my colleague 
from Nutana noted that if you have people using the forest 
recreationally and they come across one of these rusted-out 
culverts or bridges, it certainly does pose a significant risk to 
safety. 
 
Another thing that has been noted, and I understand the intent 
of this bill is to take over . . . include management in the role of 
forest management, that from time to time there are commercial 
and recreational users who would seek to use those roads, for 
example, for a system of trails or a system for ATVs [all-terrain 
vehicle], I suppose, or ski trails and other types of trails. So that 
is something that is contemplated with this bill. I’m just going 
to take a minute to look at my notes. 
 
This bill acknowledges, puts in place some regulations, I 
understand, in the event that those holding the licence are in 
non-compliance or found to be in contravention of the 
regulations. So it does look at increasing penalties. I understand 
that the minister would be able to impose a penalty or a period 
by which the licensee wouldn’t be able to apply for another . . . 
apply again for three years or in the case that a judge . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Premier on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I also 
want to thank the member for Regina Lakeview for facilitating 
the introduction here today. Joining us in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, are some very distinguished guests who have travelled 
a long way to be in Saskatchewan. They are with Yankuang 
Group and have come from Beijing to visit in Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to introduce them by name and 
maybe they could give a wave when I’ve introduced them, 
when I’ve said their name. The CEO of Yankuang Group is 
with us, Mr. Li; the director of International Business Centre for 



October 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 879 

Yankuang Group, Mr. Tian; the director of operation and 
management department of Yankuang Group, Mr. Tong; Mr. 
Ma, chairman of Yancoal Canada Resources Limited; and Mr. 
Han, president of Yancoal Canada Resources Limited. And 
joining them from the Ministry of the Economy, William Wang, 
as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these officials, these representatives of Yancoal 
and of Yankuang Group are in the province today really for two 
reasons. They have visited earlier this day Boundary dam 3 to 
have a look at what we’re doing with respect to carbon capture 
sequestration at the coal plant at Estevan. They’ve also had 
meetings with respect to their proposed investment in a new 
potash mine in Saskatchewan. I think they’ve been here now for 
a few days. I think they’ve also hosted a fowl supper in Earl 
Grey recently and had a great community participation at the 
fowl supper and raised some money for local charity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re looking at a major investment in the 
province of Saskatchewan that would create a number of jobs, 
construction and in operation, and they’re also interested in 
CCS [carbon capture and storage] partnership with our 
province. And so we always are welcoming of that interest, and 
I would ask all members to please join with me in welcoming 
this delegation to the Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to ask 
for leave to introduce guests. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — On behalf of the Official Opposition, I too 
would like to welcome all the guests from Yancoal here today: 
Mr. Li, Mr. Tian, Mr. Tong, Mr. Ma and Mr. Han. And of 
course, thank you very much for coming to Saskatchewan and 
with such interest in our resources here in Saskatchewan. It’s 
very important to have that kind of interest and we look to 
seeing these kinds of partnerships grow. 
 
Also thank you to the official from the ministry, Mr. Wang. I 
know your assistance is very important in facilitating these 
types of arrangements. So again, on behalf of the official 
opposition, we’d like to welcome you to Saskatchewan, to our 
Legislative Assembly, and wish you the very best in your 
enterprises. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote . . . oh, who is not here today. I’m going to have 
Prince Albert . . . Sorry. I will recognize Regina Lakeview. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 10 — The Forest Resources Management 
Amendment Act, 2016 

(continued) 
 

Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So to continue where I 
was — and I’m sure we were all paying attention; Cathy’s 
paying attention — we were talking about the bill proposed, 
Bill No. 10, The Forest Resources Management Amendment 
Act, 2016 and noting that one of the reasons for amendment, as 
stated by the minister, involved a process that had developed 
over time that sort of went against the initial licensing . . . what 
was initially intended with the licensing scheme. 
 
So originally the Act contemplated a term supply of forestry 
licences being issued, mostly to small- and medium-scale 
operators, and volume-based timber allocations. There was a 
practice that sometimes happens with legislation, I suppose, that 
you have some unintended consequences. Over time, a subset of 
those licences were adopted as transitional five-year, 
term-based licences. And I understand that the practice . . . 
Rather than going ahead and preparing forestry management 
plans, some producers would continually reapply for those 
five-year licences and thus circumvent the more intense forest 
management plan. So that is certainly important, that we have 
those forest management plans in place for the larger 
operations, and I understand that that is the goal of that piece of 
the legislation. 
 
Another piece that is proposed in these amendments is 
clarifying licence holders are accountable for the actions of not 
only their company but of their contractors while they’re 
undertaking forestry operations on behalf of the licence holder. 
And I think that’s really important, not just within forestry but 
within all industries, that it’s very clear that those who are 
undertaking contracts with contractors, that they are ensuring 
that not only are they following the rules and the regulations, 
you know, certainly with regard to the forestry Act but also 
labour standards and all of those legislation, ensuring that those 
. . . Those regulations are there for a reason, Mr. Speaker, and 
it’s important that they’re followed. So I certainly understand 
the intent of that amendment. 
 
And as I had mentioned further, there’s some changes to the 
remedies proposed in this legislation including suspension, 
cancellation, or refusal to issue a licence. And certainly it’s 
important to have legislation and also important to have some 
mechanisms by which you can actually enforce that legislation, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The note that this is . . . Prohibiting people with a serious 
history of non-compliance and from applying for or obtaining a 
licence has been proven effective in other areas, for example 
The Wildlife Act. And certainly, as I noted, it’s important that 
you have those measures in place in order to ensure, as I said, 
not only do you have the legislation right but there are those 
deterrents and those mechanisms by which you can impose 
judgments and penalties such as excluding licences. 
 
You know, I guess our role here as opposition, or one of our 
roles certainly is to ensure that the voices, when legislation is 
contemplated, that we bring voices to bear in this legislature 
and voices from our constituencies ensuring that, you know, 
we’re another set of eyes on this legislation and making sure 
that we, you know, have a look, as I said, not just for the 
intended consequences but perhaps some of the unintended 
consequences of the legislation. 
 



880 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2016 

And I know two of my colleagues have already spoken to this 
legislation and did a very good job so I’m going to go over 
some of the concerns that were brought up. I’m going to start 
with the member from Athabasca who initially spoke to this 
legislation and this bill, the proposed amendments, and brought 
forward some concerns of the trapping community which I 
don’t think I have as much knowledge, for sure, as he has. But 
he mentioned a few things that I thought were worth repeating. 
 
He’s talking about having photographs of trappers that have 
trapped in an area for years and taking pictures of the traplines 
and their cabin, and a few months later coming back and 
finding that most of the land has been harvested, and without 
having provisions to deal with the fact that that has impacted 
their livelihood. And I think it’s important, any time that we’re 
undertaking development or contemplating legislation, that we 
ensure that voices are heard and their concerns are taken 
seriously and taken into account. So I appreciate him bringing 
those concerns forward. 
 
Another item that isn’t necessarily directly contemplated with 
this legislation, or this bill, but I think both of my colleagues 
from Athabasca and as well as from Cumberland have noted on 
repeated times in this legislature and outside, is just the impact 
on roads in the North and how that creates a hazard for people 
driving who make their home in the North and are travelling on 
those roads. And that’s something that should be taken into 
consideration as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Of course you can imagine that these trucks are very, very, very 
heavy that are carrying the trees out of the forests, and put a 
great stress on the highways. And I know that they’ve 
repeatedly asked for some consideration to the impact on the 
state of those roads. My colleague from Athabasca noted that 
the minister has received letters about these concerns and there 
was a group that even attended this legislature, this Assembly, 
to speak about their issues. 
 
And I would echo some of the comments that my colleague 
made on his initial response once this bill was tabled, and that is 
ensuring that people understood that it wasn’t the intent of the 
people of the North to not support development, but 
encouraging development that took robust consideration of all 
of the impacts. 
 
I think it’s often easy for anyone in a jurisdiction removed from 
the jurisdiction that is impacted by the legislation to, you know, 
even with careful consideration, to miss some things that 
perhaps people who live and work in those areas might have 
more intimate knowledge about. And I think we’d do well to 
listen to their voices any time we’re contemplating legislation, 
Mr. Speaker, and ensure it can only be richer when we have 
those voices at the table applying the local context and maybe 
looking at, you know, things that we don’t understand. 
 
[16:45] 
 
I know that our province . . . Often when we see our province 
on the national or international stage, we see, you know, great 
rolling wheat fields. And it often . . . I remember as a young 
person, coming as a bit of a shock to someone who grew up on 
the southern plains that more than half of our province is 
covered in forest. And I think that it is important that . . . You 

know, we can be a long way down here sometimes in this 
Assembly, and it’s important that we listen to those voices from 
those who are actually there and living in those communities, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m just going to go back to some of the comments again as I 
noted that my colleague from Nutana had provided on the 
proposed amendments. Just noting the expansion of the 
definition in the explanatory notes that were provided by the 
ministry, the clause regarding to scope, that now does more 
than just the seven words basically describing the roads. “. . . 
[It] expands on the minister’s authority to enter into agreements 
with clients for the purpose of developing, improving, 
maintaining, closing, reclaiming and managing new and 
existing roads, road[way] allowances and rights of way.” 
 
And as I noted, that might have implications. And I’m sure my 
colleagues would like to look further into that, how that works 
with, not only when it’s deemed necessary that these roads be 
taken out of existence and reclaimed or replanted but also in the 
instance when it’s contemplated that they be used as trails or 
other sorts of development that fits in with the local ecosystem 
there. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would propose that I’m sure that 
my colleagues will have more . . . and ultimately the critic and 
in committee about looking at these bills. I’m sure they’ll want 
to consult with their stakeholders and their constituents in their 
areas about their thoughts and concerns here as well as the 
things that they agree with. So with that, I would like to adjourn 
debate. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview has 
adjourned debate on Bill No. 10, The Forest Resources 
Management Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

Bill No. 11 
 

[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cox that Bill No. 11 — The Forestry 
Professions Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again as noted, this Bill 
11 is The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, and I’m just 
going to go through some of the explanatory notes. In summary, 
this bill establishes the authority to apply financial penalties to 
people who unlawfully engage in the professional practice of 
forestry without registering as forestry professionals. The bill 
establishes that the limitation of prosecution provision applies 
to contraventions respecting the unlawful practice of forestry. 
 
I think, as is often the case when we’re looking at professional 
governing bodies, it’s important that we recognize those and the 
professional qualifications that are required for both training 
and carrying out of the duties within those professions, Mr. 



October 25, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 881 

Speaker. Some of the considerations of this bill outlines the 
importance of forestry professionals in ensuring that 
Saskatchewan’s forest ecosystem remains healthy, long term. 
 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, there are a lot of voices that we need at 
the table when we’re looking at skilful management and 
protection and stewardship over our northern forests. And local 
knowledge is very important, as well as the professional 
forestry or forestry professionals, rather. It’s important to have 
those voices on the table. 
 
Further in the goals of this legislation, Mr. Speaker, is looking 
at the accountability of forest professionals in making decisions 
about public forests. As has been noted, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
certainly, you know, getting that wrong, getting the 
management of our forests . . . or getting it right, you know, on 
the other side. These are important decisions that are being 
made. It’s important that we have people that have the proper 
knowledge and experience and educational background to 
ensure that we’re getting good decisions with regard to forest 
management in the North, you know, for the reasons that I’ve 
outlined previously. 
 
Our forests are a huge resource and of huge importance to this 
province for a number of reasons, again not only the forestry 
industry, the mills, and those industries but also tourism in the 
North, the livelihood of local communities, fishing, trapping. 
I’ve already noted tourism. And it’s very important that we are 
strong stewards over that resource, this resource that covers, 
you know, half of our province. And we would all do well to 
remember that importance. 
 
I understand that these amendments are to bring us in line with 
legislation otherwise been enacted throughout Canada 
consistent with the provisions applicable to forestry professions 
in other provinces in Canada. I mean, I do think that that 
context is also important, Mr. Speaker, that we look at what 
other jurisdictions are doing and learn from that. Sometimes, 
you know, we are the ones who other provinces are learning 
from. And certainly when we look around and find that our own 
legislation and our own standards are lacking, it’s important 
that we make sure that we are up to date and in keeping with 
best practice throughout the country. And this bill is also 
important to ensure that forestry associations are protected 
through the amendments in this bill, so I guess there’s a bit of a 
balance there to be struck, Mr. Speaker.  
 
And as with the previous bill, I am sure that there are further 
questions that my colleagues will have. Those with different 
knowledge and a different lens on this legislation will have 
perhaps constituents whose voices they want to bring here and 
ensure that we are aware of as we contemplate this bill. So with 
that, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn debate on Bill 
No. 11, The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Lakeview has 
moved adjournment on Bill No. 11, The Forestry Professions 
Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 

Bill No. 12 
 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Duncan that Bill No. 12 — The Public 
Health (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
second time.] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Always good to join 
debate and take my place, in this case on Bill No. 12, The 
Public Health (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
Two main purposes in this particular piece of legislation, Mr. 
Speaker. One is to better facilitate the posting of information 
related to public health inspections of restaurants, Mr. Speaker, 
certainly a timely bit of discussion here just before the supper 
hour. 
 
And secondly, as regards a more clear delineation of the chain 
of command when it comes to communicable disease response 
coordination on the part of the ministry and certainly updating 
certain of the powers prescribed to nurse practitioners and clinic 
nurses as relates to the reporting of communicable diseases and 
their responsibilities, Mr. Speaker, and better aligning those 
positions with the scope of practice. 
 
It, you know, seems like fair enough legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ll be looking for, you know, I’m sure greater clarity on 
various of the measures in the Act come committee. Also 
certainly it is with note . . . I’m looking at the remarks of my 
colleague from P.A. [Prince Albert] Northcote and the folks on 
the opposition benches that have a greater understanding of the 
public health side of the health care system. 
 
But as regards this particular piece of legislation, Mr. Speaker, I 
note with interest that three of the measures contained in this 
piece of legislation relate to the housekeeping of changing 
department to ministry. And you’ll remember that great public 
policy initiative of the sitting government whereby they 
changed the nomenclature from using departments to ministries, 
and of course, you know, the province hasn’t been the same 
since, Mr. Speaker. But I’m sure someday they’ll get through 
all the legislation and change all the usage from department to 
ministry, and what a glorious day that will be, I’m sure, Mr. 
Speaker. But in the meantime, that quest continues. 
 
But as regards substantive measures in the actual legislation, 
again we’ve got some changes around nurse practitioners, 
around clinic nurses, around how those positions relate to the 
coordination of efforts and response to communicable diseases, 
and then of course, some of the changes around the posting of 
information as regards the public health conditions in 
restaurants and how those might be better reported out to the 
public and, you know, more clearly delineating what the 
responsibilities there are. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is a pretty straightforward piece of 
legislation, and you know, those hard-working legislative 
officers out there in ministry land, they’ve got to earn their keep 
the same as anyone else. So this particular piece of legislation, 
pretty straightforward, but we’ll be looking to ensure that there 
aren’t any unintended consequences. We’ll be sure to, you 



882 Saskatchewan Hansard October 25, 2016 

know, do our due diligence in terms of consulting with other 
interested parties. And certainly we’ll have some more detailed 
questions as relates to the legislation come time in committee. 
 
But with that, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate on 
Bill No. 12, An Act to amend The Public Health Act, 1994. 
 
The Speaker: — The Opposition House Leader has moved 
adjourned debate on Bill No. 12, The Public Health 
(Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. It being 5 p.m., this Assembly stands 
recessed until 7 p.m. tonight. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 851 
  Chartier ............................................................................................................................................................................. 851, 852 
  Cox ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 851 
  Sproule ............................................................................................................................................................................... 851, 879 
  Carr ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 851 
  Makowsky.................................................................................................................................................................................. 852 
  Wyant ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 852 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 873 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 878 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 852 
  Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 852 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 852 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 853 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 853 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 853 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 853 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 854 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Donation to Children’s Hospital Foundation 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 854 
 Prince Albert Celebrates 125 Years of Ukrainians in Saskatchewan 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 854 
 Community Living Fourplex Opens in Lloydminster 
  Young ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 854 
 Students Hold Fundraiser for Residential School Memorial 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 855 
 New Physicians in Preeceville 
  Dennis ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 855 
 Melville Student Wins Gold at Skills Canada National Competition 
  Kaeding ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 855 
 Violence Prevention Week in Saskatchewan 
  Makowsky.................................................................................................................................................................................. 855 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transaction 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 856 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 856 
  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 857 
 Funding for Education 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 858 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 858 
 Funding for the Northern Teacher Education Program 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 858 
  Eyre ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 859 
 Funding for Lighthouse Shelter 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 859 
  Beaudry-Mellor ......................................................................................................................................................................... 859 
 Support for Children in Care 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 860 
  Beaudry-Mellor ......................................................................................................................................................................... 860 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 39 — The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2016 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 860 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 39 — The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2016 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 861 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 861 
COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE ON BILLS 
 Bill No. 39 — The Workers' Compensation Amendment Act, 2016 ............................................................................................ 863 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 39 — The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2016 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 863 



 

BILL WITHDRAWN 
 Bill No. 601 — The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2016 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 863 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 Position on Climate Change and Carbon Tax 
  Moe ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 864 
 Recorded Division (amendment) ................................................................................................................................................. 867 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 867 
 Recorded Division (main motion) ............................................................................................................................................... 869 
TRANSMITTAL MOTION 
  Merriman .................................................................................................................................................................................. 869 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 2 — The Miscellaneous Statutes (Crown Corporations’ Fiscal Year End Standardization) 
 Amendment Act, 2016 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 869 
 Bill No. 4 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2016 
 Loi modificative de 2016 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 871 
 Bill No. 5 — The Electronic Information and Documents Amendment Act, 2016 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 872 
 Bill No. 6 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 874 
 Bill No. 7 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2016 modifiant le droit législatif 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 874 
 Bill No. 8 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2016 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 875 
 Bill No. 9 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2016 
 Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 876 
 Bill No. 10 — The Forest Resources Management Amendment Act, 2016 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 877 
 Bill No. 11 — The Forestry Professions Amendment Act, 2016 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 880 
 Bill No. 12 — The Public Health (Miscellaneous) Amendment Act, 2016 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 881 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


