






















































Hansard: November 28, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 49A  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 28, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (Ind.) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10; Independent (Ind.) — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1495 
 November 28, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d request leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thanks to the members. I’d like to take a 
moment, Mr. Speaker, to recognize Elaine McNeil who is 
seated in your gallery today. There she is. Elaine is a long-time 
international education consultant, a post-secondary 
international nursing instructor, and University of Regina 
international project coordinator who has extensive human 
rights experience working with women in Africa and the 
Caribbean. 
 
Elaine is here today to represent the Grandmothers Advocacy 
Network, or GRAN. GRAN is a network of volunteers across 
Canada that work to engage Canadian and international support 
for policies and programs that will address the needs of African 
grandmothers as they strive to sustain families and communities 
in the wake of the HIV/AIDS [human immunodeficiency 
virus/acquired immune deficiency syndrome] pandemic. 
 
Their work also focuses on broader gender balance issues, 
including the Unite Orange campaign, which we’ll hear about 
shortly, but all I can say is it’s the reason that most of us are 
wearing orange ribbons today. I have to go get mine. While 
GRAN is made up of a strong core of older women who 
contribute their energy and experience, there are also many 
dedicated men, younger women, and youth among volunteers as 
well. 
 
Elaine, I’d like to thank both the Grandmothers Advocacy 
Network and you personally for your tremendous commitment 
you show in support of lives of women and girls. So I’d ask all 
members to help join me in welcoming you to the legislature 
today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the minister opposite and welcome Elaine McNeil to her 
Legislative Assembly. Her hard work with GRAN and 
advocating for HIV [human immunodeficiency virus] supports 
and awareness for women and girls is absolutely commendable 
and definitely a very important service, both here in Canada — 
as we know, Saskatchewan has extremely high rates of HIV — 

but around the world as well. So I’d like to ask that all members 
join me in welcoming Elaine to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Central Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure here today to introduce a couple sitting in the west 
gallery, Mr. Jada Yee and his wife, Kristi Yee. Give us a wave. 
Thanks. 
 
Jada currently works for Casino Regina and was recently named 
to Global Gaming Business Magazine’s Top 40 Under 40 for 
2017. What an amazing accomplishment. You’ll hear more 
about Mr. Yee in a member’s statement. But I must say, Mr. 
Speaker, he truly exemplifies our provincial strength, and our 
provincial strength is shown through people like you. 
 
Anyway, I would like all colleagues to join me in welcoming 
Jada and his wife, Kristi, to their legislature. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d just 
like to join with the minister, on behalf of the official 
opposition, in terms of welcoming and congratulating Jada and 
Kristi Yee to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Certainly Jada Yee is a guy that’s been in the Top 40 Under 40, 
probably each and every one of those years that he’s been 
around, Mr. Speaker. He’s a guy that has added a lot to the 
post-secondary education community, to his work at Casino 
Regina, and certainly as a proud member of, I believe, Wood 
Mountain First Nation. And the way that the Yee family 
generally has added to the wealth of our province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, it’s not a surprise that this would 
have been one more accolade coming Jada’s way. But certainly 
on this particular story we want to say, great work, Jada. 
Congratulations and we expect more great things to come. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Request leave 
for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On 
November 25th the Government of Saskatchewan enacted 
regulation changes that will benefit apprentices and employers 
across our province. I’ll discuss those important changes in a 
ministerial statement following question period, but in 
recognition of these changes I would like to welcome the 
following apprentices and employers sitting in the government 
gallery of their Legislative Assembly. 
 
Doug Dimen is a level 3 construction electrician apprentice. 
Nicole VanDerVelden is a level 4 construction electrician 



1496 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2016 

apprentice. They both have been with Alliance Energy since 
March 2015. And maybe if they could give us a wave. Prior to 
indenturing, Doug was a steelworker. Nicole had been working 
toward an accounting diploma and changed her mind. Doug and 
Nicole are accompanied by Drew Tiefenbach, the Chair of the 
Saskatchewan Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Board. 
Welcome, Drew. 
 
Sean Gillespie is a level 2 motor vehicle body repair apprentice, 
originally from Calgary, now in Regina with Bennett Dunlop 
Ford. Troy Norman is a level 2 automotive service technician 
apprentice, born in Yellowknife, grew up in Melfort, also with 
Bennett Dunlop Ford. Qui Ly is a level 2 automotive service 
technician apprentice. Almost a decade ago, Qui moved to 
Canada from Vietnam with his family. Sean, Troy, and Qui are 
accompanied by Bryan Leier, the Vice-Chair of the 
Saskatchewan Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Board 
and the body shop manager at Bennett Dunlop Ford here in 
Regina. 
 
A number of apprentices from SIIT [Saskatchewan Indian 
Institute of Technologies] as well. Melodi Quewezance is a 
level 3 carpenter apprentice. She lives in Regina and is from 
Cote First Nation originally. Cody Desnomie is a level 2 
carpenter apprentice from Peepeekisis First Nation and 
currently works for Dengler Construction in Regina. Melodi 
and Cody are both accompanied by Mark Gettle, the director of 
Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies career centres. 
 
Also in attendance I see Jeff Ritter, our CEO [chief executive 
officer] of Saskatchewan Apprenticeship and Trade 
Certification Commission, who has done a tremendous service 
to this province and to apprentices right across this province 
over a number of years. And I want to welcome Jeff to his 
Assembly as well. So I guess I would ask all members to join 
with me in welcoming all of these apprentices and employers to 
their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. No, I’m 
not into reruns, but I would like to just join with the minister in 
welcoming these individuals to their Legislative Assembly. 
Certainly apprenticeship and trades is a pretty critical venture 
on the part of this province, and the work that is done out of the 
SATCC [Saskatchewan Apprenticeship and Trade Certification 
Commission] is continuing to be impressive and vital to our 
ongoing prosperity. 
 
We want to say a particular shout-out to Mark Gettle, with the 
Saskatchewan Indian institute of trades and technology, Mr. 
Speaker. And of course, you know, Mr. Jeff Ritter, CEO with 
the Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Commission; and 
Chair, Drew Tiefenbach; and Vice-Chair Bryan Leier, and I 
believe also the worshipful — the worshipful — Bryan Leier, 
mayor of Sedley, Saskatchewan in addition to the fine work he 
does at Bennett Dunlop Ford. 
 
But of course, Mr. Speaker, their work translates into giving the 
opportunity to these folks going through their apprenticeship 
their place to shine and to make a better living for themselves 
and their families. And for that we say, keep up the great work. 
Keep on building Saskatchewan. And again, Mr. Speaker, you 

know, there’s some good news coming in the ministerial 
statement, but we want to say a very general, yet emphatic, keep 
up the great work to these individuals here at their 
Saskatchewan Legislative Assembly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 
to all the members of the Assembly, I would like to introduce 
my wife, Attia, sitting in the west gallery with our two kids: 
Kashif, 11; and Arsalan is 7. And yes, our older son is in 
Campbell Collegiate today, didn’t join in. 
 
We’ve been married together since 17 years, Mr. Speaker. Attia 
is a great lady and a great, I would say, family architect, and a 
great mom of three boys. Mr. Speaker, they are visiting today 
this building to see the proceedings and how is the husband 
doing here. I would like all members to join me in welcoming 
them in their legislature. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s always a great pleasure to introduce to you and through you 
and to other members of our Assembly, some great students 
from the Humboldt Collegiate Institute, of course in Humboldt. 
Their teacher, Mr. David Millette, has brought a classroom 
down here I think every year since I’ve been elected, and he’s 
also accompanied with Mr. David Rowe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Humboldt students are always full of 
questions, so I look forward to meeting with them and having a 
discussion of the procedures that go on in this House. And I 
want everyone to join me in welcoming them to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, sitting in your gallery 
is a gentleman named Logan Drydale. Now Logan’s claim to 
fame in this Assembly is he is the dad to one of the Pages, 
Chase Drydale, and so he’s . . . I think Chase is, instead of bring 
your child to work, he’s bringing his dad to work today and 
showing him around. And I want everyone to welcome Logan 
to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To 
you and through you, I’d like to introduce Wendy, who is my 
CA [constituency assistant]. She’s sitting way up in the top of 
the west gallery. You know, we’ve many times in this 
Assembly talked about the team of support people that each of 
us as MLAs [Member of the Legislative Assembly] has in our 
worlds — our spouses, our friends, our parents sometimes — 
but I think we sometimes don’t talk enough about how 
important our CAs are and how much work they do on our 
behalf, especially when we’re in session. And so I want to 
particularly say thank you to Wendy for being my right and 
sometimes left hand, and for looking after me and our 
constituents in the constituency association. So I’d like to . . . 
Please join me in welcoming Wendy Ward to her Legislative 
Assembly. 
 



November 28, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1497 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, just very briefly, I’d 
like to also recognize and welcome my executive director for 
the Status of Women, Pat Faulconbridge, who is seated up in 
the Speaker’s gallery today. Pat and I have been friends for a 
very long time and it’s very nice to be able to work together on 
this file that we both care so much about. So I’d just like to . . . 
Please join me in welcoming Pat Faulconbridge to her 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you and all 
members of the Legislative Assembly, I would like to introduce 
my wife of 32 years, Carla, in the Speaker’s gallery. And she’s 
a town administrator for the town of Churchbridge, is on her 
way to Niagara Falls for the national Outstanding Young 
Farmers convention, which she is the executive director for. 
 
She did want to remind the Minister of Environment that she is 
watching you, because she did babysit him in his earlier days, 
and she would also like me to smack the member from 
Saskatoon Westview as he used to pull her hair in grade school. 
 
But anyway, I would like to thank her for her never-ending 
support of me and this career, and I would like to ask all 
members to welcome Carla to her Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have five individuals seated in your gallery I’d like to introduce. 
Mr. Speaker, first of all is Mary Walters, who’s an individual 
who has been volunteering — I’ll have a lot more to say about 
her in member’s statements — with the Salvation Army for the 
last 50 years, and certainly have more to say about that. 
 
Also accompanying her are Dr. Jim Coucill, who is the 
president of the Saskatchewan Council board of directors for 
the St. John Ambulance. Joe Ralko, who many would 
recognize, of course, is a member of the Saskatchewan Council. 
Madeleine Robertson is a member of the Saskatchewan Council 
as well. And finally Ashley Balysky who is the director of 
community services for the St. John Ambulance. So if 
anybody’s feeling a little under the weather, we’ve got you 
covered here today. The St. John Ambulance is well 
represented. 
 
I just want to quickly say that, you know, all of us MLAs that 
especially represent rural constituencies go through 
redistribution, and that’s kind of a bittersweet time. You lose 
communities that you’ve represented — for me, Francis for 16 
years; that’s the bitter part — but the sweet part is you bring on 
new populations. And for the first time, I’ve been able to 
introduce somebody from Pilot Butte, which of course the 
member from Regina Wascana Plains had that in her 
constituency, but that is the sweet part of redistribution. 
 
I’d ask all members to welcome these five individuals to their 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 

Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the member opposite in welcoming the five individuals in your 
gallery, in particular Mary Walters for her 50 years of service to 
her community. It’s absolutely to be commended. What is so 
great about the province of Saskatchewan is the hard work and 
the community service that’s ingrained in all of us. I’m looking 
forward to hearing more about that in a member’s statement 
coming forward. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, I’d also like to specifically point out 
Joe Ralko who is a good friend of many members of this 
Assembly. He’s a non-profit leader and a strong communicator 
— many, many years of service both within government and in 
the private sector, as well as in volunteering as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
[13:45] 
 
And last but not least, of course, I’d like to specifically 
welcome a good friend of mine. She’s not only a constituent, 
but she’s also a good friend I’ve had since high school, Ashley 
Balysky, who I’m assuming is here because of her full-time job 
at St. John Ambulance. And I’m happy that she’s here today. 
 
I also want to commend her for some other work she’s done, 
Mr. Speaker. Not only is she one of the many esteemed 
graduates of the Michael A. Riffel High School graduating class 
of 2004, Mr. Speaker, but she’s also a strong advocate for the 
importance of doulas in our health care system, and she is a 
BodyTalk consultant. And if you ever want to know what that 
means, feel free to ask her after session. I’ve seen her do her 
work in the past, in particular assisting a good friend of ours 
through a very stressful wedding day. So I can tell you that she 
does some pretty amazing work both through St. John’s and in 
her spare time, Mr. Speaker. So I ask that all members join me 
in welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition for citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Estevan, 
Minton, Steelman, Macoun, Avonlea, Torquay, Lampman, 
Stoughton, Midale, and Weyburn. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 



1498 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2016 

again today to present a petition to reverse the cuts to the 
Lighthouse program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that in April of 2014, the 
then minister of Social Services said the Lighthouse in 
Saskatoon would “. . . take pressure off of existing detox 
facilities, hospitals, and police cells, while keeping people safe, 
especially in our brutally cold winters.” That same day, Mr. 
Speaker, the petitioners point out that the then minister of 
Health said, “We want to ensure that individuals with mental 
health and addictions issues have a safe place to stay.” 
 
They also point out that since that time, Mr. Speaker, the 
government has repeatedly indicated that the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit keeps individuals out of hospital emergency 
rooms and jail cells. And on this side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, we could not agree more. We only need to look to 
Saskatoon and recent events there, where hospitals have been in 
record over capacity for many reasons, Mr. Speaker, but one of 
them being the fact that the Lighthouse stabilization unit turns 
people away, and they often end up at hospitals just down the 
road, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately reverse 
their recent cuts to the funding that allows extremely 
vulnerable people to access the services of the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit in Saskatoon, and revisit their imposition 
of a strict and narrow definition of homelessness in 
November of 2014 which forced the Lighthouse to cut 
back its hours of essential service in February of 2016, and 
take immediate steps to ensure that homeless people in 
Saskatchewan have emergency shelter, clothing, and food 
available to them before more lives are lost. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens of 
Saskatoon. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased to stand in my place to present a petition for a second 
bridge for Prince Albert, Mr. Speaker, that the Saskatchewan 
Party government refuses to stand up for Prince Albert in this 
critical infrastructure issue, and that the need for a second 
bridge for Prince Albert has never been more clearer than it is 
today. Prince Albert and communities north of Prince Albert 
and all the businesses that send people and products through 
Prince Albert require a solution. So, Mr. Speaker, the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan ask that the Saskatchewan Party government 
stop stalling, hiding behind rhetoric and refusing to listen 
to the people calling for action, and to begin immediately 
to plan and then quickly commence the construction of a 
second bridge for Prince Albert using federal and 
provincial dollars. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned time and time again, we’ve 
had this petition signed by many people throughout the 
province of Saskatchewan, and on this particular page that I’m 
presenting today, the people that have signed the petition are 

primarily from Prince Albert and area. And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise to 
present a petition in support of funding heritage languages here 
in Saskatchewan. And we know that after 25 years, the 
Government of Saskatchewan is discontinuing all support for 
heritage language learning in Saskatchewan. Since 1991 
heritage language schools have depended on this modest 
funding from the Ministry of Education to help sustain their 
programs. But as a result of the announcement by the Ministry 
of Education, many of these non-profit heritage language 
schools will be faced with the difficult decision of whether or 
not they can continue to operate. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, in addition to providing language 
and cultural classes, these schools often offer a welcoming 
environment and crucial support for newcomers who are 
searching for a way to feel at home in their new surroundings 
here in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to reconsider this decision and restore funding for heritage 
language education in Saskatchewan heritage language 
schools. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the 
cities of Saskatoon and Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition regarding child care centres in Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, those who are signing this petition wish to draw our 
attention to the following: across Saskatchewan, licensed 
non-profit child care centres are taxed inconsistently. Many of 
our licensed non-profit child care centres pay commercial 
property tax, and this is not done in Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, 
BC [British Columbia], or New Brunswick. 
 
Child care is essential to the economy, yet most centres struggle 
to balance their budget. This issue threatens both the number of 
child care spaces as well as the quality of care. Quality child 
care has an enormous positive impact on a child’s future 
outcomes and yields high rates of economic return. Child care 
centres are institutions of early learning and childhood 
development. It is appropriate that they have the same tax 
treatment as schools. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognize 
that licensed non-profit child care centres provide 
programs that are foundational to a healthy society by 



November 28, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1499 

including them in The Education Act and exempt all 
licensed non-profit child care centres in Saskatchewan 
from property tax through changes to the appropriate 
legislation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we have literally thousands of signatures on these 
petitions from across the province, and I’ll read some of the 
communities: Regina, Saskatoon, Maryfield, Moosomin, 
Tisdale, Hudson Bay, Estevan, Alida, Torquay, Midale, 
Bienfait, Frobisher, Elrose, Kyle, Prince Albert, Fort 
Qu’Appelle, Silton, Edenwold, Melville, Churchbridge, 
Springside, Gravelbourg, Goodeve, Beechy, Pilot Butte, 
Carnduff, Strasbourg, Wilcox, Osage, Pense, Indian Head, 
Rouleau, Bulyea, Drinkwater, Yorkton, and the list goes on, Mr. 
Speaker. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling for a stop to the Sask Party plan to sell 
off SaskTel. The petitioners point out that in the recent election 
campaign, the Sask Party promised that they would not 
privatize SaskTel. But the petitioners also point out that instead 
of looking at their own waste and scandal, the Sask Party has 
now started talking about breaking their promise and looking to 
sell off SaskTel to make a quick dollar. The petitioners also 
point out that once SaskTel is gone, there is no getting it back 
and no telling what else the Sask Party will then sell, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

In the prayer that reads as follows, the petitioners 
respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan call on the Saskatchewan Party government 
to keep their promise, stop their plan to sell off SaskTel, 
and to keep our valued Crown corporation in the hands of 
the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular batch of petitions is signed by 
citizens from Leader, Success, Swift Current, Waldeck, and 
Cabri. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise yet again in the 
House today to present another petition calling on the 
government to reverse the cuts to the Aboriginal court worker 
program. The Government of Saskatchewan cut the budget for 
the Aboriginal court worker program in the 2016-2017 
provincial budget, resulting in layoffs of Aboriginal court 
workers throughout the province, and in stark contrast to the 
recommendations made in the Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission’s report, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Those on this side of the House know that Aboriginal court 
workers play an important role helping Aboriginal people in 
criminal and child apprehension cases. Aboriginal peoples are 
disproportionately represented in Saskatchewan’s correctional 
centres, and Aboriginal court workers successfully help to make 
our communities safer through reduced recidivism rates. I’d like 
to read the prayer: 
 

We in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 

that the Government of Saskatchewan reverse its 
short-sighted and counterproductive cuts to the Aboriginal 
court worker program. 

 
The individuals signing the pages of the petition I have to 
submit today, Mr. Speaker, are from Estevan, Regina, and 
Moose Jaw. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
to stop the redirection of funding of the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, Inc. A recent report shows that 94 
per cent of NORTEP [northern teacher education program] 
grads found employment in the North. NORTEP has a positive 
teacher retention rate in the North. NORTEP has a positive 
economic impact in northern Saskatchewan. NORTEP provides 
a highly quality, face-to-face instructional and services to 
students. The province’s financial deficit cannot be fixed by 
cutting indigenous education in the North and a program that 
has served the North for over 40 years. And the prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to immediately restore the 
five-year agreement to fund the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, Inc. and to continue to fund 
NORTEP-NORPAC programs in La Ronge. 

 
It is signed by hundreds and hundreds of northern residents. I so 
present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Saskatchewan Caribbean-Canadian Association 
Celebrates Barbadian Independence 

 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, last Friday I, along with the 
member from Coronation Park, had the honour of attending the 
Saskatchewan Caribbean-Canadian Association’s community 
event celebrating the 50th anniversary of Barbados’s 
independence. On November 30th, 1966, Barbados officially 
attained nationhood as a sovereign and independent state within 
the Commonwealth, and a major ceremony took place at the 
Garrison Savannah to usher in Barbados’s independence. Some 
of the most proud moments for all those assembled included the 
first ever public performance of the Barbados national anthem 
and raising of their national flag. 
 
This year, Barbados celebrated their milestone 50th anniversary 
throughout the year with a lively mixture of festivals, galas, 
concerts, and competitions. The celebrations conclude on 
November 30th with a grand parade at the Garrison Savannah 
where a new monument is to be unveiled. 
 
In Regina, the SCCA’s [Saskatchewan Caribbean-Canadian 
Association] day of celebration was filled with good company, 
delicious food, and energetic displays of song and dance. There 
was even time set aside to celebrate Guyana’s 50th anniversary 
of independence, which also took place earlier this year on May 



1500 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2016 

26th. Truly the event served as a fantastic reminder of the 
vibrant cultural communities that enrich the city of Regina and 
our great province as a whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask all members to join me in 
thanking the SCCA for helping to make Caribbean culture a 
prominent and vibrant part of Saskatchewan communities, and 
to congratulate Barbados for celebrating 50 years of 
independence. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 

Pilot Butte Volunteer Honoured for 50 Years of Service 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to recognize the achievements of a constituent. Mary 
Walters was honoured recently for her 50 years of volunteer 
service with the St. John Ambulance Society of Saskatchewan 
at an event in Pilot Butte where she resides. 
 
Since 1966, Mary has volunteered more than 22,000 hours of 
service, from small-town community gatherings to major events 
such as Craven Jamboree as well as home games for both the 
Saskatchewan Roughriders and the Regina Pats. She has been 
an instructor with St. John Ambulance for three decades, 
teaching courses ranging from babysitting and CPR 
[cardiopulmonary resuscitation] to first aid and oxygen therapy. 
In addition, Mary also trained the individuals who instruct first 
responders. 
 
She received the title of serving member in 1981, became an 
officer of the Order of St. John in 1988, commander in 1995, 
was promoted in 2004 to dame — the highest rank of a woman 
in the Order — and was awarded honorary life membership 
along with Chair’s Commendation bars at an event in Pilot 
Butte recently. 
 
St. John Ambulance has been ensuring the health and safety and 
quality of life for Canadians for well over 125 years. Mr. 
Speaker, I encourage all members to join me in congratulating 
Mary on 50 years of service to the people of Saskatchewan 
through the St. John Ambulance. Thank you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
[14:00] 
 

Keep Meewasin Vital Campaign 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today on a very important 
provincial matter: keeping urban parks, often also referred to as 
our conservation agencies, vital and well in our communities. 
 
In June of 2016, this government caused a great concern when 
it announced that Meewasin would undergo a financial review. 
Quickly, within days, the Saskatoon community launched the 
Keep Meewasin Vital campaign. The campaign wanted to 
create a positive, coordinated way for the people to show their 
support for Meewasin while the authority underwent this 
review. 
 

Mr. Speaker, Meewasin is a major contributor to tourism, 
education, economic development, and the health and vibrancy 
of Saskatoon. It’s important that the partnership between the 
province, the U of S [University of Saskatchewan], and the city 
of Saskatoon remain intact and that the funding to Meewasin 
through these agencies stays in step with the impact Meewasin 
makes on our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you know, Meewasin more than matches every 
dollar of the statutory funding through fundraising and 
donations. And as well, the Keep Meewasin Vital campaign ran 
from June 29th to September 17th, 2016 and people were 
invited to endorse the letter of support — over 2,400 people 
signing on from across Saskatchewan, and in fact across the 
world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I call on all members to recognize the importance 
of keeping Meewasin vital, and thank all those who stepped up 
to the call on this government to continue its financial support. 
We certainly hope this government listens. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 

Grandmothers Advocacy Network Works 
to End Violence Against Women 

 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise in 
the House to acknowledge a very important cause for an 
organization that is working hard to make a change in the 
world. The Grandmothers Advocacy Network, or GRAN, is 
here today promoting the United Nations’ Unite to End 
Violence against Women, and girls, Orange campaign. That’s 
why you see the members of this Assembly wearing an orange 
ribbon today, the official symbol of this very important 
campaign. The initiative invites governments and individuals 
around the world to take action on this very important issue and 
raise awareness for 16 days, starting this past Friday, which was 
also International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against 
Women. 
 
We all feel the impact of gender violence in our communities, 
and we must all be part of the solution. Mr. Speaker, I am proud 
to say that our government continues to find initiatives to 
combat violence against women such as the death review panel, 
domestic violence courts, children exposed to violence 
programming, Aboriginal family violence programming, and a 
variety of additional programming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this campaign has seen growing success across 
Canada and the world, and I hope to see it build on that success 
in the years to come. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm River. 
 

Hanley Sabers Win Provincial Championship 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Many of us likely 
watched the exciting Grey Cup game yesterday. However for 
the Hanley Sabers, they had a championship game of their own 
on November 12th. Mr. Speaker, the Hanley Sabers faced off 
against the Wynyard Bears on the Bears’ home turf for the 
six-man 2A provincial football championship. Like the Grey 



November 28, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1501 

Cup, the game left fans on the edge of their seats. The Sabers 
took an early lead, but the Bears were not to be underestimated. 
After the back and forth, the Sabers finally secured an 
eight-point margin, with the final touchdown with 32 seconds 
left on the clock. 
 
The final score, 69-61, was a satisfying finish for the six 
players, who will all be graduating this year. In fact, one of 
those graduated commented to the local paper that “There isn’t 
a better way we could hang up our helmets than putting another 
banner in the gym.” From the dedicated fans who seemed to 
outnumber the opposing team in their own stands, the 
volunteers who spent countless hours to make the team a 
success, to the coaches and parents, this team was a worthy 
winner. Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me, 
congratulating the Hanley Sabers on their win. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 

Dress for Success Regina Holds #GivingShoesDay 
on Giving Tuesday 

 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to stand in the House today to acknowledge a donation 
drive being spearheaded by a very worthy local organization, 
Mr. Speaker: Dress for Success Regina, an affiliate of the 
global organization that envisions a world where women do not 
live in poverty. The way that they accomplish this is providing 
women with professional attire, employment counselling, and 
interview preparation. Dress for Success is about more than just 
an outfit. It is about equipping women to break the cycle of 
poverty, giving women a hand up, not a handout. 
 
Many of you will remember that I’ve been involved in 
promoting and volunteering for Dress for Success Regina for 
many years, and it was my privilege this morning to help open a 
donation drive called #GivingShoesDay where we, as MLAs, 
had the opportunity to donate shoes to women who are working 
hard to re-enter the workforce. Mr. Speaker, if we’re all honest 
with ourselves, we all know that we likely have an extra pair of 
shoes in our closet to help. 
 
I would also like to ask members to acknowledge the good 
work that Dress for Success does in helping eliminate poverty 
for women; and second, I’d invite all members to donate 
women’s shoes as part of the #GivingShoesDay. Thank you 
very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres. 
 

Local Resident Makes Top 40 Under 40 List 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today to 
applaud the accomplishments of Mr. Jada Yee. Jada is a 
long-time resident of Regina, a proud member of the Wood 
Mountain First Nation, an employee of the Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation, and a constituent of mine. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, Jada has worked for Casino Regina for more than 17 
years. During that time, Jada has risen through numerous 
departments and ranks at the casino, from a part-time security 
guard on the gaming floor, all the way to his current role as the 

food and beverage manager. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in October, Jada was named to the Global Gaming 
Business Magazine’s Top 40 Under 40 list for 2017. This is an 
achievement that recognizes only the best and brightest future 
leaders in the casino and gaming industry from around the 
world. It is also important to note that Jada was the only 
Canadian that was named to this list.  
 
Jada is the vice-president of the Regina Aboriginal 
Professionals Association, a student mentor and instructor at the 
Canadian First Nations University, and a role model for 
numerous First Nations youth. In January, Jada will also begin 
working towards a master’s degree in human resource 
management at the First Nations University of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join me in congratulating 
Jada on his accomplishments, and wish him continued success 
into the future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transactions 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this morning at Public 
Accounts the auditor asked for some time to “reinforce a couple 
of points.” Mr. Speaker, she was concerned that her conclusions 
were, “not well understood,” and, Mr. Speaker, that a line in 
one press release has, “. . . really I think overshadowed our 
audit conclusion.” Mr. Speaker, the Auditor wanted to “. . . 
emphasize that the audit did not conclusively state that there 
was no conflict of interest, fraud, or wrongdoing . . .” 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier acknowledge that the lines he’s 
used time and time again are wrong? Will he retract those 
comments, his weak and tired talking points, and will he finally 
start to answer the questions that Saskatchewan people are 
deserved in that government’s GTH [Global Transportation 
Hub] land scandal? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 
member for his question. There was no scandal. The member 
keeps using that description. Clearly, Mr. Speaker, that’s not 
been the case, as evidenced by the Conflict of Interest 
Commissioner’s report on the matter with respect to the 
member who was the minister at the time, and it’s also 
consistent with what the Provincial Auditor found and did not 
find. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was very careful to quote the press release from 
the Provincial Auditor over and over again as late as last week. 
Again, from the Provincial Auditor’s press release that 
accompanied the report: “The audit did not find evidence of 
conflicts of interest, or indications of fraud or wrongdoing by 
the GTH management or Board of Directors.” Now one of the 
board of directors would have been the minister. 
 
Well here’s what else she said this morning: she referenced 
generally accepted accounting standards. She said GAAS 



1502 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2016 

[generally accepted auditing standards] doesn’t allow the 
auditors to ignore . . . I’d ask the member to listen now: 
 

. . . doesn’t allow the auditors to ignore risks of fraud due 
to . . . or errors or irregular acts, as they relate to the 
objective of the audit. Rather, as we previously highlighted 
[as we previously highlighted], GAAS expects auditors to 
identify such risks, carry out audit procedures in response 
to those risks, and assess the audit and evaluate the audit 
evidence [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
What the auditor is saying is that generally accepted accounting 
standards would require an auditor to not ignore risks of, signs 
of fraud. And so in the accompanying press release, she says the 
audit, this is the accompanying press release: “The audit did not 
find evidence of conflicts of interest, or indications of fraud or 
wrongdoing by the GTH management or Board of Directors.” 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that Premier should be 
embarrassed, plain and simple . . . [inaudible] . . . Saskatchewan 
people is nothing but a disrespect to try to dismiss this as not a 
scandal with millions of dollars that have been wasted, where 
taxpayers have been ripped off, where nuns have been ripped 
off, is nothing short of a disrespect to all people in this 
province. 
 
Let me try again: “. . . we want to emphasize that the audit did 
not conclusively state that there was no conflict of interest, 
fraud, or wrongdoing . . .” Will the Premier agree with the 
auditor here today? Does he agree that this clarification is very 
important? And will he change his and his Sask Party 
government’s arrogant dismissal of this very serious issue? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there is so much that needs to 
be corrected in the hon. member’s preamble every single time 
he stands up, including, Mr. Speaker, this notion, this ridiculous 
notion that the government was dismissive of concerns with 
respect to the transaction. 
 
In fact it was the government, in fact it was our office that 
asked the auditor to look at the matter. It was our office, when 
asked, would we make all of the cabinet materials available . . . 
And that’s not always done, Mr. Speaker, as we know the 
tradition of cabinet documents and their confidentiality. We 
were asked, would you make all of the emails, all of the cabinet 
documents available for the independent officer of the 
legislature to review? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we did exactly that. We said, absolutely. 
Everything should be available for the auditor and her team. By 
the way, Mr. Speaker, she also testified at the committee, the 
last sitting of the committee, that there was someone on her 
team that had forensic audit capacity, Mr. Speaker, to look for 
risks, to look for the same risks . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Well the member is asking, what did she say today? What she 
said today was generally accepted accounting standards doesn’t 
allow the auditor to ignore risks of fraud. Mr. Speaker, is the 
opposition insinuating that the Provincial Auditor and her team 
would ignore risks of fraud? She expressly testified that she did 

not do that and went on in their covering press release to say the 
audit found no evidence of such conflict of interest, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s not the answer they want to hear, but it’s the 
correct answer. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, day after day we see that 
Premier hide from answering questions from Saskatchewan 
people. We see that same sort of weak and pathetic display here 
again today. 
 
The auditor said that when it comes to her comments about 
evidence of conflict of interest, indications of fraud or 
wrongdoing by the GTH management and the board of 
directors, she is concerned that, it “. . . is not well understood 
and has really I think overshadowed our audit conclusion.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier stand here and tell us, is it the 
case that he has, as the auditor put it, “an insufficient 
understanding of audit,” or is there another explanation for why 
he and his ministers have clung to that one line, that one line in 
the press release for so many weeks and months while 
obfuscating, hiding, and not answering anything? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — The auditor of course did a very 
thorough audit. That was her testimony before the Public 
Accounts Committee on November the 8th. She went through 
the process, including the team of experts, including an 
individual who was trained in forensic auditing. She reiterated 
today that GAAS doesn’t allow the auditors to ignore risks of 
fraud. And she was very clear about that. 
 
In the accompanying press release on June 30th, 2016 . . . And 
these are her words, these are her words. And they might, you 
know, they might dismiss these words, Mr. Speaker, but these 
are the words of the Provincial Auditor: “The audit did not find 
evidence of conflicts of interest, or indications of fraud or 
wrongdoing by the GTH management or Board of Directors.” 
 
The auditor also made a number of recommendations, 10 
recommendations. The purpose of the committee meeting this 
morning was to address the two recommendations that she 
made with respect to GTH. I would note for the record that 
those recommendations were not even addressed by the 
members opposite. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
[14:15] 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the question of course was 
to the Premier. A sad response from the minister, as we’ve 
come to expect in this Assembly, with this GTH land scandal. 
The words I’m using are the auditor’s, and I’ll quote again: “. . . 
we want to emphasize that the audit did not conclusively state 
that there was no conflict of interest, fraud, or wrongdoing with 
respect to these land transactions related to GTH. 
 
After mischaracterizing her comments for weeks and weeks, 



November 28, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1503 

why will the Premier not stand up, admit that they were wrong? 
What is he so adamant about hiding? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well that’s of course nonsense, Mr. 
Speaker. We take the auditor’s conclusions very serious. And I 
would note, for the record, that in all the questions that we’ve 
received from members opposite over the course of this sitting, 
we haven’t had one single question on the recommendations 
made by the Provincial Auditor — not one. That’s what . . . We 
take those recommendations very seriously. 
 
Even this morning in committee when the CEO of the Global 
Transportation Hub appeared before the committee with the 
mandate from the committee to answer questions with respect 
to those recommendations, there was not one single question 
with regard to the recommendations, which the Provincial 
Auditor reiterated as her central findings. The members 
opposite are not interested in the central findings of the 
Provincial Auditor, which were her recommendations. We very 
much are, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why we’re working very 
diligently on implementing those recommendations. 
 
But I would reiterate, one of the observations and the 
conclusions made by the auditor in her press release noted on 
June 30, 2016 . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well they might 
dismiss this, Mr. Speaker. They can dismiss this line all they 
want. The fact is this was the Provincial Auditor’s observation, 
and I quote, “The audit did not find evidence of conflicts of 
interest, or indications of fraud or wrongdoing by the GTH 
management or Board of Directors.” 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the question was to the 
Premier. Same old tired talking points from the minister. The 
auditor herself addressed this, to address the way that this 
government’s been holding out that one line, time and time 
again, as their weak defence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today, one of the Sask Party committee members repeated a 
point that the Premier and his minister often use, that a forensic 
audit apparently wouldn’t be needed. But, Mr. Speaker, the 
auditor’s answer was very clear on this as well: 
 

. . . if our office was asked to do a forensic audit, I think 
we would probably pause on that at this . . . time because 
we understand that there is a police investigation under 
way and the scope of the investigation does include the 
activities related to GTH’s acquisition of land from the 
private sector. 

 
To be fair, she said that she’d pause before going ahead, but 
because of an RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] 
investigation into this scandal. 
 
Will the Premier finally stand up and admit that his justification 
he’s been using against a forensic audit has been wrong? Will 
he start answering, stop obfuscating, and finally open up his 
office and fully co-operate with the RCMP’s criminal 
investigation into his government’s GTH scandal? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well of course the government will 
co-operate with any investigation, as we co-operated fully with 
the Provincial Auditor. In fact she had a number of quotes with 
respect to that. She said, no . . . This is the Provincial Auditor’s 
quote: 
 

No, there weren’t really any obstacles. Like I said, some of 
the information took a little . . . longer to compile and pull 
together than we had hoped, but I think, given the volume 
of the information, that it wasn’t unreasonable in that 
regard. 

 
Another quote: “We did find that people were [very] 
co-operative.” Of course we will be co-operative. 
 
The Provincial Auditor did directly address the issue of a 
forensic audit. She said that there would be . . . She would put it 
on pause, I believe, even if requested by the committee.  
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would quote the Provincial Auditor as well 
in terms of the quantity of information provided in the audit that 
she did do. On June 8th, her quote: “And frankly, if we did a 
forensic audit, there would be a lot of matters that we included 
within our report that would have not been provided to the 
committee.” Meaning there was actually more information 
provided to the committee in the context of the audit that she 
did, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Well there they go again, Mr. Speaker. 
The question was about the forensic audit, and the minister 
actually stood just now and said that the auditor would pause, 
and then that’s all he quoted. He forgot to finish the quote. She 
would pause because of the criminal investigation into that 
government. 
 
You know, we also learned this weekend that the Premier’s 
office and his chief of staff were consulted on this right at the 
middle of this Sask Party’s GTH land scandal, even before 
senior bureaucrats and members of cabinet were. They were 
there with this rushed deal-making process. This is the 
Premier’s chief of staff. This is the Premier’s most trusted 
adviser, his right-hand man. This is the Premier’s office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the Premier still expect Saskatchewan people 
to believe that he wasn’t involved in this scandal all the way 
along? What did he know and when did he know it? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there’s an email that’s being 
referenced here by the Leader of the Opposition. I’m going to 
quote from the email that was copied to my, to the chief of staff, 
Mr. Donlevy. And the email says, “I intend to call Anthony 
again . . . and see where we go from there.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s the new smoking gun. All of their other 
ones haven’t fired. The leaked cabinet document wasn’t in fact 
a leaked cabinet document. The mysterious call, Mr. Speaker, 



1504 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2016 

the auditor also dealt with that this last time she appeared. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just months before this email would have been 
sent, cabinet dealt with the issue of an anonymous potential 
transaction that cabinet said no to. This is the transaction they 
spent all of last week on, that never happened because the 
government won’t deal with anonymous parties with respect to 
these sorts of things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a result a cabinet committee was established, 
chaired by the Attorney General, and the government 
understood full well we needed to move on land assembly. Mr. 
Speaker, this GTH project is, was then and is, a very important 
economic project. And so land assembly proceeded, Mr. 
Speaker. Land assembly proceeded. 
 
The auditor noted that the minister of the day had the chief of 
staff in his office working on it, Mr. Speaker, and the auditor 
noted the reason was the minister was worried about rapidly 
escalating prices and the need to acquire land in a cost-effective 
way. And so in the course of doing that duty, the chief of staff 
to the then minister, he sent emails around including an update, 
an update to my chief of staff that said he was going to talk to 
one of the potential sellers of the property. Or actually, “I intend 
to call . . . [him] again and see where we go from there,” Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Of course, of course he’s going to get a copy of that email, Mr. 
Speaker, and many, many others, and many, many others. And 
we’d be happy to answer more questions from the Leader of the 
Opposition in this regard. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, day after day that Premier 
refuses to answer anything. He dismisses, he dismisses real 
questions. He fails to answer questions like, when did he learn 
that the concealed identity was the minister’s landlord? And 
now we learn through investigation that his Premier’s office 
was involved before the senior bureaucrats involved in these 
entities. 
 
He pretends somehow that there’s some sort of poor 
communication that caused the waste of millions of dollars, but 
it seems pretty clear here now that the Premier’s office and the 
chief of staff had some pretty straightforward communication. 
My question to the Premier: what did the Premier know? When 
did he know it? Why was he so intent on doing this deal that 
wasted millions of dollars? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, pretty direct and forward 
communication, that’s how the Leader of the Opposition 
incredibly just characterized this email. Mr. Speaker, the chief 
of staff in my office was copied by the individual charged in 
government to go ahead with the land assembly on this 
important project, to do so in a way that was transparent, not to 
deal with the company that wouldn’t divulge its identity, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And by the way, they keep raising that transaction. He just did 
it again in his preamble. That transaction never happened. And, 

Mr. Speaker, I think the auditor quite rightly notes that it 
shouldn’t happen because the identity of the entity, in terms of 
the potential seller, was not known. So we didn’t proceed with 
it. And this smearing that he does with this private citizen and 
an hon. member of this House couldn’t have possibly happened 
without the transaction happening. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, none of that matters to the hon. member. 
They’re desperately trying to make something out of this even 
though there’s no there there. And the latest is an email that’s 
copied to the chief of staff . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well 
now he’s yelling from his seat about taxpayers’ dollars, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve seen in a recent transaction, Mr. Speaker, that 
the land now, even with the servicing cost, is selling for more 
than we paid for it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in terms of this scandal, there’s no conflict of 
interest. The independent Conflict of Interest Commissioner has 
said that. Mr. Speaker, the auditor has done her report with 
respect to wrongdoing, fraud, and conflict of interest; has made 
commentary. And finally, and finally land that was purchased is 
selling for more than it was purchased, Mr. Speaker. That’s why 
there are problems that need to be dealt with in the auditor’s 
report. But to be characterized the way members are 
characterizing it, Mr. Speaker, is just simply wrong. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Property Tax Relief for Child Care Centres 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Across Saskatchewan, 
child care centres are getting squeezed by high property taxes. 
These are licensed and non-profit child care centres, and they 
provide care to our kids. But instead of being treated like the 
educational centres they most resemble, they are being treated 
like any other business. These centres struggle to operate, and 
the current situation poses a legitimate threat to their survival. If 
they close, the existing problem with the number of child care 
spaces in Saskatchewan will only get worse and could impact 
the quality of care. What specific action is the government 
taking to address this, and when will they finally get it done? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we truly do value the service that day care centres give to our 
province, and we recognize the importance of that service in 
that we have expanded the number of child care spaces 
substantively each and every year while we’ve been 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite knows that municipalities 
have the authority under subsection 262 of The Cities Act to set 
municipal tax rates. Municipalities have a number of tax tools 
in which they can exempt or give some tax relief, and there are 
a number of different examples across our entire province of 
how municipalities have done just that. There’s a number of 
entities and organizations that give great service to our citizens, 
and so the municipal governments choose how they give those 
organizations tax relief, Mr. Speaker. 
 



November 28, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1505 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, concerned citizens like Colleen 
Schmidt, and parent Julie Eisler and little baby Sarah, who are 
watching us today, deserve better answers than that. 
 
Saskatchewan has some of the very worst taxation of child care 
centres in Canada. Saskatchewan also has the lowest per capita 
number of child care spaces in Canada. The spaces we currently 
have are centres that struggle every day just to keep the lights 
on. This is just another example of the very real consequences 
of the Sask Party’s mismanagement, scandal, and waste. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ending the property taxes child cares are forced to 
pay would be a simple but important step in improving the child 
care situation in Saskatchewan. So why won’t the government 
go ahead and make this change? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, the officials in my office 
have done a scan across the province on the different 
municipalities and what they do when it comes to child care 
spaces. Most of them give tax relief to child care centres. This 
is a difficulty that has arisen here in Regina, and I have 
encouraged those organizations to talk to the Regina city 
council to try to get this relief they’re looking for. 
 
The member opposite is portraying it as if it’s province wide. 
That’s not indeed the case. All of the other cities are giving tax 
relief to their child care centres. And I encourage these 
organizations to continue the conversation with the city of 
Regina. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Donations to Political Parties 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Pay-to-play is 
something that hurts people’s faith in politics, and that’s a 
problem. We work for them. But, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan 
election laws leave more questions than answers. A refresher on 
our rules here: corporate and union donations, no limit; 
out-of-province donations, no limit; donations from businesses 
getting government contracts, no limit. Every other jurisdiction 
in Canada has banned these donations, Mr. Speaker. But 
Saskatchewan remains the wild, wild west. 
 
Mr. Speaker, has the Minister of Justice heard enough? Will he 
commit today to work with us to get big money out of politics? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Justice and 
Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve stood in this 
House on a number of occasions and explained the position of 
our government. We are not prepared to make any changes at 
this point in time. As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, the majority 
of the donations that come to us come by way of ticket sales to 
our various events, Mr. Speaker. 

So I find it very, very interesting, Mr. Speaker, that on the very 
day that the member opposite stood in this House and started 
talking about donations, they sent out a fundraising letter, Mr. 
Speaker, for their leader’s dinner in Saskatoon, their leader’s 
reception. Mr. Speaker, $200 a seat, Mr. Speaker, the same day 
that that member stood up and started to . . . and asked us to . . . 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s very difficult for me to understand how 
they can square that circle when they stand up and ask for 
donations to be banned, Mr. Speaker, when they do the very 
same thing. 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Federal Government Reaction to Medical 
Imaging Legislation 

 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, we already know this 
government’s mismanagement, scandal, and waste are costing 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. Their mismanagement is leading to 
clear consequences. A letter from the federal Minister of Health 
said that the Sask Party’s ill-thought, privatized, buy one, get 
one legislation for MRIs [magnetic resonance imaging] and CT 
[computerized tomography] scans will cost Saskatchewan 
people even more. 
 
The federal minister says this is “. . . subject to mandatory 
dollar-for-dollar deductions to the Canada Health Transfer 
payments.” Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party is willing to throw 
away money that could help with chronic disease, with ER 
[emergency room] waits, with seniors’ care, with mental health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when they pushed this legislation through we 
warned them, and stakeholders warned them that this was in 
contravention of the Canada Health Act. But the Sask Party 
arrogantly brushed it off. When will they start listening to 
experts and when will they realize that their mismanagement is 
costing the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
two-for-one system that we’re putting in place right now, what 
it’s doing is incredibly benefiting the public system. Mr. 
Speaker, for every person who pays for a private MRI, it’s also 
taking one person out of the queue in the public system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this has been done for many years, close to 25 
years in Quebec and BC, with the exception of the two-for-one 
part. They have a private MRI system. The federal government 
at no point has clawed any funding back. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the point that the member makes is just 
completely wrong. She calls it mismanagement and she says 
that she warned us that somehow that this would be in 
contravention of the Canada Health Act. And yet, Mr. Speaker, 
for many years, the members opposite were doing it for the 
Saskatchewan Roughriders. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, there are 
no bigger fans of the Saskatchewan Roughriders than the 
members on this side of the House, but we think if it’s good 
enough for the Roughriders, we think it’s good enough for the 



1506 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2016 

citizens of the province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Equivalency Agreement With Federal Government 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, there’s no question: this has been 
the Sask Party’s terrible, horrible, no-good, very bad day. This 
morning the auditor set the record straight about her report on 
the Sask Party’s GTH land scandal. Then there’s the letter of 
punishment from the federal Health minister. So now they’re 
trying to change the channel with a press release that talks about 
talks they started seven years ago. Beyond finally finalizing an 
agreement, Mr. Speaker, they’ve also committed to taking our 
advice and committed to Ottawa that they will finally enact 
their green tech fund Act.  
 
Mr. Speaker, has the Environment minister explained this to the 
Finance minister, who has been ranting about the dangers of 
their own policy, or has he explained it to the Premier who said 
he would not negotiate with Ottawa? And has he explained to 
all of the Sask Party MLAs who have been clapping dutifully 
behind them when they railed on against the very policy they 
are now trotting out? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — I thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
thank the member opposite for the question so that we can 
update Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, on the equivalency 
agreement that was agreed to here this morning, Mr. Speaker, 
that will allow for great environmental outcomes as we move 
forward with our power generation here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And it will also allow us to make proper and 
economically wise decisions as we transition, Mr. Speaker, to a 
lower and more renewable energy source here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I’ve been across the province a number of, the last number of 
weeks, Mr. Speaker, talking to Saskatchewan people about our 
power generation facilities, about the emissions in the province 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and also about a federally 
imposed carbon tax here in the province of Saskatchewan.  
 
And the question that I’ve had, Mr. Speaker, is from people 
across the province, is where is the opposition on this, Mr. 
Speaker? They seem to be supporting a federally imposed 
carbon tax on the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, a tax 
that’ll add 11 cents to the price of fuel for all of those across 
Saskatchewan, will cost agriculture, Mr. Speaker, will cost 
industries, Mr. Speaker, and it’ll be detrimental to the people of 
the province of Saskatchewan. The people want to know where 
you are, Mr. Speaker, in standing up for families here in the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 

Implementation of Apprenticeship Mobility Protocol 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 

Last year, Canada’s premiers agreed to support the 
pan-Canadian apprenticeship mobility protocol, an agreement, I 
may add, that Saskatchewan played a leadership role in 
negotiating. And I must give a significant amount of credit to 
Jeff Ritter in the gallery who played a central role as the 
Chairman of the Canadian Council of Directors of 
Apprenticeship in the negotiation of that agreement. 
 
Recent regulation amendments made by the Government of 
Saskatchewan are making that mobility protocol a reality. As of 
November 25th, out-of-province apprentices registered in 
another Canadian jurisdiction will no longer have to be 
registered with the SATCC in order to work in this province, 
gaining on-the-job training towards their certification. Also, 
workers in compulsory trades will have more time to meet the 
educational requirements needed to register as an apprentice. 
This will allow more flexibility for those in extenuating 
circumstances. Individualized training plans will be able to be 
created, and SATCC officials will work with them to ensure the 
educational requirements are met. 
 
Saskatchewan is known for the high quality of apprentices and 
journeypersons that our apprenticeship system produces. In fact 
since 2007, the number of training seats in Saskatchewan has 
increased by 84 per cent. In 2015-16, over 6,800 apprentices 
were trained by SATCC. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government believes in reducing barriers 
between provinces not only for trade but for labour mobility as 
well. These regulation changes will reduce interprovincial 
barriers for labour mobility and help guarantee the continued 
success of our apprenticeship system for the benefit of both 
employers and workers who help to keep Saskatchewan strong. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Always 
good to join in and say, you know, call good news, good news. 
And this is indeed good news for the province of Saskatchewan 
and for Saskatchewan workers and certainly for the good work 
of the Saskatchewan Apprenticeship and Trade Certification 
Commission. 
 
And I would attach myself to the comments of the minister in 
complimenting the good work of CEO Jeff Ritter at the 
apprenticeship and trades commission and, as had been 
introduced earlier, different of the individuals that are working 
their way through the apprenticeships and also the different 
employers that do so much to support that vital system of 
training, and certainly the great work of Chair Drew Tiefenbach 
and Vice-Chair Bryan Leier and all the folks that make up the 
commission, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a body that reaches into all sorts of different walks of 
life and has that labour side, employer side representation and is 
a very valuable not just organization but a very valuable 
example I think to the whole province of what we can do when 
we’re working together and that that work that we can do in 
terms of building Saskatchewan translates into those good 
changes that have been brought forward with the changes to the 
regulations. 
 
It’s interesting that they’re bringing forward the changes to the 



November 28, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1507 

regulations and the announcement of them on this day, Mr. 
Speaker, when there’s so much else going on and indeed on the 
whole question of supports that are there for students that are 
getting their training in other parts of the post-secondary 
education system. But that certainly is a comment for another 
day. 
 
On these changes in and of themselves, we as the official 
opposition are proud to stand in support and to say again to the 
Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Commission, both the 
staff, the board, and all the folks, employers, employees that 
benefit from that vital work of that vital institution, job well 
done, and keep on building Saskatchewan. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 43 — The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 43, 
The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016 be now introduced and 
read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 43, The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016 be now introduced 
and read a first time. Is the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Next sitting of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 602 — The Election (Fairness and Accountability) 
Amendment Act 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 602, 
the elections (fairness and accountability) Act be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member that Bill 
No. 602, The Election (Fairness and Accountability) 
Amendment Act be now introduced and read a first time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 

The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Next sitting of the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cannington. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am instructed 
by the Standing Committee on Human Services to present its 
second report. I move: 
 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 
Human Services be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — The member from Cannington has moved: 
 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 
Human Services be concurred in. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm River. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 29, The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2016, a 
bilingual bill, without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice 
and Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill, and that 
the bill now be read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 29, The 
Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2016, and the bill be now 
read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 



1508 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2016 

The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 29 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 
2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur les juges de paix 

 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move the bill be now read 
the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 29, The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2016 be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm River. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 4, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2016, a 
bilingual bill, without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill now be read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 4, The 
Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2016, and that the bill be now 
read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. I recognize the minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 4 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2016/Loi 
modificative de 2016 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 

 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move the bill now be read 

a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 4, The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2016 be now read 
the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready 
for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — On division. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried, on division. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm River. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 5, The Electronic Information and Documents 
Amendment Act, 2016 without amendment. 
 
[14:45] 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill now be read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 5, The 
Electronic Information and Documents Amendment Act, 2016 
and that the bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Electronic Information and Documents 
Amendment Act, 2016 

 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the bill now be 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the Bill 
No. 5, The Electronic Information and Documents Amendment 
Act, 2016 be now read the third time and passed under its title. 



November 28, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1509 

Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm River. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 6, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill now be read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 6, The 
Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 and that the bill be now read 
a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 6 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this bill now be 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 6, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for 
the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 

Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm River. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 7, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016, a bilingual 
bill, without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Minister of 
Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in the Committee of the Whole on this bill and 
that the bill now be read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 7, The 
Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 and that the bill be now read 
a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 7 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 (No. 2) 
Loi no 2 de 2016 modifiant le droit législatif 

 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move the bill now be read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 7, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 be now read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm River. 
 



1510 Saskatchewan Hansard November 28, 2016 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice. 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 9, The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments 
Amendment Act, 2016, a bilingual bill, without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Minister of 
Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill now be read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration on Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 9, The 
Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2016 and 
that the bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 9 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments 
Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur 

l’exécution des jugements canadiens 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move this bill now be read 
a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 9, The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment 
Act, 2016 be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 227 and 228. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered responses 
to questions 227 to 228. I recognize the Government Whip. 
 

Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to table the 
answers to questions 229 through 234. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
to questions 229 to 234. Recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this House be now adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 14:51.] 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1495 
  Sarauer .......................................................................................................................................................................... 1495, 1497 
  Tell ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1495 
  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1495, 1496 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1495 
  Fiaz ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1496 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1496 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1496 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1497 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1497 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1497 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1497 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1498 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1498 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1498 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1499 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1499 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1499 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Saskatchewan Caribbean-Canadian Association Celebrates Barbadian Independence 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1499 
 Pilot Butte Volunteer Honoured for 50 Years of Service 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1500 
 Keep Meewasin Vital Campaign 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1500 
 Grandmothers Advocacy Network Works to End Violence Against Women 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1500 
 Hanley Sabers Win Provincial Championship 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1500 
 Dress for Success Regina Holds #GivingShoesDay on Giving Tuesday 
  Ross .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1501 
 Local Resident Makes Top 40 Under 40 List 
  Steinley ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1501 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transactions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1501 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1501 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1502 
 Property Tax Relief for Child Care Centres 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1504 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1504 
 Donations to Political Parties 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1505 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1505 
 Federal Government Reaction to Medical Imaging Legislation 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1505 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1505 
 Equivalency Agreement With Federal Government 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1506 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1506 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Implementation of Apprenticeship Mobility Protocol 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1506 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1506 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 43 — The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1507 
 Bill No. 602 — The Election (Fairness and Accountability) Amendment Act 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1507 
 



 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1507 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1507 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 29 — The Justices of the Peace Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur les juges de paix 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1508 
 Bill No. 4 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2016/Loi modificative de 2016 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1508 
 Bill No. 5 — The Electronic Information and Documents Amendment Act, 2016 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1508 
 Bill No. 6 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1509 
 Bill No. 7 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2016 (No. 2)/Loi no 2 de 2016 modifiant le droit législatif 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1509 
 Bill No. 9 — The Enforcement of Canadian Judgments Amendment Act, 2016 
 Loi modificative de 2016 sur l’exécution des jugements canadiens 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1510 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1510 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


