






















































Hansard: June 23, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 22A  THURSDAY, JUNE 23, 2016, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Hon. Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Hon. Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Merriman, Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 51; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Maurice Riou http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 631 
 June 23, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
request leave for an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it is a pleasure and an honour 
to be able to introduce to you and through you to all members 
of this Assembly, a group that have joined us from Calgary. 
They are seated in your gallery, or actually soon to be seated in 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure if anyone’s ever 
filibustered an introduction before, but the introduction doesn’t 
seem nearly as compelling or poignant without the actual 
people in the gallery. 
 
So let me just say, Mr. Speaker, that this group is from Crescent 
Point Energy in Calgary, and if I talk very slowly, there’ll be a 
chance for both an introduction by my friend, the Leader of the 
Opposition, and myself. I guess they’ve arrived, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Crescent Point Energy is one of the most dynamic oil and gas 
companies, not just in Western Canada, not just in Canada, but 
right across North America, worldwide. They are an excellent 
company with a great track record in terms of how they treat 
suppliers and employers, but also their environmental record is 
among the best you’d find of any oil company operating in 
North America today. 
 
Today we are joined by the CEO [chief executive officer] and 
the long-time leader of Crescent Point, Scott Saxberg, originally 
born in Manitoba, working in Calgary but cheering for the 
Saskatchewan Roughriders, I want to inform members. And 
joining Scott today, the chief operating officer, Neil Smith. 
Steven Toews is here; he’s the vice-president of engineering 
and operations. Shant Madian, manager of capital markets; and 
communications analyst Chelsey Higden is also here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we had a meeting this morning to talk about 
Crescent Point’s ongoing interest and investment in our 
province. There are over 425 people employed in Saskatchewan 
today because of this dynamic company, and many thousands 
of others who are indirectly benefiting in their business or in 
their jobs because of Crescent Point’s investment. 
 
And if I may, very quickly, Crescent Point now has confirmed 
they plan to spend 85 per cent of their capital budget; they 
could invest it anywhere in the oil industry, they’ve chosen to 
invest it here in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s $800 
million to drill an estimated 520 wells, and there’s more to 

come over the next five years, an estimate of $6 billion to 
invest. And more than that, a great corporate citizen; you know, 
I think of the STARS [Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society] 
contribution alone. I’m not sure those great STARS helicopters 
would be flying without contributions like the 5 million from 
Crescent Point and their support for a number of charities. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I want to welcome them to the Legislative 
Assembly today, thank them for the meeting this morning. We 
want to continue to make Saskatchewan a great place for them 
to invest. And I’d ask all members of this Assembly to join me 
in welcoming this delegation from Crescent Point Energy to the 
Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
tremendous honour to join with the Premier here today and to 
welcome CEO Scott Saxberg and the delegation from Crescent 
Point Energy to the Saskatchewan Assembly. Certainly they 
play a significant role in Saskatchewan, the amount of jobs that 
they continue to maintain. Their relationship with our business 
community is significant, and as well their choices through a 
difficult period of time in the energy sector to maintain an 
actual, an ambitious drilling program here in Saskatchewan is 
something that every last one of us value, and of course it’s 
important to Saskatchewan people and the thousands of people 
whose jobs depend upon it. 
 
It was also mentioned by the Premier that beyond the jobs and 
the economic impact which is so important, Crescent Point has 
been a strong corporate citizen. You see them proudly on 
display at Mosaic Stadium as the Riders thump the Stamps. And 
you see them as well in very important investments throughout 
the southeast, Estevan notably. So it’s my pleasure to welcome 
this — and Weyburn as well — it’s my pleasure to welcome 
this important company and Mr. Saxberg to the Saskatchewan 
Assembly. Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you to all members of the Assembly, I am 
pleased today to introduce 46 grade 4 and 5 students from the 
Henry Braun School in the constituency of Regina Northeast 
seated in the west gallery. They’re all waving up there. They are 
joined today, Mr. Speaker, by their classroom teachers Sandra 
Schenher, Darcia VanIderstine; and educational assistants 
Karen Riche — I hope I pronounced that correctly — and 
Denise Rosca. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these students are touring the Legislative 
Assembly here today, and we’ll have an opportunity to get 
together after question period. Unfortunately I can’t make it, 
Mr. Speaker. I have to attend a meeting, but you’re in much 
better hands with the CFL [Canadian Football League] hall of 
famer, the member from Regina Gardiner Park, who will be 
attending to meet with you afterwards. So I would ask all 
members to welcome these students from Henry Braun School 
to their Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 



632 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2016 

Riversdale. 

Ms. Chartier: — With leave to make an extended introduction. 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through to all members of this legislature, 
many fine citizens of Saskatchewan who are here today to hear 
first reading of Bill 601. They’re here in the hopes that this bill 
will improve support for those suffering from PTSD 
[post-traumatic stress disorder] caused from work, Mr. Speaker. 
So they’re here for that very reason. I would like . . . There are 
people here. There are paramedics, firefighters, social workers, 
Armed Forces members. 

I’d like to introduce everybody who I have on my list. It was a 
growing list, so I may miss someone; I’m hoping I don’t. But 
with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce — if you want to 
just give a wave when I read your name — Neil Diacon, Nick 
Hennink, Crystal Beach, Kim Downing, Chris Siddons, Scott 
Ingraham, Ryan Omichinski, Paul Hills, Jared Benson, Braden 
White, Mike Fay, Colby Burwell, Tyler Packham, Jerry Shull 
— sorry I cannot read the writing here — Cathleen MacPhee 
and her service dog, Lyra, Hazel Ritchie, Jennifer Chouinard, 
Len Herauf, Blair Scherer, Jay Yaciw, Rob Wilson, Jeff 
Anderson, Chad Lincoln, Drew Kreis, Curtis Heintz, Hartley 
Daku, and Roger Arsenault, and I have an L. Jackson — L. 
Jackson? Thank you so much for coming today. This is 
important work. 

Many of these individuals have worked very hard to get 
signatures on a petition calling for better support for those who 
suffer from PTSD, as I said, from workplace injuries, Mr. 
Speaker. So thank you for bringing voice to this issue and 
ensuring that all Saskatchewan residents have an opportunity to 
weigh in on this. So thank you, and I’d ask all my colleagues to 
join with me in welcoming these folks to their legislature. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the member opposite in welcoming these members to the 
legislature today. These people have . . . We’ve met with them 
periodically in the past. The issue that they raise is one that’s of 
increasing importance, not just to people in our province, but to 
people all the way across Canada. And it’s something that I 
want to assure them is something that has been under active 
consideration by the committee of review. 

The people at Workers’ Compensation will have more to say 
about it later in the day, Mr. Speaker, but I do want to welcome 
then and thank them for the good work they’re doing. In 
particular I want to recognize Jennifer Chouinard who I met 
with earlier. She’s the one that’s responsible for the ribbons that 
the members are wearing in the House, and for the excellent 
paper which is the basis of a lot of the research that’s been 
done. 

While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I would like to recognize 
somebody in the west gallery. There is one of our summer 
students, Bronte Prosser, who is accompanied today by her 
mother, Bernie Prosser, who’s a constituent, a friend of mine 
and my spouse’s. Very recently we were at her 50th birthday. I 
wouldn’t want to say how many years ago, but it couldn’t have 
been more than one or two or maybe a little more. In any event, 
she is someone that looks incredibly well for someone that had 
a 50th birthday one or two years ago. And I want to welcome 
her to the Assembly today and thank them for having Bronte 
working in the building this summer. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 

Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the minister opposite, and importantly the member from 
Riversdale, to welcome these leaders to their Assembly in 
emergency and protective services within our province and 
within our community. These are men and women who serve 
and sacrifice for the benefit and security of all of us each and 
every day. 

Within this group are many personal friends as well and good 
people within our community and our province, individuals that 
have committed themselves not just to protecting and serving 
our respective communities across our province, but pushing 
forward meaningful legislative changes that provide greater 
security and protection to those that have served.  

So we have members here today from fire and from the Armed 
Forces and paramedics, as well social workers. I know that 
we’ve also met with members in police on this matter, and in 
corrections. The issue that they’re here to see advanced in the 
legislation, that we can work together to advance here today, is 
something that we should all be proud of and also something 
that we should certainly be able to make happen. It’s my 
pleasure to welcome these leaders within our community, 
within our province to their Assembly here today and to thank 
them for what they do each and every day. Thanks, Mr. 
Speaker. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 

Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, it’s indeed my 
honour to introduce my friend Dr. Scott Francis in the west 
gallery. I have coffee with Scott about one morning a week. It’s 
always great to visit with him, but he does attend our 
proceedings quite regularly, as people will notice him in the 
gallery. 

Mr. Speaker, Scott is a chaplain with the organization called 
Leading Influence. They offer free chaplaincy to elected 
officials across Canada, as well as pray for them and their 
families. He’s also a professional leadership coach and a 
consultant. He and his family live in White City where he also 
serves his community as a volunteer firefighter and first 
responder. So, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to welcome Scott 
to his Assembly and thank him for his service. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 



June 23, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 633 

Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to introduce my intern for this session, Bram Lerat. 
Bram has completed, I believe, his political science studies at 
the U of R [University of Regina], and I want all the Assembly 
members to know that this very impressive, young, disciplined 
man is going to be someone of significance in the very near 
future. And I’d ask all members to remember his name. And the 
point, Mr. Speaker, that I would raise is that his discipline is 
really encouraging. He’s very intelligent, a very hard-working 
man. And some may say he’s better looking than me. But, Mr. 
Speaker, I would ask them not to exaggerate. I would ask all 
members of the Assembly to please welcome my intern, Bram, 
to the Assembly today. Welcome, Bram. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 
and through you to all members of this legislature, I as well 
want to introduce Molly Waldman who’s been a summer 
student in our office here the past number of weeks, Mr. 
Speaker, and throughout this summer. Molly hails from the 
constituency of Saskatoon Southeast, and despite our initial 
concerns with that, Mr. Speaker, she’s worked out rather well in 
our office. And she’s been a tremendously hard worker, Mr. 
Speaker, and a great sense of humour which seems to be a 
requirement working in the office that we’re in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I do also want to acknowledge, a couple of weeks ago I got 
to meet Molly’s father, Ron, Mr. Speaker, as we had dinner. 
And I do want to acknowledge Molly’s mom, Shannon, that’s 
with her here today and welcome both of them as well as 
Bronte and her mother to their Legislative Assembly here in the 
capital city. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave, to make 
a statement. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Apology 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday in 
debate, I said something that was incorrect. For that I apologize 
unreservedly to this House. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
once again today to present a petition to improve PTSD 
coverage for Saskatchewan workers. Mr. Speaker, the 

petitioners point out that post-traumatic stress disorder can 
severely impact the lives of Saskatchewan workers. They point 
out that delaying diagnosis and treatment for PTSD can be 
detrimental to recovery. They’re simply asking, Mr. Speaker, 
that those who suffer traumatic events on the job and then get a 
subsequent diagnosis of PTSD will then be . . . that trauma will 
be assumed to be the presumptive cause of the PTSD, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Saskatchewan government to 
make the necessary changes to ensure that if Saskatchewan 
workers are exposed to traumatic events on the job and are 
then diagnosed with PTSD, it is presumed to be caused by 
the worker’s employment and the worker will subsequently 
be covered under workers’ compensation and receive the 
same benefits as others with work-related injuries. 

 
[10:15] 
 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by citizens from all across 
Saskatchewan, but today these pages are signed from those 
from Strasbourg, Govan, Earl Grey, Saskatoon, just to name a 
few, and I will continue to present these petitions until the 
minister moves on this, Mr. Speaker. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition in support of funding for heritage 
languages in Saskatchewan schools. And we know that after 25 
years, the Government of Saskatchewan is discontinuing all 
support for heritage language learning in Saskatchewan. 
 
Since 1991 heritage language schools have depended on this 
modest funding from the Ministry of Education to help sustain 
their programs. And as a result of this announcement by the 
Ministry of Education, many of these non-profit heritage 
language schools will be faced with the difficult decision of 
whether or not they can continue to operate. In addition to 
providing language and cultural classes, these schools offer a 
welcoming environment and crucial support for newcomers 
who are searching for a way to feel at home in their new 
surroundings here in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to reconsider this decision and restore funding for heritage 
language education in Saskatchewan heritage language 
schools. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition are from Regina 
and various communities throughout the province. I do so 
present, thank you. 



634 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2016 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Moose Range Celebrates 100th Anniversary 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Saturday, June 18th, I was honoured to attend the 100th 
anniversary celebration of the Rural Municipality of Moose 
Range. The RM [rural municipality] of Moose Range was 
incorporated in 1916 and is the 10th largest RM in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Settlement in the area received an impetus after the end of 
World War I and again at the end of the Second World War 
when returning soldiers were settled here under the Soldier 
Settlement Act. With the formation of the railway, increased 
settlement took place and was accelerated by the trek of farmers 
from the drought-stricken Prairies looking for fertile land. This 
land was entirely covered by bush, and all clearing was done by 
hand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, logging has always been a part of the economic 
development of the area with as many as 45 mills operating in 
the early ’40s. Another resource-oriented industry is the 
Premier peat moss company. The peat is dried, processed, 
bagged, and sold all over North America. 
 
The construction of the E.B. Campbell dam in 1961 to 1963 
created a lake 40 miles long and 2 miles wide. Tobin Lake is 
now one of the most popular fishing destinations in Western 
Canada where just about anyone can catch a very large fish or a 
very large walleye — just about anyone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating the 
RM of Moose Range on its 100th anniversary. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

Motorcycle Ride for Dad 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
recognize those who donned their leather jackets and got on 
their bikes this past Saturday, June 18th, to fight prostate cancer 
in this year’s Motorcycle Ride for Dad. Myself, along with the 
members from Saskatoon Southeast and University, were on 
hand to send the riders off on a beautiful day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, prostate cancer is the most commonly diagnosed 
cancer in Canadian men. The fight is ongoing with an average 
of 65 Canadian men diagnosed every single day, and 11 die a 
day from it. With astounding recent advances, researchers are 
now able to treat close to 90 per cent of those diagnosed with 
the disease. The success rate depends fully on early diagnosis 
and timely treatment, which is why events like this year’s Ride 
for Dad are so important. They’re getting the message out there 
and getting people talking about prostate cancer and seeing their 
doctors. And what is so special about the ride is that all the 
dollars raised stay in Saskatchewan for Saskatchewan research. 
 
A big thanks goes out to all those involved with this year’s 

Motorcycle Ride for Dad including Co-Chairs Robert 
Thompson and Bob Milburn, ride captain Vince Streuken and 
the riders and volunteers who selflessly donate their time and 
effort to the cause. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I call on all members to recognize the efforts and 
dedication of everyone who took part in this year’s Motorcycle 
Ride for Dad to fight prostate cancer. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Physician of the Year 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
inform this Assembly that for the second time in the past three 
years, Saskatchewan’s doctor of the year goes to a doctor in my 
constituency of Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
Each year the Saskatchewan Medical Association recognizes an 
outstanding Saskatchewan doctor who delivers exceptional 
patient care while contributing to the well-being of the 
community or advancement of the medical profession. Mr. 
Speaker, we know that physicians who serve our communities 
are leaders both in their clinics and in our hospitals and 
Saskatchewan communities, and the 2016 SMA [Saskatchewan 
Medical Association] Physician of the Year is no different. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the winner of this prestigious award is Dr. Crystal 
Litwin from Wynyard. Dr. Litwin is an inspiration to the whole 
area and has become “a tireless advocate for rural medicine” 
and was quick to thank her team at the clinics and the hospital 
when she received the award. Her accomplishments are 
numerous, but what sets Dr. Litwin apart is the fact that she is a 
leader in the community. Executive director of the Wynyard 
community clinic, Paul Lendzyk, had this to say: “In the past 20 
years, many family physicians have come and gone, but one 
physician you can always count on is Dr. Litwin.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all members to join me in congratulating 
Dr. Litwin for being Saskatchewan’s Physician of the Year. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Prince Albert Street Fair 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Saturday, June 
18, I had the pleasure to attend the Prince Albert Street Fair. 
The street fair takes place every year in downtown Prince 
Albert and is organized by the Prince Albert downtown 
improvement district. The entire downtown section of Central 
Avenue is closed off, and only foot traffic is allowed for the 
duration of the event. This was the 13th street fair in Prince 
Albert, and this year over 7,000 people attended. 
 
The day started off with a pancake breakfast where I was 
pleased to be part of the volunteer work crew. There were many 
vendors sprawled across Central Avenue selling everything 
from jewellery and clothing to baking and food. Local 
downtown businesses all had great sales in their stores. For the 
children there was face painting, games, and a bouncy castle. 



June 23, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 635 

There was also great live, local entertainment throughout the 
day. 
 
As well there was a stunt pilot who thrilled fair attendees with 
his aerial stunts and skywriting. The Prince Albert Historical 
Society held a contest to see who the greatest Prince Alberton 
is, and the winner was Dr. Orville Hjertaas, the father of 
medicare. 
 
It was a very enjoyable day, and I would ask that all members 
join with me in congratulating the event coordinator, Lori 
Bourne, and the Prince Albert downtown improvement district 
for another successful street fair. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Carlton. 
 

Prince Albert Rental Housing Project 
 
Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last 
Friday I was honoured to be able to attend the sod-turning of a 
new rental housing project that is under way in Prince Albert. 
Upon completion, eight individuals with complex needs will be 
able to live in safety and comfort as they work towards a 
brighter future. 
 
The Prince Albert branch of the Canadian Mental Health 
Association is taking on a leadership role in moving this project 
forward. Their work to improve the lives of our most vulnerable 
citizens is admirable, and our government values the work that 
they do each day to support people living with complex mental 
health and addiction issues. 
 
I’m proud to say that Saskatchewan Housing Corporation, along 
with their federal housing partner, Canada Mortgage and 
Housing Corporation, are jointly contributing up to $900,000 
under the Canada-Saskatchewan Investment in Affordable 
Housing Agreement to support this worthwhile initiative. 
 
Since November 2007, 150 affordable rental units have been 
completed in Prince Albert. When completed, this project will 
add eight more units to this community. Mr. Speaker, I ask all 
members to join me, thanking the Prince Albert branch of the 
Canadian Mental Health Association for helping to make this 
project a reality. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

Partnership With Northern Communities 
 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
inform this Assembly that Cameco and Areva have signed a 
historic agreement involving First Nation partner communities 
and northern municipalities in the Athabasca basin. 
 
These two companies with uranium mining operations in the 
North have signed a broad collaboration agreement with three 
First Nations, including Hatchet Lake, Black Lake, and Fond du 
Lac, and four municipalities including Wollaston Lake, Stony 
Rapids, Uranium City, and Camsell Portage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this agreement builds on the long history of 

collaboration and partnership between Cameco, Areva, and the 
communities that are around their northern operations. Diane 
McDonald, the lead negotiator for the Athabasca area 
communities has this to say: “The renewed partnership 
agreement gives the Athabasca community certainty to help 
ensure that the companies operate sustainably, bringing positive 
changes for the future generation.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, Cameco has now completed three collaboration 
agreements and one participation agreement encompassing 10 
First Nation and Métis communities in northern Saskatchewan. 
These agreements focus on workforce and business 
development, community engagement and environmental 
stewardship and community investment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would invite all members of this Assembly to 
join me in thanking and congratulating Cameco for their hard 
work and collaboration with First Nation and Métis 
communities in Saskatchewan’s North. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Supporting Wanuskewin’s Renewal 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On June 17th I, 
along with the Minister of Justice and the Minister of Highways 
and the members from Saskatoon Meewasin and Saskatoon 
Westview, had the pleasure of attending the announcement of 
the membership of the fundraising team that has come together 
to support Wanuskewin Heritage Park’s renewal. Mr. Speaker, 
the Thundering Ahead capital campaign for Canada’s 
Wanuskewin Heritage Park is made up of an impressive team of 
indigenous and non-indigenous leaders from many sectors. 
Together, they will seek $25 million to support the renovation 
and expansion of the park. 
 
Some of the prominent business leaders who came out in 
support of the project include Tim Gitzel, CEO of Cameco; 
Scott Banda, CEO of Federated Co-Op; Wayne Brownlee, 
PotashCorp’s executive vice-president and CFO [chief financial 
officer], and David Dubé, CEO of Concorde Group. 
 
This project has the full support of Saskatchewan’s corporate 
community, and for the first time ever, Mr. Speaker, Cameco, 
Federated Co-Op, and PotashCorp have all come together to 
support the same campaign. The revitalization made possible by 
the Thundering Ahead campaign will help Wanuskewin in its 
bid to become Saskatchewan’s first UNESCO [United Nations 
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization] World 
Heritage site. 
 
I ask all members to join me in thanking everyone involved 
with the Thundering Ahead campaign, and in wishing 
Wanuskewin continued success. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Provincial Economy and Employment 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, time and time again the 



636 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2016 

Premier stands up and dismisses the challenges that 
Saskatchewan people are facing. When it comes to jobs, he 
grabs whatever statistic is convenient and dismisses honest 
questions about a plan to get those who are struggling back to 
work. 
 
Let me lay out some facts one more time: 9,500 jobs were lost 
year-over-year; 7,200 of those jobs were mortgage-paying, 
full-time jobs for Saskatchewan families; the unemployment 
rate for Saskatchewan people off-reserve, First Nations, has 
grown by an alarming 8 per cent to 25 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these numbers should be alarming to the Premier. 
We’ve heard nothing though but spin, and we certainly haven’t 
seen any action. With his budget, did he take action to extend 
opportunity for those struggling to get by, or to get them back to 
work? Not a thing. He cut deeper. He cut everything from adult 
basic education to economic development, and not a thing to 
diversify our economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with precarious employment and job loss as a 
harsh reality for far too many Saskatchewan people, will the 
Premier reconsider some of his job cuts so Saskatchewan’s 
hard-working people can get back to work? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there were a number of 
specific initiatives in the budget that the members opposite just 
voted against that would help to diversify the economy, 
including a brand new patent box, the first one in North 
America, for companies that want to do their research here — 
including, Mr. Speaker, $1.7 billion in infrastructure investment 
in the province. That’s the largest . . . It’s a record infrastructure 
investment we’re about to make this year. There’s going to be 
obviously direct employment as a result of that; there’ll be 
indirect employment as a result of that. And they voted against 
that as well. 
 
And I want to correct the record yesterday, Mr. Speaker, 
because yesterday I misspoke. I indicated that there had been 
50,000 jobs created since 2007 in this province, 50,000 more 
people working in Saskatchewan than when members opposite 
were the government. And I was wrong. The number is 67,000 
more people working in the province today. 
 
[10:30] 
 
And I want to . . . We are acutely aware of the layoffs that have 
occurred in this province, principally but not limited to the 
energy sector. And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, this government 
and this office has been working every day, very hard, to fight 
for the energy sector of this province. That’s why this side of 
the House proposed a new well completion support program 
from the federal government, that we could put energy sector 
workers back to work completing wells, Mr. Speaker. Who 
opposed that program? That member and that party opposite, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — You know, it’s evident again we’re 
going to see this Premier grandstand and try to put on a show. 

But he’s dismissing the reality facing workers across 
Saskatchewan. And he talks about his mismanaged 
infrastructure projects and then fails to say that the big bucks 
are flowing to foreign corporations like the one from France, 
Mr. Speaker, instead of Saskatchewan companies. 
 
And you know, he always glosses over and paints a reality 
that’s in disconnect to the true picture, Mr. Speaker. You know, 
that’s the reality with the energy sector, over 3,000 jobs lost 
under his watch. And yet he continues to grandstand. He 
pretends to be, of course, the great defender of pipelines. But, 
Mr. Speaker, not a single kilometre of pipeline has been built in 
nearly a decade in power, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That Premier will choose headlines over pipelines any day of 
the week, Mr. Speaker. And instead of working with 
Saskatchewan people to build a plan that works, companies to 
build a plan for our future, he digs his heels in, Mr. Speaker, 
puts his head in the sand, and asks us just to trust him. 
 
Does the Premier not recognize the seriousness of this situation, 
the reality for Saskatchewan people and the hard-working 
people who deserve good, mortgage-paying opportunities? And 
far too often we see him dismissing Saskatchewan companies, 
shutting them out for foreign corporations. When will the 
Premier provide real certainty to the people of Saskatchewan 
and show a real plan of action for building our province’s future 
together? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s an incredible rationale for 
the questions from the member, from my hon. friend opposite, 
Mr. Speaker, given the fact that this side of the House, just 
months ago, proposed a well completion program to the federal 
government, a way for the federal government to support our 
energy sector workers, those same energy sector workers he 
purports to speak for today. Mr. Speaker, that program, that 
initiative would have put energy sector . . . about 1,500 of them 
back to work in this province completing abandoned wells in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP [New Democratic Party] in Alberta came 
around and supported the program. The service sector supports 
the program. The producers support the program. It was 
initiated by Saskatchewan employers in the energy sector, 
supported by this government. And one entity that I’m aware of 
opposed that program. 
 
So it’s up to the Leader of the NDP to stand up today and say, 
you know what, we were wrong; we support that program and 
we’ll join you in your call for Ottawa to implement it. You 
can’t just talk about these things, Mr. Speaker. You have to act. 
You actually have to support pipelines, not just Energy East, 
but you’d have to support Northern Gateway. You need to 
support the conveyance of energy. And, Mr. Speaker, maybe, 
just maybe the NDP, the Leader of the NDP would want to send 
a signal to the energy sector other than appointing a Finance 
critic who supports in principle the Leap Manifesto. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, we see a Premier trying to 



June 23, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 637 

distract, and he’s playing games, and he knows that that 
document’s not on for anyone in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He’s out of touch with the reality facing Saskatchewan families. 
Yesterday he stood up in the House and defended their cuts in 
education, and he defended that minister and that government’s 
indefensible decision to walk away from their commitment and 
their signature. Over the last year there’s been 5,300 jobs lost in 
educational services. The mid-year adjustment was scrapped by 
that government for our growing classrooms, leaving students 
and classrooms shortchanged and our classrooms growing. 
School boards have been forced to cut more jobs and supports 
for students. You’d think the Premier would recognize that this 
is not a good thing for students or the future of our province. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, this is a time where teachers are 
wrapping up the year, where they’re preparing for next year — 
school boards as well. Why can this Premier not recognize that 
his delay of this budget, and then the unacceptable budget, and 
then the fact that he won’t reverse his minister’s bad faith 
negotiating, that indefensible decision, is leaving classrooms 
and students shortchanged? Why won’t he reverse that choice 
here today? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, once again in the hon. 
member’s preamble he talked a little bit about the economy and 
the energy sector. I want to . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well 
maybe the deputy leader is interested in the answer to questions 
that his side of the House is asking. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting. Just this morning we were having 
discussions with a company involved in the energy sector, and 
that company is making some important decisions in terms of 
their investment. They have well over $1 billion total capital 
expenditure planned for the next number of months, for the next 
year, and they’ve chosen to make . . . They could invest those 
dollars anywhere in the world, in energy sectors anywhere in 
the world. They’ve chosen to make an 85 per cent investment 
right here in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
supporting the energy sector and jobs for Saskatchewan people. 
Meanwhile the leader of the NDP handpicked someone to do 
the renewal of his party, someone who signed, signed the Leap 
Manifesto, Mr. Speaker, signed the Leap Manifesto that would 
see the end of the energy sector in this province. 
 
With respect to education, Mr. Speaker, we have increased 
operating funds to education to record levels over the last seven 
years. There is record investments in education capital. Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP campaigned in the last election, as did we, 
with an education plank to their platform. Here is what we 
would have got had they won the election for education 
funding. The NDP platform . . . And he should read it. He 
should probably read this platform. It’s very informative. They 
would have given education a 2.6 per cent increase. In our 
budget, 7.88 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker, capital and 
operating. So it’s a bit passing strange that now they’re 
lecturing other members in this House for their education 
funding, when had they been elected — heaven forbid — there 
would have been cuts in education, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 

Riversdale. 
 

Management of Health Care System 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Failures are the stepping stones to success, 
Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Health may have the shore in 
sight, but it all depends on how he takes the next few steps. 
He’s trying desperately to put the lean fiasco behind him, and 
he says he’ll cut $7.5 million from bloated senior management 
that the Sask Party has let grow out of control. From my home 
of Saskatoon, that would mean about 40 new care aids for 
long-term care. It’s not the more than 400 called for by the 
urgent action request, but it’s better than Sask Party cuts, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
While the minister talks about shifting resources from 
administration to the front lines, he has not taken into account 
the possibly hundreds of thousands of dollars he’ll have to shell 
out for severances. Can the minister tell us how much these 
buyouts are going to cost? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, as the member would have heard in committee, we are 
certainly working with regional health authorities as we look to 
rebalance between administration and front line. We want to 
certainly add to the front-line staff, particularly in long-term 
care, which has been the record of this government, Mr. 
Speaker, where we have added nearly 800 full-time equivalents 
to the long-term care complement in just the last eight years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a little bit strange to hear this question coming 
from the member opposite who, in their own platform, Mr. 
Speaker, would have cut administration by $25 million, and yet 
there was no plan in their platform in terms of where the 
severance would come from. In fact, Mr. Speaker, the Finance 
critic says, just a couple of weeks ago, that a 6 per cent increase 
in health care is necessary or else it wouldn’t be even status 
quo. Anything less than 6 per cent is not status quo. And yet the 
platform that was authored, and I assume the Health critic had a 
hand in writing the platform for the health, the health platform 
for the NDP, would have had a point eight per cent increase, 
well below the increase in this budget, Mr. Speaker. Once 
again, from the NDP, it doesn’t add up. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, this minister sent hundreds of 
health care workers and senior managers on the lean North 
American tour that highlighted a hospital that did not receive 
full certification because it failed the evaluation for, among 
other things, the category of care. The lean tours also included a 
trip to the highly relevant airbag factory. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister agreed to calling these tours essential. 
So during a travel freeze, hundreds of our much needed 
front-line care workers, along with senior managers, were 
pulled from their jobs and took the mandatory lean tour. Mr. 
Speaker, that travel cost millions. 
 
And I wonder if the minister remembers last fall, when just four 



638 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2016 

senior staffers left to go work for lean, the price tag for training 
and severance came close to $2 million. After implementing the 
return-to-service agreement, has the minister gotten any 
taxpayer money back as a result? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First I again need to correct the record on this side of the House, 
Mr. Speaker, from what the member opposite has said. Mr. 
Speaker, the Virginia Mason facility has not lost accreditation. 
In fact, I would refer to the member, a partner organization to 
the Virginia Mason is the Yakima Valley Memorial Hospital. 
And just yesterday their CEO, Russ Myers, said that the 
outcome of an inspection was “mischaracterized, saying that 
Virginia Mason was denied full accreditation by the joint 
commission.” 
 
And he goes on to say, and I quote, “They had a pending denial, 
but that was fixed within a week by addressing the concerns of 
the inspections. Most of those were fixed while the surveyors 
were there, and if not fixed, they’re going to be soon.” He goes 
on to say, “They now have contingent accreditation. They’re 
still accredited.” Again, Mr. Speaker, inaccuracies coming from 
the member from Riversdale. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the travel of the Ministry of Health 
and our officials, including North American tour, I can say that 
in the last year that I have, ’13-14, $478,000 less than the nearly 
$700,000 of travel by the Ministry of Health under the members 
opposite. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

Food Services in Correctional Facilities 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I asked the Minister of 
Corrections and Policing why her ministry had to hire an 
additional manager to manage a contract the Sask Party had 
signed with a private contractor for food service. The minister 
dismissed the question, saying, “. . . this issue is done and over 
with.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s neither done nor over. It’s not done 
because it’s the government’s job to make sure services in 
Saskatchewan correctional facilities are adequately provided, 
and the Sask Party chose a private contractor that is not 
honouring their obligations. And it’s not over because the 
minister still hasn’t answered my question. So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll 
ask another way: how does the minister justify having to hire 
yet another manager to manage and monitor the compliance of 
yet another contract instead of doing her job and enforcing the 
contract? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
we have to correct the abundance of incorrect information 
coming from the members opposite. The food services in our 
eight correctional facilities is run by what we call, a company 
called Compass. The company has a contract with the 

Government of Saskatchewan. What we have in place, Mr. 
Speaker . . . And this is about due diligence on part of 
government. We have a person within our ministry that is 
responsible for overseeing the contract of food services. There 
is no other manager hired, Mr. Speaker, no other manager. 
Compass is responsible for the delivery of food service. 
Government is responsible to ensure that Compass follows the 
contract, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, the minister can continue to 
dismiss this particular case, but this is far from the first time this 
government has dealt with contractors using kid gloves. The 
Minister of Social Services let a contractor walk away from a 
fixed-price contract to build affordable housing. The 
scandal-plagued Minister for SaskPower settled for a store 
credit from Sensus, leaving millions of dollars with them when 
he tried to return the fire-prone duds known as smart meters. 
And that same minister is paying millions of dollars to Cenovus 
because his poorly negotiated carbon capture deal leaves 
Saskatchewan people on the hook for missed CO2 delivery. 
 
The Sask Party consistently signs these contracts on behalf of 
Saskatchewan people, and when they fail, they just reward the 
companies who are failing by giving them more money. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s taxpayers who are left holding the bag. Did the 
Minister of Corrections learn anything from her colleagues? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Corrections and 
Policing. 
 
Hon. Ms. Tell: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Compass is 
responsible for delivering a food service contract in our eight 
facilities across the province of Saskatchewan. The Government 
of Saskatchewan is responsible to ensure that Compass does 
their job. We have one manager in the ministry that is 
responsible to ensure that they follow the contract, Mr. Speaker. 
And what happens in other ministries, I’m sure, is the same as it 
is here. They have people responsible for ensuring that the 
people that are contracted out to provide service actually 
provide the service, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Funding for Child and Family Services 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, the other day in committee 
with the Minister of Social Services, I learned of more cuts 
from this government that weren’t mentioned anywhere in this 
government’s budget. Were they thoughtful and overdue cuts to 
the Sask Party’s mismanagement scandals or wasteful pet 
projects? No. Mr. Speaker, these were cuts to organizations that 
help vulnerable Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, $74,000 cut from Big Brothers and Big Sisters, 
$87,000 cut from teen parent programs, over $220,000 cut from 
counselling services, and the list goes on — over $450,000 cut. 
 
[10:45] 
 



June 23, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 639 

Mr. Speaker, the minister agrees that these organizations help 
our vulnerable children and youth across the province. She just 
says, they aren’t quite vulnerable enough. How can the minister 
possibly justify cutting programs that actually keep our kids 
from becoming more vulnerable? That’s the point. Is she aware 
of the long-term costs of these short-term cuts? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
our child and family services budget is, in this year’s budget, is 
243 million. Mr. Speaker, that’s a 7.4 per cent increase over last 
year and almost three times as much as it was under the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was difficult decisions that needed to be 
made and when we looked at our CBO [community-based 
organization] contracts, some of them are not CBOs. Some of 
them were regional health authorities. Some were contracts with 
school divisions, Mr. Speaker. We looked at what is our core 
business and what is our priorities. Some of the programs were 
underutilized, Mr. Speaker, and some were duplicate services 
within that community. Some were just one-off contracts that 
had ended, and some were, indeed, difficult decisions because 
we had to look at core business and mandate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our priorities were increases for medically fragile children. So 
the minister opposite wants to talk, or the member opposite 
wants to talk about priorities? Medically fragile children are 
priorities. Mr. Speaker, intensive supports for families that are 
on the edge of at-risk, that’s priorities. All of those had 
increases. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, look, more dismissals from this 
minister. It’s all she was willing to offer at committee as well. 
When I raised concerns about these cuts, she brushed them off, 
saying, “many of them are just 20 per cent.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, a cut is a cut, and these add up to nearly a quarter 
million dollars in cuts. Cuts, Mr. Speaker, that will affect 
people across the province. Children will have a harder time 
being paired with mentors. Teenage parents will receive less 
support. Mr. Speaker, they even cut a program that helps youth 
find jobs. So much for the Premier’s pledge to take the 38 per 
cent increase in youth unemployment seriously. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask again: how can the minister, in good 
conscience, make these cuts to important programs and then 
dismiss genuine questions about their long-term costs? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, in a very difficult 
budget, we increased the child and family services by 7.4 per 
cent. Mr. Speaker, we are spending 243 million. The members 
opposite, when they had the chance to be government, spent 88 
million on this very same file, Mr. Speaker. So where were their 
priorities? This government’s demonstrated that this is a 
priority of this government. 
 
And let’s just go back to the NDP platform, Mr. Speaker. What 

did they have in the costing document for the NDP platform? 
They put their name on the ballot when they ran in the election, 
and they agreed that they would only increase the entire Social 
Services budget by point seven per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What were they going to cut? They need to come clean with the 
people of Saskatchewan of what they were going to cut out of 
the Ministry of Social Services in order to even begin to meet 
that type of sad financial commitment. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Sixties Scoop and Government Conversations 
With Interest Groups 

 
Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, tomorrow marks one year since 
the Premier told reporters in Saskatoon that his government 
would officially apologize for the Sixties Scoop. It was reported 
in the Eagle Feather News on that day that the province was 
“. . . not rushing 60’s Scoop apology.” 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, was an understatement. The Sixties Scoop 
saw First Nations and Métis children taken by the government 
to live with non-Aboriginal families far away from home. It 
destroyed families, and the effects are still being felt in our 
communities today. The Premier promised that an apology 
would come in the summer or fall, but those timelines have 
long since passed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this apology is overdue. There is plenty of blame 
for this tragic program to go around, but it’s this Premier who 
promised an apology and it’s this Premier who has not made 
good on that promise. My question is for the Premier. When can 
we expect this very important promised apology to happen? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And the 
government agrees. It’s a very important promised apology that 
our Premier and our government has made. 
 
As the members opposite know, that the original delay was 
asked for by FSIN [Federation of Sovereign Indigenous 
Nations] leadership because they wanted us to respect their 
election, which took place last fall. Since that time, myself and 
the Minister of Government Relations has been working with 
Chief Bobby Cameron to try to get a date that works for both 
the Premier and the Chief. Both are very, very busy leaders in 
their respective roles and, Mr. Speaker, we’ve yet to come to a 
date that works for both. 
 
We have met with Chief Bobby Cameron during this session to 
again put forward some dates. I don’t believe he’s returned with 
any of those working for him. So I ask the member opposite, he 
needs to talk to the First Nations leadership if he wants to gain 
understanding of the efforts that have been made. But there 
truly has been a number of conversations with Chief Bobby 
Cameron on this very issue, and it’s a matter of getting a date 
that works for both leaders. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 



640 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2016 

Growth and Financial Security Fund 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, during the election campaign, the 
Sask Party committed to eventually building a $500 million 
balance in their highly touted Growth and Financial Security 
Fund. We now know that despite recommendations from the 
auditor to just amend the Act, they’ve scrapped the Act and the 
fund altogether. And their legislation to scrap it is retroactive. 
So technically, thanks to the magic of retroactivity, it was 
scrapped even before the election day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a broken Sask Party promise is obviously not 
news. But, Mr. Speaker, they drained the fund on, get this, 
March 10th. That was nine days before they announced that 
they promised to rebuild it. So why did they drain the fund? 
Well, the deputy minister clarified that last night. She said the 
fund was drained on March 10th in part so that “. . . the fund 
would be retired before we actually introduced legislation 
effective April 1st.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the Sask Party promise Saskatchewan 
people that they would rebuild the fund if they clearly knew 
they had already drained it and they were planning to scrap it as 
soon as possible? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to 
understand that this government, over the last eight years, has 
paid down $2.7 billion of operating debt left by those members 
on the other side, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think it’s important to realize that this government has turned 
$6 billion, $6 billion in taxes back to the people of 
Saskatchewan and the businesses of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, what we had said during the campaign is a 
commitment we will keep. The Premier promised, with respect 
to the fact the heritage fund . . . a heritage fund or a savings 
account into the future, that if and when oil hits $75 a barrel 
again, Mr. Speaker, we will rebuild that fund to $500 million. 
Anything over and above that, we will pay down the debt we 
inherited from you folks and then we will create a heritage 
fund, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, it’s interesting. This is a member last 
night, Mr. Speaker, that came in here completely unprepared for 
discussing this legislation, late for the meeting. We had to 
provide the materials to the member to ask the actual questions 
of what we were going to be discussing, and now stands here 
today and says she doesn’t understand what’s happening here, 
Mr. Speaker. I can’t figure that out. Maybe she can. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 601 — The Workers’ Compensation 
Amendment Act, 2016 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 601 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 

The Speaker: — The member from Saskatoon Riversdale has 
introduced the first reading of Bill No. 601. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — First reading of 
this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read the second time? 
 
Ms. Chartier: — The next sitting of the Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m instructed by the Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice to report that it has considered certain 
estimates and to present its first report. I move: 
 

That the first report of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Rochdale has 
moved the current motion on certain estimates and to present its 
first report. She moves: 
 

That the first report of the Senate Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now concurred in. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
An Hon. Member: — On division. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. On division. I recognize the member 
from Carrot River Valley. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 



June 23, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 641 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 
21, The Growth and Financial Security Repeal Act without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Minister of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 
to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill 
and that the bill be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has requested leave 
to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on the bill 
and that the bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The Minister of Finance may 
proceed to move third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 21 — The Growth and Financial Security 
Repeal Act 

 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
the bill now be read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that the bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to 
adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
An Hon. Member: — On division. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. On division. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Carrot River 
Valley. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Mr. Bradshaw: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 
22, The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2016, without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 

consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill be now read the third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has requested leave 
to waive consideration of Committee of the Whole on this bill 
and that the bill now be read the third time. Is leave agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The Minister of Finance may 
proceed to move the third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 22 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2016 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
the bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that the bill be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
An Hon. Member: — On division. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. On division. 
 
Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel: — Third reading of 
this bill. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, I will be tabling the 
Provincial Auditor’s Annual Report on Operations for the Year 
Ended March 31st, 2016 in accordance to provisions in section 
14.1 of The Provincial Auditor Act, is to be tabled today, 
Thursday, June 23rd, 2016. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Wood River. 
 
[11:00] 

Support for Pipeline Development 
 
Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will be moving a 
motion at the end of my address regarding pipeline 
development in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all at this time, I want to thank my colleagues for giving 
me this opportunity to not only move this motion, Mr. Speaker, 
but also speak on this very important issue, Mr. Speaker, an 
issue that our Premier has been a leader on all across this great 
country of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 



642 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2016 

And there are many reasons why oil should be in pipelines, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’m going to try and address a few of those here in 
my comments today. I’ll focus on, in no particular order, Mr. 
Speaker, the environmental impact, the economical impact, the 
logistical impact, a safety impact, and competition, Mr. 
Speaker. And I’ll also give some very important stats, Mr. 
Speaker, and if time permits, I hope that I can read a letter that 
was written in 2011, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan’s oil and gas producing industry contributes a 
significant share of Saskatchewan’s real gross domestic 
product, Mr. Speaker, accounting for an estimated 15 per cent 
of the total GDP [gross domestic product]. The oil and gas 
producing industry continues to be the largest contributor 
among primary industries in the province’s GDP, Mr. Speaker. 
Industry investment in new exploration and development in 
2015 was estimated at $3.6 billion. And as we heard today, Mr. 
Speaker, Crescent Point is a large part of that, and their new 
investment in this province is going to help generate economic 
growth in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
The upstream impact of oil and gas accounted for an estimated 
33,000 direct and indirect person-years of employment in 2015, 
Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan is the number two oil producer, and 
the number three gas producer in Canada. In 2015 
Saskatchewan produced 177.6 million barrels of oil, which 
accounted for just under 500,000 barrels of oil per day, and 
205.8 billion cubic feet, Mr. Speaker, of gas.  
 
The combined value of oil and gas production in 2015, Mr. 
Speaker, was in excess of $8 billion. Oil- and gas-related 
revenue, which also includes leases, Mr. Speaker, and sales of 
Crown land in 2014-15 fiscal year was $1.5 billion, Mr. 
Speaker. The current forecast is significantly less of course with 
the downturn in the economy. And it’s also a source of revenue 
for landowners and leases, Mr. Speaker. One thing that is 
important to recognize is there is approximately 300 oil and gas 
companies that operate wells in the province of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan strongly supports the 
development of Keystone XL pipeline, Energy East, and 
Northern Gateway pipeline projects, Mr. Speaker. These 
projects provide Western Canada crude oil producers important 
access to new and expanding markets in the United States and 
Asia, Mr. Speaker. These pipelines provide market pricing 
benefits for Saskatchewan crude oil, even when Saskatchewan 
crude oil is not being exported. 
 
Pipelines are the most efficient and safest method of 
transporting large volumes of crude oil long distances in North 
America. There are stringent regulatory processes and 
requirements for pipelines in both United States and Canada. 
The Government of Saskatchewan is confident that the 
proposed pipelines can be constructed and operated in a manner 
that protects the environment and public health and safety. 
 
And if I could give an example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
technology today to detect a spill is extremely fast, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I know even in the Weyburn and Estevan area they can 
detect a spill on an oil well within a matter of minutes and can 
shut that well down with the push of a button on a control 
panel, Mr. Speaker. 

I’d like to talk if I could, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about the impact 
of the economy on the province of Saskatchewan and also other 
issues about the environmental footprint, and also the issues we 
have about the serious disasters, putting oil into pipeline rather 
than on rail. And I think the safety records of pipelines 
surpasses that of any movement on rail. 
 
We must look at ways of moving oil products to tidewater — 
the safest, most environmentally sustainable way to ensure the 
energy sector can continue to grow and provide Canada, North 
America, and the world with the safest, most environmentally 
friendly way possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the oil production and the increase in the pipeline 
capacity is not only important to the economy of Saskatchewan, 
but it is also important to the economy of Canada. We look at 
this province and we’re proud to say that we make transfer 
payments to the federal government, as we are a have province 
as a result of resource development. Mr. Speaker, we are proud 
to say that and glad to do our share to keep Canada moving, and 
we have to make sure that we have a secure energy supply for 
all the citizens of this great country. 
 
Revenue from the energy sector allows us as a province to build 
new schools, Mr. Deputy Speaker, new hospitals, new senior 
housing projects, and it gives us as a government the 
opportunity to help those less fortunate, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
The pipelines enable us as a province to become more 
competitive on the global market and less reliable on one 
customer other than Canada, and that’s the United States. 
 
We have to assure the public that the movement of oil products 
is the safest and most environmentally friendly way to transport 
oil. Mr. Speaker, in my previous role as president of SARM 
[Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities], our 
organization was a leader in advocating for Keystone XL 
pipeline. And I hope at some time during my address I will be 
able to read a letter that SARM presented. We also as an 
organization, Mr. Speaker, we lobbied our sister organizations 
across this country on the importance of moving oil in pipe and 
not on rail. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege when I was the president of 
SARM to sit on what was called the railway safety review 
committee as a result of the disaster that happened at 
Lac-Mégantic in the movement of oil and the catastrophic effect 
it had on that community. And I remember sitting on that 
committee, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with then the mayor of 
Montreal, myself, Mayor Pauline Quinlan, and Mayor Atch 
from Saskatoon. And the issue they had was moving oil 
products in tankers and the impact and danger it had on 
communities moving across Canada. And their concern was 
that, what happens if we have other catastrophic events like we 
had in Lac-Mégantic? 
 
And our conclusion, what we were really pushing for there, was 
to make sure that we had pipeline capacity, and put it into the 
pipeline rather than putting it on rail. Because it meant a lot 
more . . . It was a lot safer for the communities across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As the mayor of Saskatoon said, he said if we can’t put it in a 
pipe, which he’d much rather have had, he didn’t want to have 



June 23, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 643 

trucks going through his community or rail cars and having a 
serious wreck in his city or any other community in this 
country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if I could at this time, I want to take the 
opportunity to read a letter that our organization wrote to the 
honourable Hillary Clinton. It was dated June 2nd, 2011, and 
when she was Secretary of State at that time, and the subject 
was the Keystone pipeline. And it’s: 
 

Dear Secretary Clinton, 
 
The Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, the 
board supports the development of the TransCanada 
Keystone XL pipeline and respectfully requests the 
presidential permit necessary for project’s realization be 
granted. 
 
SARM represents all 296 rural municipalities in 
Saskatchewan, and is mandated to act in the interests of 
rural citizens. The positive economic impacts that can be 
anticipated from the completion of the TransCanada 
pipeline will benefit our membership substantially. 
 
The expected economic benefits of the Keystone XL 
project are significant. The project will not only create 
numerous privately funded employment opportunities, but 
our local governments will have a stable source of income 
from economic activity associated with pipelines 
construction and from taxes collected from the pipeline 
companies. 
 
The Keystone XL project will have the added benefit of 
reducing the negative impacts of transporting oil on our 
highways, an important consideration for our membership. 
 
The environmental benefits of this pipeline are also 
important to consider, as this improved method of 
transporting crude oil resources will drastically reduce air 
pollution associated with land transportation. 
 
The Keystone XL pipeline also stands to ensure a 
long-term stabilized energy supply from Canada to the 
United States which will help address rising energy needs. 
Of added importance, the exceptional trade relations 
between Canada and the United States, combined with the 
development of this pipeline, has the potential to further 
strengthen energy security in North America. 
 
TransCanada has been a long-standing presence in 
Saskatchewan and it has been SARM’s experience that 
Keystone XL is a good corporate citizen and a credible and 
safe operator. Keystone XL has developed a positive 
working relationship with our association as well as the 
municipalities we represent. 
 
It is the position of SARM that Keystone XL pipeline 
would advance the economic competitiveness of our 
province and be a powerful economic stimulus for our 
membership. We therefore respectfully encourage the 
conclusion of the review process and fully support the 
cross-border permitting of Keystone XL pipeline. 
 

Signed by myself, then president of SARM, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think it’s important that we have to increase our capacity to 
move oil products out of this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If 
we rely totally on rail, we’d come into some serious issues 
about logistics, about within the rail companies. And that was 
proved just a few years ago when we grew an exceptional crop, 
potash exports were up, and we were trying to move oil 
products out of this province by rail, and we had some huge 
logistical problems. 
 
And just to give you a few numbers, Mr. Speaker, in 2014, and 
this is commodities that were . . . This was in tonnes, Mr. 
Speaker. Fuel oils and crude petroleum in 2010, to give you an 
example, was 146 467 tonnes. In 2014, it was 3 343 584 tonnes, 
Mr. Speaker. So it’s been drastically going up in the movement 
of products on rail. And potash is doing the same thing. In 2010 
they moved 14 712 000 tonnes of potash, and in 2014 they 
moved 16 857 000 tonnes. So we’re seeing some drastic 
increases in product moving on rail. 
 
Also in the grain sector, in the agriculture sector, Mr. Speaker 
— and this is important — in Saskatchewan in 2006-2007, we 
moved 12 366 000 metric ton of product. In 2014 and ’15, we 
moved just under 20 million metric ton of product, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s almost doubling our capacity in our rail line, and we 
don’t have the logistical capacity to move the product on that 
line. We have to find ways to put the oil in pipelines so that we 
have capacity if we want to grow other sectors in this province, 
be it potash and be it agriculture, to move our products as it’s 
just-in-time delivery that we have to move that to. 
 
I know I’m running short on time, Mr. Speaker. With the huge 
increase in production of agriculture products and the increased 
production of potash and with two new potash mines coming 
online very soon, it’s going to make the movement of 
commodities, including oil, it’s going to bring significant 
logistical challenges to our two national railways. We have seen 
it in the past, Mr. Speaker. And we have large crops. Potash 
sales are up. And the movement of oil, rail is up. It has had a 
huge impact on our provincial economy and all industry players 
that wanted their product moved in timely manner to our 
customers globally. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our farmers and ranchers, along with potash 
companies and oil companies, can’t grow their business or 
expand their customer base if we don’t solve this logistical 
problem we have here in Saskatchewan. That’s why, Mr. 
Speaker, it is important for us as a province to increase the 
pipeline capacity to take oil products off of rail and put it into 
pipelines, Mr. Speaker. And it also creates a competition within 
the industry to move their product, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly supports the construction of pipelines 
including Energy East, Keystone XL, and Northern 
Gateway, as they are private infrastructure projects that 
would create jobs, have positive effects on the 
Saskatchewan economy, be environmentally responsible, 
safely transport crude oil, and reduce Eastern Canada’s 
dependence on foreign oil. 

 



644 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2016 

I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[11:15] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Will the members take the motion 
moved by the member from Wood River as read? I recognize 
the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And as 
always, it is indeed my honour to rise in the Assembly to enter 
into the debate. And this is an important debate and certainly 
one that I want to thank the member for bringing forward. It 
stops short, and there are some additions I think that need to be 
made to the motion to improve it. But certainly, you know, the 
concept itself is one that this side of the House has always 
supported and will continue to support. 
 
I mean we know the importance of pipelines in Canada and the 
importance I think that the member talked about, of safety, 
getting as much on pipelines which are safer than railway or in 
transport. He talked about a lot of important issues that I think 
are ones that we certainly take into account. 
 
When I was working as a lawyer prior to my political career, I 
did a lot of work with TransCanada Pipelines through First 
Nation reserves, and I agree with the member opposite that 
that’s a very respectful company, a company that takes its work 
seriously and treated the First Nations with utmost respect and 
fairness. So certainly I think TransCanada Pipelines, as far as 
Energy East or Keystone, is a corporate citizen that takes its 
role in this industry very, very seriously, as does of course the 
National Energy Board and I think the whole process of, you 
know, how the National Energy Board goes through the 
regulations of these. These take years and years and years and I 
think there are things, as politicians, that we could probably do 
to perhaps facilitate that process rather than hinder it. So that’s 
a part of the comments I want to make. 
 
But one of the things I want to talk about in this short time that I 
have today, Mr. Speaker is, you know, we’ve heard this 
government worrying about existential crisises and gnashing 
their teeth and wringing their hands when really what they 
should be focused on is the work that needs to be done here at 
home. We have over 20,000 kilometres of pipelines here in 
Saskatchewan alone. These are the feeder pipelines that feed 
into the cross-border pipelines and I think it would be useful for 
us to talk a little bit about a report of the auditor from 2014 on 
regulating pipelines . . . or sorry, not in 2014. It was in 2012, 
and then she reviewed the actions of this government in 2014. 
 
So let’s take a little look maybe about how this government is 
dealing with the home fires. And I think that’s an important 
place to start when we’re talking about our roles regarding 
regulating pipelines and looking after the whole system that 
feeds into the important pipeline work that is going on. 
 
One of the things that the auditor recommended was that the 
Minister of the Economy “monitor pipeline operator 
compliance with integrity management and safety processes for 
existing pipelines.” And, “In early 2013, the ministry developed 
and implemented a set of written policies . . .” but the ministry 
has not, and this is in 2014, “the ministry has not established 
policies and procedures to guide staff on evaluating the 

completed self-assessments . . .” 
 
So although the self-assessments for the industry were done as 
the auditor recommended, they hadn’t gone the next step and 
ensured that the ministry staff had the tools they needed to read 
and understand these self-reporting techniques. So I think that’s 
something that this government needs to take a very careful 
look at and ensure it’s in place. We don’t have an update since 
2014, so I would be interested to hear from the members 
opposite if those updates . . . and perhaps from the ministry 
whether those updates have actually been done. 
 
Another area, and this is in terms of the regulation of pipelines. 
The auditor has recommended that the Minister of the Economy 
“. . . consider seeking responsibility in law to verify that 
pipeline operators clean up contaminated sites to an acceptable 
condition.” And so again this is not implemented as of 2014. I 
checked the bills. There was one bill that came in regarding oil 
and gas but it wasn’t a bill to take responsibility in law to verify 
that pipeline operators clean up contaminated sites. So what the 
auditor highlighted, and I think this is something I’m sure the 
Minister of the Economy is taking very seriously, but we’re 
looking for those changes. 
 
She has indicated that there is a risk if this ministry doesn’t do 
it, “. . . no other government agency will accept this 
responsibility. This could result in land and groundwater 
becoming contaminated due to insufficient clean-up of spills by 
pipeline operators.” So it’s a very real concern, a real concern 
that the auditor has raised, and perhaps the Minister of the 
Economy is working on that right now. We don’t know. But 
certainly if they take the regulatory responsibility that the 
auditor is recommending . . . I don’t know why they wouldn’t. I 
mean it would be prudent and responsible. But it’s interesting to 
see that that has not yet been implemented. 
 
One other area that the auditor commented on that has not been 
implemented was a recommendation that the Ministry of the 
Economy “ . . . consider seeking responsibility in law to license 
flowlines.” So this is a very strong recommendation and when 
we consider the amount of pipeline activity that is taking place 
in Saskatchewan — as I’ve said there’s over 20,000 kilometres 
— and this government has not taken the opportunity yet. And 
perhaps it’s coming up on the order paper in the fall; we don’t 
know. But this is 2012, so we’re four years out now from the 
recommendation, still nothing yet from the Minister of the 
Economy. I know he’s a busy guy, and I know that he’s, you 
know, got lots on his plate, but this is certainly something I 
think that the ministry should be looking at because if they 
aren’t responsible in law to license flow lines, who is? 
 
And the auditor indicated, “At September 30th, 2014, the 
Ministry had not made progress in this area. The ministry 
expects to consider the need to license flowlines during the 
2015-16 fiscal year.” That was an indication that the minister 
had given, but that’s a year ago. We’re now in ’16-17, and I 
don’t know what the minister’s report is to the auditor. But 
certainly I think people are interested in knowing that our home 
fires are looked after here, Mr. Speaker, that our pipeline 
system is well tended to, and currently we don’t have the 
regulatory regime that has been recommended by our auditor. I 
don’t know why the minister hasn’t done that in the last four 
years, and I would certainly be very interested in finding out 



June 23, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 645 

what his plans are in terms of coming into compliance with the 
recommendations that the auditor has made. 
 
Now as I said at the outset, the member opposite made some 
very good points about the importance of security and safety for 
pipelines and certainly that there’s some hard work being done 
by companies like TCPL [TransCanada Pipelines Ltd.]. And as 
I said that’s a company that I’ve had experience with and 
certainly feel that they take it very seriously, and they are doing 
their part, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But there’s some interesting things that are left out of the 
motion, and we’re kind of wondering why. So one of the things 
we would want to change — and I will be reading an 
amendment as I finalize my comments — but is that they forgot 
there’s not just Energy East, Keystone, and Northern Gateway 
that are going through the regulatory process right now, Mr. 
Speaker. But also the Kinder Morgan Trans Mountain 
expansion is another important pipeline that should be included 
in the list, and it’s not clear to us why it wasn’t included. But 
certainly all of them are going to create jobs and have positive 
effects on our economy. And that’s something we’ve been very 
consistent about, Mr. Speaker, as we go along. 
 
And again the member made a good point that they would 
transport crude oil more safely than possible with trucks and 
trains. I know there’s some conflicting information on the 
transportation crisis with grain from 2014 because certain 
industry members have said that it wasn’t oil that caused the 
congestion in the railway, the grain transportation matter. So 
I’m not sure if that’s entirely clear, but I think, you know, we 
know that there was a crisis. And as the member correctly 
pointed out, there’s been a considerable increase in rail traffic 
over the past few years because of significant increases in 
farmers’ production of grains and also of course potash. And as 
we’ve seen the decline of oil production in the last couple of 
years, we certainly haven’t heard more issues about congestion 
on the railways. 
 
So I think there’s a lot of differing opinions on that, but 
certainly the Canadian Transportation Agency review is looking 
at all of those matters, and I know our Minister of Agriculture is 
actively involved in ensuring he’s representing the best interests 
of our producers here in Saskatchewan. 
 
One problem I think we should address too also is the Northern 
Gateway pipeline, though. We have to be careful about 
supporting that wholeheartedly. There are a number of issues 
with that particular pipeline that haven’t yet been addressed, 
and I think that’s one that we need to ensure that the rights of 
First Nations are being looked after. And also there’s federal 
government involvement of course in all of this, and they have 
implemented a ban on oil tanker traffic off the northwest coast 
of British Columbia. 
 
So without that, I’m not sure why we would be including 
Northern Gateway in this particular motion today. There are the 
other projects that are being talked about. Certainly Energy East 
and Keystone are important projects that need to be done 
correctly, sustainably, and properly. 
 
So I’m going to try and read my motion in the time that 
remains, but we want to amend it to replace it with the 

following: 
 

That Energy East, Kinder Morgan, and Keystone XL 
pipeline projects . . . 

 
That would be changed to add that. So I’m out of time now, Mr. 
Speaker, but I’d like to suggest that we amend the motion to 
that extent. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I did not hear the member move an 
amendment, so I think we need to proceed with the debate. I 
recognize the member from Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for allowing 
me to participate in this extremely valuable debate. And I’m 
going to spend a bit of time identifying really the value of the 
oil resource to this province and to this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s really no secret that the oil and gas sector is a 
valuable part of our provincial economy. Currently it represents 
over 15 per cent of this province’s real gross domestic product. 
Even at the reduced values that we were facing in 2015, it was 
still valued at $8.3 billion. In 2014 it was worth 15.9 billion, 
and that’s a 48 per cent drop in value within a year. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s really no wonder that, in typical 
Saskatchewan fashion, the second thing talked about across 
every coffee shop every morning after the weather is discussing 
what was crude oil trading for this morning. This morning at 8 
a.m., nearby crude oil in the New York Mercantile was trading 
at $49.81 per barrel. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, oil in Saskatchewan is an extremely vast 
resource. Estimated oil reserves currently in the ground in this 
province are 56 billion barrels of initial oil in place, with 
another 1.2 billion barrels remaining in established oil reserves. 
Gas has 12.4 trillion cubic feet of gas in place, with an 
additional 1.8 trillion cubic feet remaining in established gas 
reserves. Rough averaging in the last couple of years, 
Saskatchewan has extracted 500,000 barrels per year. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, my math is bad, so I’ll just say that that is 
a lot of years of oil that we have sitting under the Saskatchewan 
landscape right now. At current values, that inventory is worth 
trillions — that’s with a “t” — trillions of dollars. With the 
royalty revenue on those values, we could retire sufficient debt, 
and we could replenish infrastructure throughout the province 
and continue to improve the lives of our citizens. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, oil is not a commodity that we need to 
leave in the ground for future generations. Eventually at some 
point in time, our children or our grandchildren’s lifetime, oil 
will not be a valuable resource. They will have invented or 
produced some ingenious method of converting waste or 
by-products to power some sort of unique engine that won’t 
require hydrocarbons. But that is not today. That’s not 
tomorrow, and it probably won’t be for another 50 to 100 years. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in Saskatchewan in 2015, an estimated 
33,000 direct and indirect person years of employment was 
attributed to the oil and gas industry. Direct oil and gas revenue 
attributed to the Government of Saskatchewan for 2015-16 
fiscal year was $600 million, unfortunately down 60 per cent 



646 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2016 

from the 1.5 billion received in 2014-15. This included Crown 
land sales. This is not an industry that can be replaced 
immediately by pixie dust and moonbeams, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It needs to be developed and marketed and production 
increased to take advantage of the market opportunities that we 
have now. Leaving it in the ground is not an option. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in order to continue and increase 
production, we need better market access. Better market access 
means a better distribution system. This means more pipeline 
capacity and increased access to markets. Canada, according to 
CNNMoney, is the fifth-largest oil producer, just behind China. 
Only the US [United States], Saudi Arabia, and Russia are 
ahead. According to Business Insider, Canada has the 
third-largest proven crude oil reserves in the world, behind 
Saudi Arabia and Venezuela. Also found in the same report is a 
statement that Canada is the US’s largest foreign supplier of oil. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan is positioned as a 
significant part of Canada’s supply, ranked as the no. 2 oil 
producer at 177.6 million barrels per year, or 486,600 barrels 
per day on average in 2015. With those notable facts of our 
position in the world’s supply and potential for oil, we are also 
the country with the greatest distance to an export terminal of 
all the top 10 suppliers in the world. And this continues to put 
us at a competitive disadvantage and reduces the value of the 
commodity. For every dollar increase in the value of West 
Texas Intermediate, it represents $19.6 million in annual 
revenue to this province, a one-cent change in exchange rates 
related to $11.5 million in annual revenue. Improving oil 
exports and increasing value can provide a stabilizing effect on 
the Canadian economy, thereby stabilizing the value of the 
dollar. 
 
[11:30] 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the other odd fact about Canadian oil 
production is that although we are one of the world’s largest 
producers and exporters, we also import 634,000 barrels of 
crude oil every single day in this country. Leading exporters to 
Canada include Saudi Arabia, Iraq, Norway, Algeria, and 
Angola, which sell a combined $8 billion worth of crude into 
Canada every year. Eight billion dollars would cover the 
average annual salary of 15,000 Canadian teachers for nine 
consecutive years. It represents the entire economic wealth 
created in a year by a country like Niger or Haiti. 
 
In 2013 according to Government of Canada information 
supplied by the National Energy Board, Canada imported $26.2 
billion worth of crude oil. We exported 81.8 billion. What 
would this country do with an extra 26 billion? Twenty-six 
billion would finance about half of Ontario’s entire health care 
budget. It would fund Quebec’s $20.6 billion education and 
culture budget. It would pay for New Brunswick’s health care 
budget for 10 years. Or it would retire most of Saskatchewan’s 
debt and help build some more roads, schools, hospitals, and 
care homes. All that is holding us back from capturing even a 
portion of those import dollars, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a couple 
of pipelines. 
 
I’m only going to have time to discuss the merits of one 
pipeline, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that’s the Energy East 
pipeline. It would move 1.1 million barrels per day of Western 

Canadian and North Dakota crude from Western Canada and 
North Dakota to Saint John, New Brunswick. This pipeline will 
need to be constructed across the Prairies, through eastern 
Ontario and Quebec, and into New Brunswick. The 
construction phase alone would be an economic driver for 
Canada with an estimated 14,000 full-time equivalent, direct 
and indirect jobs annually. During the first 20 years of 
operation, it’s expected to sustain over 3,300 full-time, direct, 
and indirect jobs across this country. 
 
What does it mean to Saskatchewan? Saskatchewan would 
receive close to 1,000 jobs during the nine-year construction 
and development phase, and would retain over 200 full-time 
jobs for the operation phase. Tax revenues alone would provide 
over $500 million to Saskatchewan during the construction and 
operations phase. And it’s estimated that Energy East could 
provide over $4 billion to the GDP growth for our province 
during the nine-year construction phase and the 20-year 
operation phase. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is one pipeline moving Saskatchewan 
produced oil, paying Saskatchewan royalties, employing 
Saskatchewan young people who will be paying Saskatchewan 
taxes. Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is a lot of revenue that this 
province would have a difficult time finding in alternative 
sources right now. This is a revenue, an employment that we are 
not going to realize moving away from hydrocarbons and 
attempting to leap into alternative energy. This may come over 
time, but now is not the time. Now is the time to develop our 
resources while we have them. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I urge the opposition to quit dithering. 
Pick a position, and let’s move the debate along to actually 
support this province and its resources. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
hon. Leader of the Opposition has been on record, November 
26, 2015, in this Assembly supporting and advocating this 
pipeline, the Energy East project: “The Energy East project . . . 
is an important one for Canada and certainly important to our 
province. We’ve long been a supporter and an advocate for the 
Energy East pipeline . . .” 
 
John Nilson was on record March 12 supporting this pipeline, 
March 12, 2014: “We’re also already and supporting of an 
east-west pipeline. We know that there are some methods of 
transporting our products from the west to the east which will 
make sense for the Canadian economy.” And yet their party is 
pursuing a concept that shows utter contempt for this industry 
and its development. Their counterparts in Ottawa obviously 
don’t get it. Nathan Cullen, NDP MP [Member of Parliament] 
for Skeena-Bulkley Valley is quoted on a YouTube video 
refuting pipelines: “It serves some pretty narrow interests, right. 
If you’re into shipping raw bitumen out of Canada, then this is a 
project for you. If you’re anybody else, it doesn’t serve you at 
all.” 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what part of paying $26 billion to foreign 
countries for something that we have here in Canada do they 
understand, do they not understand? Where would they 
anticipate that we would acquire that revenue virtually 
overnight? Where would new sources of personal and business 
tax, property tax, sales tax, consumer goods — purchased by, 
acquired by new revenue sources — come from? Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, a note found in the June 2016 issue of Canadian 



June 23, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 647 

Association of Petroleum Producers indicated that Canada’s 
future success in the global oil market relies on the existence of 
transportation infrastructure to provide market access for 
growing supplies. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s time to stand up for this province. It’s 
time to stand up for one of its most important and valuable 
resources. It’s time to stand up for the many men and women 
who are proud of the work they do in this valuable industry. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I ask both sides to show unanimous support 
for the motion presented by the member from Wood River. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to enter into this debate, and it’s always interesting to 
hear the thoughts from the other side. And you know, this is 
something that we really appreciate the opportunity. It seems 
that the member that just spoke thought it’s just all about the 
dollars. It’s all about the dollars, when he says, what part don’t 
you understand. We understand that, but we understand it’s a 
little more complex. But we, you know, when we talk about 
dithering, we look at that side. Eight years, eight years and not 
one kilometre of pipeline has been built, not one kilometre. 
Talk about dithering; talk about dithering. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to enter into the record an amendment 
that I would like to present at this time: 
 

That all the words in the motion after ‘construction’ be 
struck out and replaced with the following: 

 
of the Energy East, Kinder Morgan Trans Mountain 
expansion, and Keystone XL pipeline projects, as they will 
create jobs, have positive effects on the Saskatchewan 
economy, transport crude oil more safely than possible 
with trucks and trains, and reduce Eastern Canada’s 
dependence on foreign oil, and, 
 
That this Assembly recognizes that the Northern Gateway 
pipeline proposal has been significantly impeded by the 
federal government’s political decision to implement a ban 
on oil tanker traffic off of the northwest coast of British 
Columbia; and 
 
That this Assembly supports the collaborative approach to 
getting pipelines approved that involves working with 
affected communities and other provincial governments; 
and 
 
That this Assembly condemns the ineffective 
intergovernmental affairs and public relations strategy 
taken by the Premier that has seen exactly zero kilometres 
of new pipeline built to tidewater during his time as 
Premier. 

 
And I so move that, and I would submit that accordingly. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, am I all done? . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
No, I’ll wait for the ruling. You guys seem to be all . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. The member moved a 

motion. We’ll deal with the motion. The member from 
Saskatoon Centre has moved the following motion: 
 

That all words in the motion after “construction” be struck 
and replaced with the following: 
 
of Energy East, Kinder Morgan Trans Mountain 
expansion, and Keystone XL pipeline projects, as they will 
create jobs, have positive effects on the Saskatchewan 
economy, transports crude more safely than possible with 
trucks and trains, and reduce eastern Canada’s dependence 
on foreign oil; and 
 
That this Assembly recognizes the Northern Gateway 
pipeline proposal has been significantly impeded by the 
federal government’s political decision to implement a ban 
on oil tanker traffic off the northwest coast of British 
Columbia; and 
 
That this Assembly supports a collaborative approach to 
getting pipelines approved that involves working with 
affected communities and other provincial governments; 
and 
 
That this Assembly condemns the ineffective 
intergovernmental affairs and public relations strategy 
taken by the Premier that has seen exactly zero kilometres 
of new pipeline built to tidewater during his time as 
Premier. 

 
This is a fairly lengthy amendment, but I do believe, even 
though it is perhaps pushing the limits, I believe that it’s 
acceptable. We will proceed with concurrent debate on both the 
motion and the amendment. And I believe the member has 
some . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . His time is . . . Okay, I’ll 
recognize the member from Regina Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And it’s an honour to join in our motion, the 75-minute debate 
motion talking about pipelines, but also talk about the 
amendment put forward by the member from Saskatoon which 
. . . I have to correct the record again for the opposition because 
the motion is completely factually incorrect. Because since 
2008 the government’s made over 1600 metres of pipeline, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker — 1600 kilometres of pipeline, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. So I’m not sure why the members opposite keep 
harping on, saying that there has been zero pipelines built in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Alberta Clipper pipeline started in 2008 when, I believe, 
we were in government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And since 2008 
there’s been 1607 kilometres built with pumping stations all 
across Saskatchewan. So these members opposite have not done 
any research. You see it in question period every day, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. They come in here with misinformation, with 
factually incorrect information. I’m trying to be very careful, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. Because it’s really interesting when you 
sit back and listen to QP [question period] all the time, and 
minister after minister on this side get up and the first part of 
their answer always has to be, let me correct the facts from the 
other side, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Time and time again they come in. They came in yesterday, and 



648 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2016 

the member from Saskatoon Riversdale had incorrect 
information regarding the travel of our Minister of Health. They 
come in and they say . . . It’s a concurrent theme, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that they always bring forward misinformation. And 
several times we’ve had to stand up and correct this 
information, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I’m looking forward to talking about pipelines for a fairly 
long time because the member opposite doesn’t understand the 
process of the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But this isn’t just 
about pipelines. This is about supporting our economy. This is 
about a broader conversation about who can keep Saskatchewan 
strong, who can keep our economy growing, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And I’m very passionate about this topic in particular because I 
have family members, I have friends that have been out of work 
for a fairly long time. And they don’t think we don’t understand 
that this has a human effect on everyone. Well, Mr. Speaker, I 
take great offence to that because I have people that are very 
close to me that work in the oil field. 
 
And the member from Athabasca can yap because that’s the 
best thing he does from his seat. Whenever he gets up and asks 
a question, there’s actually a lot of misinformation in most of 
his questions. As well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he’s been here for 
25 years, and I think he’s just really upset that he’s going to be 
in opposition for another 25, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s a few things that we need to get on 
the record, and one is that this side of the House, we’ll support 
our economy as long as we have the honour of serving. And one 
thing that I think is a great disservice is when there is 
delegations that come and sit in the Speaker’s gallery, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, a delegation from America that came down to 
look at the carbon capture and sequestration facility, one of the 
most innovative facilities for capturing carbon on the planet, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And the Leader for the Opposition, the 
member from Rosemont, gets up and rails against this project 
for 10 minutes while there’s a delegation that’s going to go 
down and look at it. 
 
He’s doing a disservice not only to the leaders, to his caucus, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, but he’s being disrespectful to the people 
of our province who worked hard, who worked hard to make 
sure that there’s an innovative solution to greenhouse gas 
emission, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
[11:45] 
 
And I think that’s something the member from Rosemont 
should come to understand is that when he’s the Leader of the 
Opposition, he also has to stick up for the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan, not belittle them when they’re trying 
to make improvements to our province and improvements to 
our economy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and try to make 
improvements to . . . trying to create a solution to a problem 
that’s worldwide. As I’ve said in this house many times, there’s 
going to be more and more coal-fired electrical plants in China 
year after year after year, and Saskatchewan people, 
Saskatchewan companies are trying to bring a solution to that. 
 
And we saw it again today, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We had 

members from the executive from Crescent Point sitting in the 
gallery. And what does the member from Regina Rosemont do? 
He starts off question period slagging our economy, slagging 
our oil sector, Mr. Deputy Speaker, saying that we’re in a 
downturn, saying that Saskatchewan . . . basically telling the 
people from Crescent Point that our province isn’t the place to 
invest right now. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the biggest risk to the Saskatchewan 
economy is those 10 members over there. Time and time again 
he gets up and says how bad the economy is in Saskatchewan. 
We know that we’re going through a tough time, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but we also know the people of Saskatchewan will 
work hard, will make sure that they weather this tough time and 
will come out of it stronger when the economic times go back 
into an upturn. 
 
Sitting in this spot, listening to the members opposite, I 
understand that they come from a background of people that 
have socialist beliefs, and I understand that they believe that 
government can solve all problems. But there’s only 10 people 
in the province that want Saskatchewan people to fail, and those 
10 people are sitting over there. All they want to do is try and 
make sure that people look to government for help. They want 
to make sure that people . . . Actually, I think they enjoy it 
when numbers come out, and people are losing jobs. I think the 
member from Elphinstone enjoys that, Mr. Speaker. I think he 
enjoys it because that means . . . He thinks, hey if there’s more 
people that don’t have jobs, maybe they’ll depend on the 
government more, and they’ll think that socialism’s the way to 
go. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s does a great disservice 
when you have 10 members opposite basically rooting for the 
Saskatchewan economy to fail. And I’ve sat in here for six 
years and listened to their speeches, and that’s what it’s about. 
It’s all about failure. Things aren’t going right, failing. The 
economy’s failing. The CCS [carbon capture and storage] 
plant’s going to fail, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I think that is 
one of the biggest reasons why they have 10 members over 
there, and we have been a little bit more successful in the April 
4th election because we put forward solutions. 
 
We actually look at our province and the people of 
Saskatchewan, and say, you know what, we are in an economic 
downturn, but things are going to turn around because we 
believe in the people of Saskatchewan — the hard work, the 
innovation that they bring forward. The people down at 
Estevan, we think CCS is a solution to keep people working in 
Estevan for the next 50 years, 100 years, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because they’ll be mining that coal. They’ll be working those 
power stations, and they’ll be doing a very good job of it, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk about Regina for a few 
minutes to talk about the pipelines in Regina and the effect 
they’d have if these pipelines are approved, which our Premier 
does a fantastic of going across our nation saying the economic 
benefits of approving pipeline projects. 
 
Well I want to talk about Evraz, who is one of the largest 
private employers in Regina, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And the 
members opposite get up and talk about the hard-working 



June 23, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 649 

people, and they speak for the hard-working people of 
Saskatchewan, which they don’t because they voted against the 
new tax incentive in our budget. Last budget all the members —
the new ones because they weren’t here — but all the members 
on that side voted against a new tax incentive that created the 
expansion opportunity at Evraz. They voted against jobs in 
Regina, against jobs across Saskatchewan, based on a tired, old 
ideology, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And they should be ashamed of 
themselves for voting against jobs in Regina, especially the 
member from Elphinstone, the member from Rosemont, and the 
member from Lakeview, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They should be 
ashamed that they voted against good mortgage-paying jobs in 
Regina, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it’s a wonder some of them 
were back here after they voted against that after April 4th. 
 
There’s a couple of people that I know very well that work out 
at Evraz. They do a fantastic job, and they always talk about 
how they need support. They need support from both sides of 
this House, and they feel they’re not getting it from the 
opposition members, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
They go out there and they talk about how they support union 
members, and then when it’s time to actually stand up, and 
stand up and show support, they voted against a budget measure 
in our last budget that created jobs in Regina. And I think for 
that, they should be ashamed of themselves, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I can’t believe they voted against a measure that 
brought more jobs to our province. 
 
I listened to the member from Nutana — I know I’m getting, 
I’m running short on time — the member from Nutana gave a 
very elegant speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker. She talked about 
pipelines and how she was involved with them. The one thing I 
did not hear her mention, not once, was her support in principle 
of the Leap Manifesto. 
 
This is a perfect opportunity for her to get to her feet, rise in this 
House and say, you know what? I would never support a 
document that created economic devastation across 
Saskatchewan. Did not hear that. It was a perfect opportunity, 
talk about pipelines, talk about the oil sector. She could have 
got on her feet and said, I do not support the Leap Manifesto. 
That is not true. And she will not say it because we all know she 
does support the Leap Manifesto in principle, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And then the member from Regina Rosemont, I want to talk 
about him. He says he supports Evraz. He says he supports 
pipelines. Then he appoints Nicole White as the head of their 
renewal committee, someone who absolutely does not want this 
economy to grow, does not support the energy sector in our 
province. She signed on to the Leap Manifesto, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and the member from Regina Rosemont appoints her 
as a renewal committee, where she supports something that will 
absolutely devastate our economy, devastate agriculture, and 
devastate pipelines across our province. 
 
Thank you, and I support the motion, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A 

pleasure to join the debate today. And certainly, just to make 
clear at the start of my remarks, I will be supporting the 
amendment. And I guess, the thing about the main motion is 
that it doesn’t quite get the job done, which is sort of like the 
approach of these members when it comes to actually getting 
the job done. 
 
We hear a lot of sound and fury from members opposite in this 
place and across the province and across the country, Mr. 
Speaker. But when it comes to actually getting the job done, to 
advancing projects, there’s been precious little progress in that 
regard, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I guess the thing that’s interesting about this, Mr. Speaker, 
is that the member that preceded me in this debate comes out of 
northwest Regina. And he had a lot of things to say about 
Evraz, about Evraz steel, and the old IPSCO approach to 
interprovincial pipeline. And the thing that was interesting 
about that, Mr. Speaker, the interprovincial pipe and steel, 
certainly that’s an entity that goes back a great number of years 
in the history of this province. But of course the anti-socialist, 
red-baiting tirades that we hear from members opposite, of 
course there’s never any recognition for the important role that 
was played in that operation getting up and running by the then 
CCF [Co-operative Commonwealth Federation] government in 
the 1950s and by certainly then valuable public servant and then 
later Premier of this province, Allan Blakeney, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And when it comes to Evraz . . . And you know, where I grew 
up, and the folks that are steelworkers that have worked hard 
for that corporation and different iterations it’s taken on, in 
terms of the folks that were often as not members of United 
Steelworkers of America 5890, these are friends of mine, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re my neighbours. And they’re certainly parents 
of kids that I grew up with. And they did a hard day’s work, and 
they also did it as proud union members. 
 
So we’d seen a variation on this trick in the federal election 
where the member from Regina Qu’Appelle and now putative 
leadership candidate in the federal Conservative contest, Mr. 
Speaker, come out and talk about, you know, making the 
connection between Evraz and pipelines. And what 
steelworkers had to say at that time, Mr. Speaker, was, you 
know, it’s all fine and good to support Evraz, but where was the 
action from the federal Conservative government when it came 
to the dumping of cheap Chinese steel and the way that that 
competed against the good work that’s done by men and 
women at Evraz every day, and again, members of Steelworkers 
5890? 
 
So that now, of course, we have this sort of tirade come to the 
legislature and, you know, the big lecture on who’s really 
supporting Evraz. It would always be nice if this was a 
consistent fight that they took through the different phases of 
these debates, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And certainly the action that should have been taken by the 
federal government when it came to supporting a local producer 
and in terms of working with the people of Saskatchewan to 
take that fight internationally to make sure that there was fair 
treatment, that’s something you don’t hear a whole heck of a lot 
from the members opposite about. And you certainly didn’t 



650 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2016 

hear about it when there was the grandstanding going on in the 
federal election. Again only one side of the story from members 
opposite. 
 
So I guess it’s, you know, they can get into the red-baiting and 
the tirading all they like, Mr. Speaker, but when it comes to the 
historical record and the actual fact in terms of who stood 
beside the steelworkers of Evraz, it’s pretty clear in that regard, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
When it comes to the debate itself in terms of the motion, we’ve 
had experience in this province where even with other pipeline 
projects that have gone . . . And again, the distinction being 
about tidewater, Mr. Speaker. In terms of pipeline projects that 
have come across Saskatchewan territory, we’ve seen what 
happens when this government screws it up with the 
relationships that need to be maintained when it comes to our 
First Nations, when it comes to the Saskatchewan First Nations 
in this province, Mr. Speaker. And I can remember a time not 
too far in the past but certainly under the watch of these men 
and women opposite where it led to First Nations 
demonstrating, blockading, and a great deal of uncertainty 
being injected into the equation because the duty to consult and 
the work that should have been done with First Nations had not 
been done. 
 
And when you take that sort of lesson in terms of the way that 
members present their arguments about how they can certainly 
do no wrong, Mr. Speaker, and you look at the actual record, 
there’s one example in terms of how, when it came to in our 
own backyard, they couldn’t get the job done, and it led to a 
great deal of conflict that was fortunately resolved. But you 
know, if they’d got the job done right in the first place it 
wouldn’t have come to that. 
 
And I think about that example, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to 
the way that people like the Provincial Auditor have weighed in 
on the way that this government fails to properly regulate and 
maintain our pipeline infrastructure as it exists in this province. 
And again, Mr. Speaker, that’s an infrastructure that didn’t 
come from anywhere. It came under successive governments 
because there is support on this side of the House for projects 
that are economically sensible, that are environmentally 
sustainable, and can work with the affected communities going 
forward, that you know, why wouldn’t we get that job done? 
 
But when it comes to the way that this government has used the 
bully pulpit to, you know, again generate a lot of speeches like 
the one we’ve seen here today, it’s been to very little effect, Mr. 
Speaker. And I guess I don’t know what it is. Is it you go to 
other people’s backyards and tell them that they should forgo 
their own process, that they should ignore affected 
communities, Mr. Speaker, and that they should just drive 
ahead and not work to, you know, build that consensus, not to 
make the reasoned arguments despite the hundreds of millions 
of hours, pardon me, the hundreds of millions of dollars that 
have been sunk into this in various ways in terms of the projects 
themselves? 
 
But certainly the public relations efforts of this government 
when it comes internationally, we saw how that worked with 
Keystone. And we saw the . . . Again it’s almost like the kiss of 
death for a project that you see that Premier coming down the 

mountain to make the case for it because that’s been the net 
effect of the efforts of the way that this government does their 
business, the way that the government promotes projects. So I 
don’t know if it’s a . . . You always want to look at what the 
results are in terms of the way that that the government says 
something or, you know, makes a case for something. What are 
the net results? What are the results? 
 
And we’ve had years now of this government coming down the 
mountain. We’ve had years of that Premier coming down the 
mountain where this project or that project is proclaimed as a 
priority, and it’s rammed ahead with it in terms of the rhetoric, 
and again we don’t have to look very far to find an example of 
that approach, you know, again here today in the Assembly. 
And what has been the result of that? Has the government 
learned some lessons in terms of the kind of diplomacy that 
you’d think would need to be undertaken in terms of the kind 
of, you know, being less of a . . . more pulpit, less bully, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? 
 
Do you think there are any of those lessons that are being taken 
from this where, you know, to advance projects you’ve got to 
demonstrate the economic case certainly? And there’s that in 
spades for different of these projects. You need to demonstrate 
the environmental sustainability case for these projects and 
again there is work in our own backyard where people around 
the country and around the world could look to the way this 
government has been the steward on this file and fallen 
abundantly short. And again you don’t have to ask me about 
that, Mr. Speaker, you can ask the Provincial Auditor. 
 
[12:00] 
 
So in terms of going out and preaching something that we’re 
not practising in our own backyard, Mr. Speaker, around the 
country and throughout North America, there’s a credibility gap 
that exists between the way it’s been preached and the way it’s 
been practised. So they’ve got to clean up our own backyard 
first, Mr. Speaker, before you can go and lecture the world 
about it. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, this is a government that back in 2007 
took the pledge on the green technology fund, and then 
promptly after the election took that $300 million and went 
somewhere else with it, as yet another example of the way 
there’s a gap between what this government preaches and what 
they practise. And guess what, Mr. Speaker? The world’s 
paying attention. They’re not just sort of asleep at the switch. 
 
So in that case, Mr. Speaker, again I think the motion doesn’t 
do the job but the amendment certainly does. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Cannington. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to rise today to talk on pipelines, as pipelines are a 
very important part of the economy in my constituency and in 
fact I worked within that industry for over 14 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Cannington constituency we have Alliance 
Pipeline running through from northern Alberta down to 
Chicago. We have Enbridge gathering the oil in southeast 



June 23, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 651 

Saskatchewan with Alida as the main terminal point which then 
pumps the oil from southeast Saskatchewan to the Enbridge 
main lines at Cromer, Manitoba. Just outside of my 
constituency is also the five main Enbridge pipelines moving oil 
east to Ontario and TransCanada’s pipeline. 
 
So pipelines are a very large part of the economy in my 
constituency. They pay a lot of taxes, property taxes, to the 
local municipalities, Mr. Speaker, to the education system, to 
support people not just in my constituency but across the 
province of Saskatchewan. There are no pumpjacks on main 
street in Regina, up and down Albert, or in Saskatoon, but the 
money coming from the oil patch provides support for all of us. 
 
I’m surprised with the Opposition House Leader’s comments 
though, not wanting outside products coming in to 
Saskatchewan. He doesn’t want steel from someplace else. He 
wants to close the borders coming in to Saskatchewan while our 
economy is based on exports — 60 to 70 per cent of all the 
things we produce in Saskatchewan are exported. If everybody 
in the world took his attitude, we’d be eating a lot of bread here 
and that would be about it, Mr. Speaker, because we couldn’t 
sell it out of the province. So that’s a very myopic view of the 
world to say nobody can come in here with any product but we 
still want to sell it around the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, I find it very interesting that people in other parts of 
Canada do not support pipelines but they still want to run their 
automobiles all over the place while they drive down to get 
their latte. They still want the money for equalization that is 
generated by the oil and gas production. My question to them 
will be, if you don’t have pipelines, where’s your money for 
equalization going to come from? And what are you going to 
cut in your provinces? Nobody wants to answer that, Mr. 
Speaker. So we need pipelines across Canada. We need 
pipelines to export our products. They are done in a safe 
manner. It’s just the scare factors by those from outside, and the 
opposition, that are creating this roadblock, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Time for debate has expired. 
Questions. I recognize the member from Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
have a question here. And you know, it is about being credible. 
Now the folks opposite, the folks opposite think they have that 
locked down, and they don’t have to do anything. They just 
have to grandstand and talk. And I appreciate the comments 
from the member from Walsh Acres. He has a special gift for 
delivering hard-hitting speeches. 
 
But here we have the reports from the auditor who has several 
concerns about pipelines here in our own province. I want to 
know from the member from Walsh Acres what we have to do 
to get these concerns from the auditor rectified before we start 
talking about pipelines around the world. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And I find it a little bit more than ironic that that member got up 
and talked about credibility when he’s been in this House for 10 

years, 15 years, and he doesn’t know how to put forward an 
amendment. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe that our record on pipelines and 
our record on environmental standards is second to none. And I 
believe that this government will continue to move forward in a 
sustainable way, an economic way, and in an environmental 
way to make sure that pipelines get built and we can get our oil 
to tidewater so the people of Saskatchewan get the return they 
deserve on their resource. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we’re very 
curious about in the way that the motion was presented as 
written is, why wasn’t, why isn’t this government supportive of 
the Kinder Morgan expansion? Why wasn’t that included in the 
government’s motion? And our question I guess is, are they 
actually choosing politics over pipelines? That’s what we want 
to ask, and I would like to ask the member from Walsh Acres to 
address that concern. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And once again I will enjoy to happily answer the question 
coming from the member from Nutana who, if she wants to talk 
about playing politics with pipelines, this is a member who is 
on record as supporting the Leap Manifesto that will destroy 
our oil energy sector, will destroy our agriculture sector. She’s 
the Ag critic. She stands in her place and says we haven’t built 
one kilometre of pipeline, and she’s dead wrong, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. We’ve built over 1607 kilometres of pipeline, so 
before she stands and asks a question, she should get her facts 
straight, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Lloydminster. 
 
Ms. Young: — Mr. Speaker, when Nathan Cullen, the NDP 
MP for Skeena-Bulkley Valley, spoke about Northern Gateway 
pipeline he said, “these projects are dinosaurs and they should 
do what dinosaurs do, which is die.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre, 
will you stand up to your federal counterparts and tell them how 
important pipelines are for the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I’ll tell you what I will stand up for. I’ll stand up for the people 
of Regina Elphinstone-Centre that have, you know, blessed me 
with the opportunity to represent their interests here in 
Saskatchewan in the legislature. 
 
And I will stand up for Saskatchewan in terms of this legislature 
and in terms of the way that the members opposite . . . You 
know, if they want to attend to the federal landscape in terms of 
the actions or inactions of different of their federal cousins, Mr. 
Speaker, and the way . . . I’m sure they’ve all got their 



652 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2016 

memberships ready to go in the federal Conservative leadership. 
 
In terms of the way that the inaction of the federal government 
impacted the folks at Evraz steel and the dumping of cheap 
Chinese steel on the Canadian market, the way that that 
impacted the interests of Saskatchewan and Regina, and north 
Regina in particular, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to see some action 
from that, on that score. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
We have a Premier and a government that’s preoccupied with 
attacking the NDP, picking fights with other premiers, 
dismissing climate change. The twitter noise, us versus them, 
hasn’t worked; it won’t work. The Premier admits himself that 
it’s not working when it comes to getting new pipelines built. 
And he says, “frankly we haven’t been winning very many 
battles.” 
 
To the member from Walsh Acres, do you agree, does he agree 
with the Premier’s assessment? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And once again, I’m happy to rise and correct the record from 
what the members of the opposition are saying. I am very proud 
to be on the side of the government that works with their 
partners across Canada. We saw a perfect example of our 
Finance minister three days ago, working hard with other 
Finance ministers across the country to make sure that we have 
a good deal on CPP [Canada Pension Plan] for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Our Premier stands up for the people of Saskatchewan across 
Canada, works hard to make sure that Saskatchewan people get 
the best deal, get the best deal on anything that they possibly 
can, Mr. Deputy Speaker. He promotes our Saskatchewan 
resources, promotes our Saskatchewan resources. He promotes 
our Saskatchewan ingenuity and our innovation with CCS and 
other technologies, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And on this side of the 
House, we’ll stand up for the people of Saskatchewan each and 
every day, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It doesn’t matter in what 
province or what jurisdiction, and I’m proud to be on a team 
that always supports the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Today the Canadian Association of Petroleum 
Producers released their 2016 crude oil forecast. This report 
forecasts oil production will outstrip current pipeline capacity 
by nearly 800,000 barrels per day five years from now. Mr. 
Speaker, to the member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre: do 
you support 800,000 barrels moving by train, moving by 
pipeline, or would your party rather keep it in the ground? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 

Mr. McCall: — I tell you what I do support, Mr. Speaker, and 
it’s interesting the question coming from that member on this 
score. I have family in his hometown — and it’s their 
hometown as well — that have worked on these pipelines, that 
have gained their living doing that work on the pipeline, Mr. 
Speaker. So despite the, you know, leave-it-in-the ground point 
to the member’s question, obviously we support an approach 
that works for the environment, that works for the economy, 
that works for communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in terms of the way that we’ve seen the government 
advance this file, to return to my earlier point, what is it about 
the current approach of this government that’s seen the 
intervention of those members on projects resemble the kiss of 
death for the success of those projects, Mr. Speaker? You’d 
think they’d recognize that something’s wrong with the 
approach over there. And if they want to advance these things, 
maybe they should do a rethink. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to try this again, 
because I asked a question about why, why this . . . I’m sorry. 
I’m stumbling. Why this amendment didn’t support the Kinder 
Morgan expansion. I asked it earlier, didn’t get an answer. So I 
think we’re going to try this again. Why is it that this 
government chose not to include Kinder Morgan in the long list 
of pipelines that they choose to support? Are they choosing 
politics over pipelines? To the member from Regina Walsh 
Acres, let’s try it again. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Walsh Acres. 
 
Mr. Steinley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And I’m always happy to rise and answer questions regarding 
pipelines. And if she wants to talk about playing politics over 
public policy, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what I’d like to say to the 
people watching today is there’s only one party that plays 
politics over policy in this House. And that’s that member from 
Regina Rosemont, the Leader of the Opposition, who when 
people come to this gallery to watch the proceedings — the 
people from the American delegation from CCS, the people of 
Crescent Point today — he sits in his chair, rises, and slags the 
people of Saskatchewan each and every time, saying how bad 
things are.  
 
Slags the economy the hard-working people of Saskatchewan 
have developed, slags the CCS operation in Estevan where 
innovation of the Saskatchewan people — innovation and 
technology and people are working hard — and he makes a 
mockery of what they’ve done down there in front of people 
that are going down to tour that facility that afternoon, Mr. 
Deputy Minister. That’s a shame. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Carr: — Mr. Speaker, the records of pipelines speak for 
themselves. Pipelines are safer than truck transport and safer 
than rail. In fact, they are the safest method of transporting large 
volumes of crude oil distances in North America. 



June 23, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 653 

Mr. Speaker, my question is for the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. My question is simple: will their party acknowledge 
that we need the Keystone XL, the Northern Gateway and 
Energy East pipelines because they are environmentally the best 
option to transport oil? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We are 
pleased to put in an amendment because we think it’s a better 
choice to include some of the other pipelines, and we do have to 
do the environmental rigour with it. And I can tell you that we 
support pipelines. We take it very seriously. I can tell you as a 
member from downtown Saskatoon when we see the trains 
going through downtown Saskatoon with oil we have concerns. 
 
[12:15] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Time for the 75-minute debate has 
expired. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Athabasca. 
 

Motion No. 2 — Calls to Action in the Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission’s Report 

 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. At the end of my comments I’ll move my 
motion as it relates to the Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission’s final document that pertains to the jurisdiction of 
the provincial Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to speak briefly about the challenges in the 
province of Saskatchewan which I think are paramount to the 
issue that I am raising today when we talk about overall the 
economy of the province of Saskatchewan and even the very 
motto of our province, “from many peoples, strength.” 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it was with great humility the other day 
when I mentioned the celebration of National Aboriginal Day 
when we spoke about the pride that Aboriginal people certainly 
have and the culture that we enjoy, the traditions, and the 
customs and the languages that are uniquely ours, Mr. Speaker. 
I wanted to take the opportunity that day to celebrate the 
National Aboriginal Day. And one of the points that I would 
raise, Mr. Speaker, is really key in understanding what the 
Aboriginal people are all about. 
 
In my preface to celebrating the National Aboriginal Day, Mr. 
Speaker, I wanted to make sure that other people in the 
province of Saskatchewan understood why an apology for the 
Sixties Scoop was really important. Mr. Speaker, I wanted the 
other people in Saskatchewan to understand why 
acknowledgement of the residential school challenges are also 
very important to recall and to try and correct. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to talk about the many challenges that 
the Aboriginal people faced throughout the history of the 
province of Saskatchewan and the history of Canada overall, 

Mr. Speaker. So what’s really important at that same comment 
is what I wanted to do as an Aboriginal person, as a Métis 
person, is I wanted to respect the challenges and other setbacks 
— a lot of them very historical throughout the world — of other 
cultures and of other people. And the purpose of recognizing 
the Holodomor and the atrocities of World War II against many, 
many people, and even the . . . as we turned away ships from 
our shores, and in which many people perished. 
 
The purpose of recognizing those particular tragic events in 
Canadian history, Mr. Speaker, is to tell the people, the families 
that are impacted by that, is that we understand them and we 
understood them and we stand and acknowledge their pain as 
well, as we have gone through similar tragic events in our 
Aboriginal history. 
 
So really it is acknowledgement of their challenges, and in the 
most respectful way saying we recognize those challenges. We 
certainly don’t defend those actions anywhere in the world and 
that as Aboriginal people, we wanted to share that message with 
the many victims of the atrocities that I mentioned, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And in doing so we also wanted recognition — not pity, not 
sympathy, Mr. Speaker, but recognition of the challenges that 
the Aboriginal people faced overall in the history of our 
province and in the history of the country as well. 
 
So it’s important that I explain to the Assembly the purpose of 
my message that day, because, Mr. Speaker, we now have 
another opportunity through the work of the Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission, in which they’ve identified a 
number of areas that many provincial governments across the 
country should follow. And I look at the failings within 
Saskatchewan overall, Mr. Speaker, and I look at some of the 
recommendations presented in the Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission’s report, and there was a number of areas that the 
commission asked Saskatchewan to begin to resolve and begin 
to lead, in which we’ve saw no considerable action, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Everything from child welfare to education to language and 
culture, to health, to justice. Mr. Speaker, there was tons of 
information. And certainly a number of commission members 
heard some very compelling stories, Mr. Speaker. And this is 
one of the reasons why they put forward a document. It was 
with great concern, and it was with a lot of hard work. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it was with a lot of focus on the issues as well, even 
though a lot of traumatic stories certainly caught the attention 
and the ears of the nation and certainly of the commission 
members. 
 
But they had to focus, Mr. Speaker, on the solutions. And as 
much as the stories were compelling, the leadership required of 
the commission was to ensure that they came forward with 
some solid recommendations to try and address some of the 
past hurts, to build a stronger future forged with Aboriginal 
partnership. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, going through the actual document, I think 
one of the most important compelling parts of the report, Mr. 
Speaker, was one particular section that I wanted to emphasize 
on. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, education, health, 



654 Saskatchewan Hansard June 23, 2016 

acknowledgement of the Aboriginal culture, incorporating 
Aboriginal values in education, the list goes on as to some 
powerful and some very compelling recommendations that the 
commission made. 
 
So I don’t take away from any of those points, Mr. Speaker, but 
I want to focus on one particular part of the report which I think 
is really relevant to the challenges, and it really gets to the point 
as to why this reconciliation work needed to be done. And I’ll 
go under the section 71, the recommendation 71, where it spoke 
about missing children and burial information. And one of the 
recommendations are, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 
 

We call upon all chief coroners and provincial vital 
statistics agencies that have not provided to the Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission of Canada their records on the 
deaths of Aboriginal children in the care of residential 
school authorities to make these documents available to the 
National Centre for Truth and Reconciliation. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think the important point around 
recommendation 71, where the commission is asking for a very 
simple request, is that you provide the truth behind how many 
of these children died while in care of the residential school 
system. A lot of family members need to know those facts, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s why it’s important, I think, that the Truth 
and Reconciliation Commission put forward that 
recommendation because there are many unexplained deaths, 
Mr. Speaker. There are many deaths that were not documented, 
and that is certainly a challenge and certainly a stain on our 
history as Canadians. And many family members to this day, 
and even though some of these cases may go back many years, 
they have to know how their son, daughter, or great-grandson 
passed away. It’s really, really important to the Aboriginal 
community as it is important to many other families out there. I 
am certain that they understand the promise or the possibility of 
closure for many of these families, Mr. Speaker. And then this 
promise, this commitment needs to be maintained in terms of 
attention by the commission, but it also needs to be respected 
by the provinces of whom the commission made some of these 
recommendations. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I tell the people of Saskatchewan this as a 
proud member of the Aboriginal community and a very proud 
member of the Aboriginal community. We make up one-third 
of the provincial population in the province overall, Mr. 
Speaker. There are many people now of Aboriginal ancestry, 
and we are growing to a powerful and very positive nation 
within the province of Saskatchewan. We have many 
Aboriginal families that have made tremendous contributions to 
our province economically, socially, politically through the arts, 
education. The list goes on, Mr. Speaker. And I’m very proud, 
and I want to acknowledge those people today. There are many 
people out there that inspire many of our young people to 
achieve the same level of success that they have, and these are 
scholars, doctors, lawyers, people of many professional 
backgrounds that are of Aboriginal ancestry. And I’m proud to 
say, Mr. Speaker, that they have succeeded in their career. 
 
But there are however, Mr. Speaker, many other families that 
have not. As we see, as a province we have to do a better job of 
incorporating Aboriginal people into the economy. We have to 
have more sensitive teachings about the Aboriginal history and 

the culture and the people of Saskatchewan in the past and 
certainly of today. We’ve also got to make sure that we 
incorporate many of own spiritual beliefs around traditional 
methods of healing, Mr. Speaker. These are some of the points 
that the commission has brought forward, and it’s something 
that we need to certainly pay a lot of attention to. 
 
So the list goes on and on in terms of what is required in 
recognizing the past, Mr. Speaker, but people don’t want to 
simply dwell on the past mistakes. They certainly want to 
acknowledge those past mistakes and where we build from here 
to position the Aboriginal people accordingly. I think it’s really 
important that we begin that work, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why 
the commission has been, on a continual basis, been putting 
forward recommendations that are very straightforward, very 
simple to achieve. And yet, Mr. Speaker, we have seen 
provinces like Saskatchewan simply lag behind. And to me, Mr. 
Speaker, I think that’s a crying shame and that something ought 
to be done with that particular challenge. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m just serving notice today that many 
people in the community are paying very close attention to this 
issue and that certainly I think that we will not let this issue rest. 
And as you look at some of the past examples and the most 
recent example, Mr. Speaker, with the shutting down of the 
Buffalo Narrows Correctional Centre, putting 28 people out of 
work in the community of Buffalo Narrows, a community that 
can ill afford to lose these mortgage-paying jobs, Mr. Speaker, 
and yet this government coldly and callously once again 
stabbed the Aboriginal community right in the back on that 
front. And I say shame on them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We didn’t need less investment. We needed more investment. 
And this is a classic example of how this government once 
again continues to turn their back on many of the Aboriginal 
families and communities in the province of Saskatchewan. 
And that’s a crying shame, Mr. Speaker, because this province 
was built in co-operation, in the spirit of co-operation with the 
Aboriginal communities. And now 2016 we see a government 
that has no respect for that spirit that the Aboriginal community 
afforded the province and continue to support the province in 
many, many ways. 
 
So on that notion, Mr. Speaker, I move the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly call upon the government to fulfill the 
calls to action in the Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission’s final report that pertain to the jurisdiction of 
the provincial government. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has 
moved the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly call upon the provincial government to 
fulfill the calls to action in the Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission’s final report that pertain to the jurisdiction of 
the provincial government. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the member 
from Regina Elphinstone-Centre. 
 



June 23, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 655 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Certainly my intervention at this point in the debate will be 
brief, given other demands of the Assembly for committees and 
on understanding between the sides. 
 
But I just want to rise to say that there are many things that are 
important in terms of the work that we do in this Assembly that 
are critical, that are critical not just for today and next week but 
for the future of this province. And in terms of responding to 
the 94 calls to action from the Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission, and the government has said that they identified 
34 impacting Saskatchewan and that 22 of those are under way, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s encouraging. 
 
But I guess one of the things that has become apparent about 
the way that this government has done business over the years, 
and particularly as it relates to the indigenous people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we’d like to hear more about that 
work. We don’t know why there hasn’t been some kind of a 
more visible, more profiled way of coming forward as the 
province of Saskatchewan and saying that, this work is our 
work. And this is work that, having gone through the truth part 
of the process, Mr. Speaker, as painful and wrenching as that 
has been, that we now move earnestly towards reconciliation 
and that we take on our share of that work as the people of 
Saskatchewan.  
 
And we haven’t heard more from this government where in past 
they’re quite anxious to profile things like having a feast at the 
legislature. And I don’t mention that by way of taking away 
from the importance of what the feast represents in terms of 
people coming together, but we want to hear more about this 
government’s plan to enact those calls to action, to take on its 
responsibility. 
 
[12:30] 
 
And in terms of what we’ve seen in other jurisdictions where up 
to and including legislation being enacted to ensure that that 
road map for reconciliation is laid out and undertaken, again, 
Mr. Speaker, when we reflect back on what’s happening here in 
Saskatchewan, it certainly wasn’t in the Throne Speech. It 
wasn’t in the budget. And we want to hear from this 
government how they’re undertaking this work on all of our 
behalf to make sure that we learn from the truth part of the 
Truth and Reconciliation Commission’s work — again you 
know, historic and wrenching, painful work, Mr. Speaker, that 
that not be in vain and that we as the people of Saskatchewan 
are undertaking our responsibility in that connection very 
seriously. 
 
I commend the remarks from the member from Athabasca. He’s 
the longest serving indigenous member of this Assembly, in the 
history of this Assembly. And certainly I couldn’t think of a 
more fitting person to move this motion calling for that 
response, for that action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s more to be said on this front, but 
recognizing the hour of the day, as I’d stated at the outset, I 
would move to adjourn debate on the motion calling that this 
Assembly calls upon the government to fulfil the calls to action 
in the Truth and Reconciliation Commission’s final report that 
pertain to the provincial jurisdiction here in Saskatchewan. I so 

move. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre has moved to adjourn debate on the motion 
presented by the member from Athabasca. Is it the pleasure of 
the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — That’s carried. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. In order to facilitate the work of committees later this 
day, I move that this Assembly do now adjourn. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The Government House Leader has 
moved that this Assembly does now adjourn. Is it the pleasure 
of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — This Assembly is adjourned until 
Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:33.] 
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 631 
  Wotherspoon ..................................................................................................................................................................... 631, 632 
  Doherty ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 631 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 632 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 632 
  Ottenbreit .................................................................................................................................................................................. 632 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 633 
  Moe ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 633 
STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 Apology 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 633 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 633 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 633 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Moose Range Celebrates 100th Anniversary 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................... 634 
 Motorcycle Ride for Dad 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 634 
 Physician of the Year 
  Nerlien ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 634 
 Prince Albert Street Fair 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 634 
 Prince Albert Rental Housing Project 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................... 635 
 Partnership with Northern Communities 
  Lambert ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 635 
 Supporting Wanuskewin’s Renewal 
  Olauson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 635 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Provincial Economy and Employment 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 635 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 636 
 Management of Health Care System 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 637 
  Duncan ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 637 
 Food Services in Correctional Facilities 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 638 
  Tell ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 638 
 Funding for Child and Family Services 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 638 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 639 
 Sixties Scoop and Government Conversations with Interest Groups 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 639 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 639 
 Growth and Financial Security Fund 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 640 
  Doherty ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 640 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 601 — The Workers’ Compensation Amendment Act, 2016 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 640 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
  Ross ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 640 
 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Bradshaw ................................................................................................................................................................................... 640 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 21 — The Growth and Financial Security Repeal Act 
  Doherty ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 641 
 Bill No. 22 — The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2016 
  Doherty ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 641 



 

 
TABLING OF REPORTS 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 641 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Support for Pipeline Development 
  Marit .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 641 
  Sproule ............................................................................................................................................................................... 644, 651 
  Kaeding ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 645 
  Forbes ................................................................................................................................................................................ 647, 651 
  Steinley ............................................................................................................................................................................... 647, 651 
  McCall ............................................................................................................................................................................... 649, 651 
  D’Autremont ............................................................................................................................................................................. 650 
  Young ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 651 
  Bonk ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 652 
  Carr ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 652 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 2 — Calls to Action in the Truth and Reconciliation Commission’s Report 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 653 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 655 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


