






















































Hansard: November 24, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 48A  THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 24, 2016, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (Ind.) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10; Independent (Ind.) — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1469 
 November 24, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 
Mr. Michelson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
in the west gallery you will notice it is full of students. They’re 
all from Moose Jaw, I’m proud to say, from St. Michael’s 
School, grade 7 and 8. Mr. Speaker, we did considerable work 
on the school for upgrades a couple of years ago, and it was 
certainly needed. And they’ve blessed us with their presence to 
come here and visit us today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just to notice this, there’s 68 students there. Now 
there’s 49 members on the government side, so we have to be 
on our best behaviour or they in fact could overtake the 
government. In fact, Mr. Speaker, in four to five years they will 
be voting people of the province, and we welcome them here to 
see the proceedings and encourage them to learn about the 
democratic process. 
 
And with them, Mr. Speaker, are the teachers, Kelsey Warren, 
Jason Fisher, and Marnie Moiriuk that are accompanying them 
along with a chaperone, Shane Warren. So I’d ask members to 
welcome the St. Michael’s class from Moose Jaw and make 
them welcome in our Assembly. Thank you. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition to reverse the cuts to the 
Lighthouse program. Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that 
in April of 2014, the then minister of Social Services said that 
the Lighthouse in Saskatoon would “. . . take pressure off of 
existing detox facilities, hospitals, and police cells, while 
keeping people safe, especially in our brutally cold winters.” 
 
The petitioners also point out, Mr. Speaker, that on that same 
day the Minister of Health said, “We want to ensure that 
individuals with mental health and addictions issues have a safe 
place to stay.” Mr. Speaker, they also point out that this 
government since that time has repeatedly indicated that the 
Lighthouse stabilization unit keeps individuals out of hospital 
emergency rooms and jail cells. 
 
We on this side of the House could not agree more. We only 
need to look to the Saskatoon Health Region, Mr. Speaker, that 
has experienced record over capacity in our hospitals and 
bursting emergency rooms in recent days. And obviously the 
Lighthouse is not the whole problem, the cuts to the 
Lighthouse, but it is certainly a contributing factor, Mr. 
Speaker, and the government needs to address that. I’d like to 
read the prayer: 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately reverse 
their recent cuts to funding that allows extremely 
vulnerable people to access the services of the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit in Saskatoon, and revisit their imposition 
of a strict and narrow definition of homelessness in 
November of 2015 which forced the Lighthouse to cut 
back its hours of essential services in February of 2016, 
and take immediate steps to ensure that homeless people in 
Saskatoon and in Saskatchewan have emergency shelter, 
clothing, and food available to them before more lives are 
lost. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Saskatoon. I 
so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from the citizens who are opposed to 
the federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer read as follows, respectfully request that 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by citizens of Whitewood, 
Wawota, Moosomin, Rocanville, Wapella, Maryfield, Fleming, 
Regina, Spy Hill, Welwyn, Langenburg, and Tantallon. I do so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
proud to stand in my place today to present a petition as it 
relates to the NORTEP [northern teacher education program] 
program. The NORTEP-NORPAC [northern teacher education 
program-Northern Professional Access College] has been a 
program of higher learning and change to the educational 
landscape in the North for over the past 40 years. It is a very 
successful program where, in a most recent report of the last 
five years of graduates, it has been shown that 94 per cent of its 
graduates have successfully found employment in northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan call on the Saskatchewan Party government 
to immediately restore their five-year agreement to fund 
the northern teacher education program and to continue to 
support NORTEP-NORPAC programs in La Ronge and in 
northern Saskatchewan. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed the many pages 
of petitions, especially the two that I’m presenting today, are 



1470 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2016 

from La Ronge, Buffalo Narrows, and Ile-a-la-Crosse. And I so 
present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition in support of the Wakamow Valley Authority. 
The people who have signed this petition wish to bring our 
attention to the following: that as a result of the passage of The 
Wakamow Valley Authority Amendment Act on June 30th, the 
Wakamow Valley Authority lost their statutory funding of 
$127,000 from the Saskatchewan government in addition to 
$30,000 supplemental funding. This loss of annual funding 
negatively affects the ability of Wakamow to maintain and 
repair the park and provide services to our community. 
 
This funding cut resulted in the layoff of one-third of park staff, 
which included two summer students and two regular 
employees. It’s a well-known fact that this will negatively 
impact the Moose Jaw economy through job loss and negatively 
impacts Moose Jaw tourism and businesses. On June 21st, 2016 
the provincial government voted in favour of this bill, resulting 
in cuts to Wakamow and subsequent job losses. So I’d like to 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately repeal The Wakamow Valley Authority 
Amendment Act, 2016 and reinstate statutory funding to the 
Wakamow Valley Authority. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This is signed by some folks from Moose Jaw and Regina, Mr. 
Speaker. I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition today in support of funding heritage languages here in 
Saskatchewan. And we know that after 25 years, the 
Government of Saskatchewan has discontinued all support for 
heritage language learning in Saskatchewan. Since 1991, 
heritage language schools have depended on this modest 
funding from the Ministry of Education to help sustain their 
programs, and as a result of the announcement by the Ministry 
of Education, many of these non-profit heritage language 
schools will be faced with the difficult decision of whether or 
not they can continue to operate. 
 
But it’s also increasingly important to work towards improving 
access to indigenous languages, many of which are endangered. 
Heritage language programs provide support not only for 
immigrants, refugees, and their descendants, but also for 
Aboriginal peoples and all Canadians who recognize the 
benefits of learning additional languages. I’d like to read the 
prayer, Mr. Speaker: 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to reconsider this decision and restore funding for heritage 
language education in Saskatchewan heritage language 
schools. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker the people signing this petition come from 
Saskatoon and Regina. I do so present. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
present to you a petition for a second bridge for Prince Albert. 
The Diefenbaker bridge in Prince Albert is the primary link that 
connects the southern part of the province to the North. With no 
other crossings, heavy truck traffic must be rerouted, adding a 
significant amount of cost for the businesses in and around 
Prince Albert in terms of losses or added expenses. The current 
residents, businesses, and tourists in Prince Albert and northern 
communities require safe and efficient transportation 
infrastructure that includes adequate bridges. 
 
That the Saskatchewan Party government refuses to stand up for 
Prince Albert and this crucial infrastructure issue. That local 
municipal governments have limited resources and require a 
second bridge to be funded through federal and provincial 
governments and not a P3 [public-private partnership] model. 
That the support of the people and the municipal governments 
of Prince Albert and neighbouring communities for a second 
bridge is overwhelming and has been joined by support from 
industry groups, the Saskatchewan association of regional 
municipalities and many others across the province, and that the 
need for a second bridge for Prince Albert has never been 
clearer than it is today. Prince Albert, communities north of 
Prince Albert, and businesses that send people and products 
through Prince Albert require a solution. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan ask that the 
Saskatchewan Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and begin immediately to plan and then quickly 
commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there’s lots of individuals signing these petitions 
across Saskatchewan, but this particular petition has been 
signed by individuals from Prince Albert in Saskatchewan. I do 
so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition in support of sexual abuse prevention curriculum in 
Saskatchewan. Those signing this petition wish to draw our 



November 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1471 

attention to the following: Saskatchewan has the second highest 
rate of sexual child abuse in Canada. StatsCan shows that 55 
per cent of all victims of sexual offences were children under 
the age of 18. 
 
Child sexual abuse has lasting impacts throughout a child’s 
lifetime, including mental health concerns, PTSD 
[post-traumatic stress disorder], depression, anxiety, panic 
attacks, and low self-esteem; in addition, decreased school 
attendance and achievement and decreased productivity 
throughout the lifespan. Victims of childhood sexual abuse are 
four times more likely to commit suicide. Currently there is no 
comprehensive elementary or secondary curriculum regarding 
the prevention and reporting of child sexual abuse in 
Saskatchewan. I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan take immediate and 
concrete action to develop and implement Erin’s law. Such 
legislation would ensure that a comprehensive health 
education program would be developed and implemented 
through grades pre-K through grade 12 along with training 
staff on the prevention of child abuse. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those signing this petition reside around the 
province. The particular papers that I’m submitting today are 
from Regina, Warman, and Wood Mountain. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling for a stop to the Sask Party plan to sell 
off SaskTel. The petitioners point out that in the recent election 
campaign, the Sask Party promised they would not privatize 
SaskTel. The petitioners also point out that instead of looking at 
their own waste, scandal, and mismanagement, the Sask Party 
has now talked about breaking their promise and has looked at 
selling off SaskTel to make a quick dollar. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners also state that once SaskTel is 
gone, there is no getting it back and no telling what else the 
Sask Party will sell. 
 

In the prayer that reads as follows, Mr. Speaker, the 
petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the Saskatchewan Party 
government to keep their promise, stop their plan to sell off 
SaskTel, and keep our valued Crown corporation in the 
hands of the people of Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by good citizens 
from Prince Albert, Hagen, Melfort, and Marcelin. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise yet again today 
to present another petition calling on the government to reverse 
the cuts to the Aboriginal court worker program. The 
Government of Saskatchewan cut the budget for the Aboriginal 
court worker program in the 2016-2017 provincial budget, 
resulting in layoffs of Aboriginal court workers throughout the 
province, and in stark contravention of the recommendations 

made in the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. 
 
Aboriginal court workers play an important role helping 
Aboriginal people in criminal and child apprehension cases. 
Aboriginal peoples are disproportionately represented in 
Saskatchewan’s correctional centres, and Aboriginal court 
workers successfully help to make our communities safer 
through reduced recidivism rates. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan reverse its 
short-sighted and counterproductive cuts to the Aboriginal 
court worker program. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those signing the petition today come from 
Regina, Melville, Moose Jaw, Yorkton, and Weyburn. I do so 
submit. 
 
[10:15] 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Regina Lakeview 
on her feet? 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave for introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to all 
members for allowing me to rise and to introduce two special 
guests, Mr. Speaker, to you, to your gallery. I’d like to welcome 
my mom and dad, Ray and Judy Beck. My mom and dad I think 
are in today to take in Agribition as they do every year. They 
made the trip in from Lang this morning. I hope the highways 
were okay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, like many of us, the reason I stand here today is 
because of the love and care of these two people. Although they 
didn’t dictate our political affiliations, they certainly did instill 
values that see me here today — a love of family, a love of 
education and community, of looking out for the vulnerable in 
society, and always being willing to roll up your sleeves and do 
a little bit more than what you’re asked. So I just want to say 
thank you. I’m going to make my mom cry, and I’m going to 
try not to cry. 
 
But like any member here will know, the value and support of 
your family allows us to be here and do the work that we do. So 
I want to warmly welcome you to your Legislative Assembly, 
and I would invite all members to do the same. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone on his feet? 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave to join 
the member with an introduction. 
 



1472 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2016 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Agreed. I recognize the member from Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great 
privilege to introduce the member opposite’s mom and dad as 
well, Ray and Judy Beck from Lang. I don’t really know Ray as 
Ray; it’s Gus from Lang. And you know, I was sitting here 
thinking . . . I knew this introduction would be coming as I saw 
him walk in the gallery. And I know we have to adjourn at 1, 
but I think I could carry the day until 1 o’clock telling different 
stories because we go back an awful long ways, playing hockey 
and against Ray a lot in baseball. 
 
But what I would say is that, you know, every community, 
every small-town community, if you’ve been around a 
small-town community, it takes a family that really steps up on 
so many different fronts. And if you know the Lang 
community, you know the Beck family, or if you know the 
Beck family, you know the Lang community. 
 
Ray and Judy have been instrumental . . . Ray’s dad, Russ, was 
instrumental in so many of the sports. Gus was a tough guy to 
get out, especially with a low fastball inside, went over the 
fence every time because I remember catching against him an 
awful lot. But I enjoyed the winter sports so much more 
because I got to play with Gus as opposed to against Gus. He 
was a great hockey player and a strong winger. We played an 
awful lot of games together and had a lot of championships into 
a small town of Lang, Saskatchewan. 
 
But it’s instrumental, that community and the Beck family. I 
just want everybody to know a little bit of the history. The 
member opposite, of course, is going to introduce them as her 
mom and dad, but I’m going to introduce them as Mr. and Mrs. 
Lang. Anyway, welcome Ray and Judy to their Legislative 
Assembly. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood. 
 

First Nations National Land Governance and Economic 
Development Conference 

 
Ms. Lambert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had the honour to 
represent the government at the First Nations national land 
management and economic development conference last month 
at TCU Place in Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, it was a great honour 
to be able to host this prestigious and important event in my city 
and on Treaty 6 territory. Dignitaries, guests, and delegates 
from 125 First Nations from across the country gathered to 
learn about the process and progress of land management under 
the Framework Agreement on First Nation Land Management. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this gathering provided significant opportunity for 
networking, the sharing of best practices, and providing an 
opportunity to connect with bankers, investors, realtors, and 
other business professionals who are interested in the economic 

and business development of First Nations. Over the last 20 
years significant progress and accomplishments have been 
made because of the framework agreement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are numerous success stories and examples 
of where First Nations here in Saskatchewan have demonstrated 
significant leadership in economic and business development 
across all sectors. This leadership is creating a better quality of 
life for First Nations people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in thanking 
the organizers and participants of this event and to acknowledge 
the hard work that was accomplished. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 

International Day for the Elimination of 
Violence Against Women 

 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Speaker, tomorrow, November 25th, is 
recognized as International Day for the Elimination of Violence 
Against Women. Approximately one-third of women 
worldwide have experienced physical or sexual violence at 
some point in their lives and often this violence goes 
unchallenged and unquestioned. 
 
And violence against women isn’t some faraway concern, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s an immediate problem here, here in our own 
backyards. The hate speech that Alberta MLA [Member of the 
Legislative Assembly] Sandra Jansen has experienced both 
before and as a result of crossing the floor to join the Alberta 
NDP [New Democratic Party] is a prime example of this sad 
reality. The horrendous threats and verbal abuse she has 
endured both from the public and her own colleagues has 
become so severe she has even been assigned a temporary 
protection unit. 
 
It’s simply unacceptable, Mr. Speaker, that Canadian women in 
positions of leadership are still facing these challenges today. 
Violence against women in any form is reprehensible and 
prevention must start here with us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s why in 1991 former federal NDP leader 
Jack Layton co-founded the White Ribbon campaign, a 
campaign which promotes healthy relationships, gender 
equality, and most importantly, men working to end men’s 
violence against women. This week-long campaign begins 
tomorrow, and I encourage every man to wear a white ribbon as 
a symbol of their opposition to violence against women. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join with me today in 
working to eradicate violence against women globally, 
nationally, and within our own political institutions. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 

Truth and Reconciliation Flag Raising Ceremony 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had the 
honour of representing the Government of Saskatchewan last 



November 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1473 

month at the Truth and Reconciliation flag raising ceremony 
hosted at St. Paul’s Hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
In partnership with First Nations and Métis leaders and 
communities and the Saskatoon Health Region, our government 
is working together to better assist our indigenous patients in 
navigating the health care system. Mr. Speaker, we know how 
important it is to build and strengthen these partnerships to 
ensure First Nations and Métis patients and clients receive 
quality patient- and family-centred care. 
 
Our province has undertaken initiatives to respond to 
recommendations of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. 
These initiatives respond to challenging areas including cultural 
responsiveness, representative workforce, mental health and 
addictions, public health and primary care, and information 
technology. We all have the same priority to provide culturally 
appropriate, accessible health care and services for First Nations 
and Métis residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this event was a meaningful gathering of different 
voices in the community, and our government will continue to 
support efforts in truth and reconciliation. Mr. Speaker, I would 
ask all members to join me in thanking the Saskatoon Health 
Region’s First Nations and Métis health services unit, the 
Saskatoon Tribal Council, the Central Urban Métis Federation 
Inc., and the St. Paul’s Hospital board of directors for putting 
together this meaningful event and bringing awareness to truth 
and reconciliation. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Regina Citizen Named Red Cross 
Humanitarian of the Year 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, if you live in Regina you’d 
be hard pressed to not have some connection to the Ryan 
family. Whether it’s in sport, business, or volunteerism, the 
Ryans are well known for their community spirit and 
compassion for others. This is of course no surprise when we 
see the incredible example set by Barb Ryan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Barb has a long list of accomplishments including volunteering 
for Relay for Life, Special Olympics, Dress for Success, and 
more. But the cause most dear to her heart is her work with 
refugee families. For the past seven years, Barb has worked 
with refugees and recent immigrants through the Regina Open 
Door Society. 
 
On October 21st Barb Ryan received the Red Cross 
Humanitarian of the Year award. In her usual humble way, 
when Barb was asked about this incredible honour she 
compared it to getting an award for breathing. Mr. Speaker, this 
is just who she is. She’s a remarkable person. Barb Ryan’s 
volunteer work extends to the Bob Ryan Foundation, in honour 
of her late husband and spearheaded by her sons Jon and Steve. 
 
The foundation supports the Canadian Cancer Society, Regina 
Minor Football, and university football scholarships. I know 
that Barb would want me to mention the annual fundraisers and 
encourage participation as well as offering a hearty “Go 
Hawks.” And as she knows, as she needs to know, we’re all 
pulling for Lincoln. 

Mr. Speaker, I had the honour of working with Bob Ryan. He 
was committed to making lives better for youth all across 
Saskatchewan and so proud of his family. Mr. Speaker, I ask all 
members to join with me in honouring a selfless, 
compassionate, loving community leader, Barb Ryan, the 2016 
Red Cross Humanitarian of the Year of Saskatchewan. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatchewan 
Rivers. 
 

Team Canada Wins Silver at World Para Reining 
International Championships 

 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
House today to recognize the recent success of several 
Saskatchewan para reiners at the World Para Reining 
International Championships in Oklahoma held mid-November. 
 
World Para Reining is a global, non-profit organization which 
focuses on the development of equestrian reining programs 
designed for riders with physical disabilities. Janice Boucher, 
my friend, hails from my constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers, 
along with Lauren Barwick from British Columbia and 
Courtney Braun from Beechy, Saskatchewan, formed this 
year’s Team Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this team earned a silver medal in the team 
competition this year. The members of Team Canada garnered 
other wins, as Courtney Braun earned first prize in the high 
point standings, while Janice Boucher placed sixth. This team, 
accompanied by loving and caring family members, drove all 
the way to Oklahoma to represent the nation. Mr. Speaker, 
countries from around the world participated in this world-class 
show, and the first international event that World Para Reining 
organized was a great success. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating Team Canada on 
their success as well as the support they received from Janice’s 
wonderful and caring family, the Cartiers. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 

Rose Valley Roadrunners Win Provincial Championship 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
stand in this House today and acknowledge the Rose Valley 
Roadrunners senior girls’ volleyball team as the 2016 1A 
provincial champions, a title they won this past weekend The 
tournament included the top ten 1A teams from across the 
province. They had a strong showing throughout the 
tournament, but it was in the finals that they really showed their 
strength. 
 
The final featured two very good teams fighting for the 
provincial title. It was the Roadrunners versus the Dinsmore 
Wildcats. The first set was a battle back and forth, but with a 
packed gym and loud fans, Rose Valley took control late and 
won the set 25-18. The second set started with Rose Valley 
jumping out to a 12-1 lead. Dinsmore tried to battle back but, 



1474 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2016 

with the crowd backing the home team, Rose Valley finished it 
with a 25-15 win. With that win, Rose Valley takes its first 
provincial volleyball title in school history and the title of a 1A 
girls’ volleyball provincial champions for 2016. The Rose 
Valley girls displayed amazing sportsmanship and were great 
ambassadors for the school and community. 
 
Of some importance, Mr. Speaker, once again the bragging 
rights go the Minister of Finance over the Minister of Health. 
Mr. Speaker, I ask members to join me in congratulating Rose 
Valley School, the community, and of course the team, on an 
amazing season, the successful tournament, and a big win. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 

New Affordable Supported Living Units in Prince Albert 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
last Friday I was invited to celebrate the opening of eight new 
affordable homes in Prince Albert. These homes are earmarked 
for individuals with complex needs and include support services 
for the residents as they work towards independence and a 
better quality of life. 
 
Thanks to the visionary leadership of the Prince Albert branch 
of the Canadian Mental Health Association, these homes will 
serve Prince Albert for years to come. The people who live in 
these homes will grow and develop in so many ways in safe, 
stable, and a caring environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government believes in partnering with others 
to address our housing challenges. I’m delighted that our 
government, along with the Government of Canada, jointly 
contributed up to $900,000 to make these eight homes a reality. 
 
Our work doesn’t stop there, Mr. Speaker. Since November of 
2007, our government has contributed to the development of a 
total of 158 affordable rental units in Prince Albert. This project 
also supports our mental health and addictions action plan and 
the poverty reduction strategy by ensuring Saskatchewan people 
have access to affordable, safe, secure, and stable housing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank everyone involved in the 
creation of these safe, quality homes and for working to meet 
the housing needs of our most vulnerable citizens. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
[10:30] 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transactions 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, day after day we ask 
questions about the Sask Party’s GTH [Global Transportation 
Hub] land scandal, questions that are being asked by 
Saskatchewan people. But day after day, the Premier refuses to 
answer. And it’s not just in question period and the media. 
 

At the latest Public Accounts meeting, of course coordinated by 
the Premier’s office, the Sask Party committee members voted 
against hearing from key witnesses who know details about that 
government’s land scandal. The Sask Party voted against 
hearing from the DM [deputy minister], if you can imagine, for 
the Ministry of the Economy. And they voted against the two 
people who held the position as CEO [chief executive officer] 
of the GTH while the scandal was going down. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s past time this Premier come clean to 
Saskatchewan people. Will he finally start answering simple 
questions? Will he stop blocking others from doing the same? 
And will he allow Sask Party members of the Public Accounts 
to finally do their job on Monday and invite these key players in 
the GTH scandal at the time of the scandal to testify? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there’s no scandal. Mr. 
Speaker, the Provincial Auditor was asked to review the entire 
matter. The Provincial Auditor completed her work, made 
several important recommendations about a lack of 
coordination and communication between two different 
government entities. But, Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor 
went on to say in the press release that the audit showed no 
evidence of conflict of interest or fraud or wrongdoing on the 
part of the board of directors. 
 
And of course, Mr. Speaker, although that wasn’t referenced 
specifically, one of the board of directors was the minister 
involved. And so that doesn’t fit with the NDP narrative. I get 
that. They’re going to still repeat the same sort of allegations 
and attempt to smear members where there isn’t evidence for it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in that testimony before the Public Accounts 
Committee, let’s reflect on what she actually said. She said that 
the reason she had noted the April 2012 phone call that’s often 
referenced by members is that there was obviously knowledge 
in the general community about the government trying to 
acquire this land. And by sharing the phone call with officials, it 
showed the minister was concerned. She said the negotiations in 
December 2013 that the NDP called a cabinet leak was not, Mr. 
Speaker, in fact a cabinet leak. She said when cabinet makes 
decisions, it shares those decisions with affected individuals. 
 
Moreover, the four people that he is saying should be 
interviewed by a committee of politicians were talked to by the 
Provincial Auditor. And I think the Provincial Auditor is more 
qualified to interview parties to this matter than any group of 
politicians, regardless of what side of the aisle they sit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, outrageous. Simple 
questions to this Premier that he won’t answer, day after day. 
Taxpayers and the nuns were ripped off in this deal, Mr. 
Speaker. Millions of dollars were wasted. For that Premier to 
pretend this isn’t a scandal is desperate and arrogant, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We of course look forward to speaking with the current CEO of 
the GTH, but the two other CEOs were there when this deal was 
being put together, when it was being formulated. There was a 
long-serving public servant, the CEO who was fired just before 
the minister’s bid to have the Sask Party buy this land, paying 



November 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1475 

way too much money, from his landlord. There was the Sask 
Party operative that ushered this forward along with the 
minister to cabinet on the . . . right up until the second pitch. 
 
It’s time for the Premier to cut the political games, cut the 
obfuscation. Will he commit today to ensure access to these key 
witnesses? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor 
had the opportunity to interview the individuals referenced 
opposite. And I quote . . . I’d actually quote from the Provincial 
Auditor’s appearance at the committee meeting referenced by 
the Leader of the Opposition, November 8th, 2016. Quote. No, 
there weren’t really any obstacles. Like I said, some of the 
information took a little longer to compile and put together than 
we hoped for, but I think, given the volume of information, it 
wasn’t unreasonable in that regard. 
 
That was the Provincial Auditor. Here’s another quote from the 
Provincial Auditor: “. . . we did find that people were [very] 
co-operative.” 
 
Another quote from the same meeting referencing precisely 
what the member opposite was asking: 
 

We were very pleased when we reached out to the former 
CEOs that they were willing to meet with our office . . . 
We thought that was very important and [we] appreciated 
. . . their involvement. 

 
The Provincial Auditor and her team of experts, including a 
forensic auditor, had the opportunity to interview these 
individuals. We take that to be very important. And we also 
would reiterate the conclusion after those interviews, and I 
quote the words of the Provincial Auditor: “The audit did not 
find evidence of conflicts of interest or indications of fraud or 
wrongdoing by the GTH management or its board of directors.” 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, the auditor’s report was 
scathing. She did her job. It’s past time that members opposite 
did theirs to get to the bottom of this. That arrogance and 
desperate responses and a pathetic display from a Premier who 
won’t answer a simple question, and then puts a minister up to 
have tired talking points that don’t answer a thing. And this is 
the people’s legislature, and it’s becoming more clear day after 
day that the Premier has forgotten this. 
 
The deputy minister of the Economy, as identified through the 
auditor’s report, is a key player at the centre of the scandal 
along with the ministers. Not only that, he still has the same job. 
He works for the new Minister of the Economy and, Mr. 
Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan pay his salary. 
 
Everyone watching PAC [Public Accounts Committee] earlier 
this month clearly saw the refusal to invite this deputy minister, 
this key individual in the scandal, as direct actions of the 
Premier’s office. Will the Premier stand up today? Will he stop 
blocking access to these witnesses at the Public Accounts 

Committee? If not, what’s he hiding? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well as the member opposite very well 
knows, or should very well know as a former chairperson of 
Public Accounts, the individuals who are speaking to 
recommendations made by the auditor are the permanent heads 
of the organizations involved. So the permanent head of the 
GTH and the permanent head of the Ministry of Highways and 
Infrastructure will be appearing and speaking to the 10 
recommendations made by the auditor, recommendations that 
we fully accept and are working on implementing. 
 
And with respect to the assertion, the statement the member 
opposite made — the Leader of the Opposition — that the 
auditor did her job, we fully concur. And that’s why we had 
asked her to do a full audit into the matter, which she did. And 
at the conclusion of that full audit, the Provincial Auditor, in her 
June 30th, 2016 news release concluded: “The audit did not find 
evidence of conflicts of interest, or indications of fraud or 
wrongdoing by the GTH management or Board of Directors.” 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The call was to the Premier. No answer. 
No commitment. Weak, tired talking points from a minister. 
This is a Premier who just announced a billion dollar deficit, 
after another billion dollar deficit, and after he hid the facts and 
reality from Saskatchewan people. And because of his 
mismanagement, scandal and waste, they’re now adding $3.5 
billion of new debt in just two years. How can he be so arrogant 
to block a committee of the people’s legislature from doing its 
work in holding an open and transparent debate? 
 
The deputy minister of the Ministry of the Economy is 
identified throughout this report, the auditor’s report, as a key 
player in this scandal, right along with the ministers and that 
cabinet, Mr. Speaker. He is supposedly still responsible for the 
Ministry of the Economy. 
 
So will the Premier finally stand up here today and approve the 
invitation to the deputy minister of the Economy to do . . . and 
do all he can to ensure that he appears before that committee to 
testify as soon as possible? It’s past time that Premier comes 
clean. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
the GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well as I had just responded, Mr. 
Speaker, and as the Leader of the Opposition should know very 
well as a former chairman of the Public Accounts Committee, 
the process for having a hearing on recommendations from the 
auditor is that the permanent heads of the organizations 
responsible appear to speak to recommendations, whether those 
recommendations are accepted, not accepted, and the 
implementation progress of those recommendations. That’s how 
it works, Mr. Speaker, and the Leader of the Opposition I think 
very well knows that, but for political reasons is choosing to 
ignore that. 
 



1476 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2016 

As far as answering the questions, the Provincial Auditor 
answered these questions, Mr. Speaker, as have we responded 
to questions in this Assembly. At the conclusion of her audit 
into this matter, which was very thorough, at the conclusion of 
that very thorough audit, this is her words, Mr. Speaker: “The 
audit did not find evidence of conflicts of interest, or indications 
of fraud or wrongdoing by the GTH management or Board of 
Directors.” 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

State of the Provincial Economy 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, they are hiding. They’re denying 
reality. They’re running from accountability and somehow 
being arrogant about it. And it seems the Finance minister is 
trying the same strategy, ignoring the facts and spinning a fairy 
tale. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there’s no fairy godmother to save the day 
here, and no amount of witchcraft reasoning will change the 
facts. The facts are that the Sask Party blew through the rainy 
day fund. They blew through the surplus. They blew through 
record revenues and they didn’t save a penny. Sask Party 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste have left Saskatchewan 
people suffering. Nearly every day we’re seeing job losses, 
countless broken promises, and millions in deep and devastating 
cuts to our hospitals, our kids’ classrooms, and to 
Saskatchewan’s most in need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not witchcraft that led up to the $3.5 billion of 
debt that the Sask Party has racked up in just two years. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s the consequence of Sask Party mismanagement, 
scandal, and waste. So is that minister willing to take 
responsibility and admit that his projections were fantasy? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Speaker, the facts are thus: in the 
last two years we’ve lost resource revenues in this province to 
the tune of $1.2 billion because of the downturn in the oil and 
gas sector, because of the downturn in the mining sector here, 
and, Mr. Speaker, we saw evidence of that yesterday with 
respect to the layoffs at the Cory mine, west of Saskatoon, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The reality is this: that our tax revenues are down some $400 
million in year, Mr. Speaker. At the same time, at the same time 
spending is up in Agriculture because of crop insurance claims. 
Would the Finance critic want this government to deny those 
claims? 
 
Spending is up in health care in this fiscal year, Mr. Speaker, 
because of utilization pressures at our health care facilities 
across the province. Would the Finance critic want us to stop 
doing surgeries and shut down ERs [emergency room] across 
the province? 
 
Spending is up in education, Mr. Speaker. Spending is up in 
social services, as the Minister of Social Services evidenced 
yesterday with respect to the amount of money we’re spending. 
Would the Finance critic have this government stop making 

those payments on income assistance to people across this 
province? Yes or no? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, once again this minister has to 
acknowledge that this party has been in government for almost 
a decade. If he wants to tell tales about the past, he should tell 
the tale of the last government he worked for, which was 
plagued by mismanagement, scandal, and waste, and drove this 
province to the brink of bankruptcy. Sounds familiar. But, Mr. 
Speaker, this is no fairy tale. $3.5 billion of debt added to the 
debt in just two years. And 11,000 more Saskatchewan people 
looking for work this year than last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, instead of digging up the past, we would rather fix 
the growing crisis right now. And right now, Mr. Speaker, the 
Sask Party’s mismanagement, scandal, and waste are hurting 
Saskatchewan people and putting our future at risk. So, Mr. 
Speaker, will the minister admit that the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste has left him feeling some 
déjà vu? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — I think it’s . . . Again I welcome the 
debate. She’s criticizing the policies of this particular party. We 
provided $6 billion in tax relief to the people of this province, 
Mr. Speaker. People vote with their feet: 1.15 million people 
living in this province right now, 150,000 . . . Well the member 
from Athabasca can get up and ask a question if he wants to 
enter the debate. 1.15 million people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have new schools being built across this province. We have 
new health care facilities being built across this province. We 
have new buildings going on at the universities in the cities of 
Regina and Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. We have highways and 
infrastructure that for years, for years, Mr. Speaker, had been 
neglected by the NDP when they sat on a rainy day fund of $1.2 
billion. 
 
We had thousands upon thousands of our young people leaving, 
where mothers and dads and grandparents asked the 
government of the day, could you do something to try and keep 
our young people here? While they sat on $1 billion, Mr. 
Speaker. We had tax revolts across rural Saskatchewan while 
they sat on $1 billion, Mr. Speaker. At the same time they were 
closing down hospitals and closing down schools. We’re 
keeping people employed in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Support for Agriculture 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to point out, 
Mr. Speaker, that minister and that entire cabinet have 
squandered our future for years and years to come. This 
government arrogantly acts like they and they alone own the 
issue of agriculture, but farmers and stock growers are being let 
down by the Saskatchewan Party’s mismanagement, scandal, 
and waste as well. Like oil and gas, they need to get their 
product to market, and that means defending rail space, 



November 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1477 

particularly for grain. But since this government could not build 
a single pipeline to tidewater, rail space is precious and rare. 
 
Mr. Speaker, add to that the closure of the Port of Churchill and 
their eager support of giving away the Wheat Board to Saudi 
Arabia so farmers in Saskatchewan are in even greater need of a 
strong voice in their corner. 
 
[10:45] 
 
Mr. Speaker, Growing Forward 2 is expiring in a year and a 
half, so it’s the Sask Party, the cabinet with a penchant for 
Twitter tantrums and storming out of meetings, that will be 
representing our farmers and stock growers. Can the Minister of 
Agriculture commit to working constructively with counterparts 
from across the country in ensuring that Saskatchewan farmers 
and stock growers get strong representation that they need and 
deserve? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Well, Mr. Speaker, you know, I think 
our producers, whether they be grain farmers or livestock 
producers, would be very quick to say and very quick to point 
out that they get much more support from this government than 
they ever did from them.  
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, they would not even fund fed 
programs upfront, leading to years of delay for payouts. They 
cancelled GRIP [gross revenue insurance program]. They were 
part of that, which they were taken to court for, Mr. Speaker. 
They totally failed agriculture on every front. I hope the 
member has more questions on this one. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Funding for Lighthouse Emergency Shelter 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Social Services 
certainly showed a lot of frustration yesterday, but she is not 
nearly as frustrated as the people who are being let down by her 
failures. The shell games and playing with the numbers made 
for an interesting video clip, but with colder and colder days 
coming, her bluster and arrogance won’t keep those with no 
place to stay warm at night. 
 
Even when presented with documents from her own ministry 
that clearly say the services will no longer be funded, she will 
not admit that there have been cuts. She calls the Lighthouse a 
wet shelter, and said they aren’t funding it because it’s not the 
responsibility of Social Services. She also said she doesn’t think 
it’s the responsibility of the Ministry of Health. She has no 
answers. 
 
Of course this minister, the member for Regina University, is 
feeling pressure to cut as deeply as her colleagues are. But does 
the minister not understand that her ministry is about more than 
a spreadsheet? And when Sask Party mismanagement, scandals, 
and waste results in cuts to the Lighthouse, their consequences 
are real, whether she admits them or not. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 

Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Mr. Speaker, our officials are 
actually meeting with the Lighthouse, and we will continue to 
meet with them to work on a plan forward for a sustainable plan 
forward. 
 
With respect to funding for the Lighthouse, I’ve said it before 
and I’ll say it again here. We fund emergency shelters. That is 
the mandate of our ministry. We try to make sure that people 
are out of the cold for the evening, so we will provide funding 
on the basis of utilization to people who we are not funding for 
shelter somewhere else in the city. So we’re not going to pay 
for someone to have shelter somewhere else in the city and also 
pay for them at the Lighthouse. That is not what we do, Mr. 
Speaker. And I’d be happy to take further questions on the 
matter. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Release of Long-Term Care Facilities Reports 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, if that minister isn’t going to 
take responsibility for her cuts, I sure hope the Minister of 
Health is going to do something and is prepared to support the 
hospitals that are already feeling the costly burden of caring for 
those who are turned away by the Lighthouse, Mr. Speaker. 
But, Mr. Speaker, his answers yesterday don’t give me much 
hope of that. 
 
We asked for the CEO tour reports. He said no, not even before 
the end of session. Most have been on his desk since the end of 
September. The minister says he needs to review them before 
releasing them, but we don’t want sanitized reports spun by the 
minister’s communications team. The people of Saskatchewan 
deserve the straight facts. 
 
The Ombudsman has said the issues are system wide. Facilities 
are understaffed, and basic care needs like baths and providing 
water are being dropped. The minister’s mismanagement is 
hurting our parents and our grandparents. Mr. Speaker, why 
won’t this minister just release the reports, unsanitized, and be 
straight with the people of Saskatchewan about the real needs in 
long-term care in this province? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the member’s 
preface of the question, I didn’t yesterday, I did not say no to 
releasing the CEO tour reports. They will be released. Mr. 
Speaker, they’re not on my desk. Mr. Speaker, the last I 
checked with ministry officials, not all the reports were in yet. 
They need to review them. And to her version of sanitizing 
them, Mr. Speaker, they need to be checked for privacy before 
they’re released publicly. They will, in due course, be released 
publicly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we take long-term care very, very seriously. The 
member opposite is always calling for more resources into it. 
We have almost 800 more long-term care workers than those 
members did when they were in government. If somehow it’s 
under-resourced, what does that speak to when they were 
representing the people of the province? 
 



1478 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2016 

Mr. Speaker, this member is always criticizing, always asking 
for more resources. And yet in their campaign, in their platform, 
Mr. Speaker, you know what they promised for health funding? 
Less than what we’re providing this year, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Support for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, from where do those ministers get 
the arrogance for answers like that? They are so out of touch 
with the realties facing Saskatchewan people. 
 
Yesterday when I asked the Education minister about cuts to 
our kids’ classrooms and breaking his commitments to teachers, 
he said that he “believes in the teachers of the province.” 
Believes in them, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure that someone is 
comforted to know that he acknowledges that they exist, but he 
sure doesn’t seem to believe them when they show proof that 
they need more support from this government. 
 
Classrooms are getting bigger and bigger, and teachers aren’t 
getting the supports that they need. I know that the minister 
wears a lot of hats and that he has a lot of pressure to cut deeply 
to make up for the Sask Party’s mismanagement, scandal, and 
waste, but why is he putting our children’s education on the 
chopping block? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 
member as well for the question. Mr. Speaker, in 2007 the 
enrolment in our classes was 161,261. In 2016 it has grown to 
179,707, an increase of 11 per cent or 18,000 students. Mr. 
Speaker, during that time, funding per student overall is up 
from $8,762 to $10,461, an increase of 19 per cent or $1,700 
per student. Overall our funding is up from $1.41 billion to 
$1.88 billion, an increase in operating funding, Mr. Speaker, of 
some 33 per cent or $475 million. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 

New Request for Proposal for Liquor Store 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Speaker, oh there’s nothing to see here; 
just trust us. Those are the sentiments we often get from the 
other side. In fact they even mock us for asking important 
questions on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Yesterday after my colleague raised questions about the RFP 
[request for proposal] process for the sell-off of liquor stores, a 
member opposite took to her feet to chastise and arrogantly 
scold a respected member of the official opposition. We now 
know that there was in fact a conflict of interest. 
 
I understand the minister is retroactively now redoing the RFP 
process. But, Mr. Speaker, after nine years of government, how 
are these folks still mismanaging their files this badly? And is 
the minister now redoing the entire process because there was a 
conflict or because they got caught? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this government 
has done the right thing. We were . . . The member for Carrot 
River Valley issued a statement earlier today. I’ll let that 
statement speak for itself. But when we were informed that 
there was a conflict, we acted immediately. The Conflict of 
Interest Commissioner was contacted, provided an opinion, and 
this morning I directed that a new RFP be issued for the Carrot 
River store in particular, to make sure that there was no 
question with regard to the integrity of the process. 
 
There was no . . . I can speak directly. There was no 
involvement on the part of the minister or Executive Council or 
members of Executive Council in any of the awards of 
contracts. This was done by a third party, KPMG, in 
consultation with senior officials at SLGA [Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority]. But with regard to this 
particular matter, I have directed that a new RFP process be 
issued for that particular permit. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 

Appointment of New President of SaskEnergy 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to inform the House that the SaskEnergy board of 
directors has just announced the appointment of Mr. Ken From 
as president and chief executive officer of SaskEnergy. 
 
Ken From is no stranger to members of this Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, after working for SaskEnergy and, before that, the gas 
division of SaskPower, from 1981 until 2007. Since that time, 
Ken has co-founded a junior oil company; worked for the 
Technical Safety Authority, TSASK; and is currently CEO of 
the Petroleum Technology Research Centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ken has demonstrated that the skills learned by 
employees in the Crowns are in high demand in other sectors of 
our growing economy. As Ken has also demonstrated, many 
workers take that additional experience and return to the 
Crowns to further strengthen those organizations. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I look forward to working with Ken in his new role. 
 
I’d also like to thank Susan Barber and members of the 
SaskEnergy board of directors for their leadership in 
interviewing a very talented and experienced group of 
candidates. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank another dedicated Crown 
professional, that being Doug Kelln, the retiring SaskEnergy 
president and CEO. Mr. Speaker, with Doug Kelln as CEO, 
SaskEnergy has become an industry leader in safety and 
innovation. The corporation provides the energy infrastructure 
for the many businesses continuing to invest in our economy. 
SaskEnergy is also a utility the people of Saskatchewan have 
come to know that they can depend upon, much as the 
Government of Saskatchewan has come to depend upon the 
leadership of Doug Kelln. Thank you, Doug, for 34 years of 
service to the province of Saskatchewan. You’ve made your 



November 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1479 

hometown of Wadena very proud. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and on behalf of the 
official opposition, I’d like to join with the minister in 
congratulating Mr. Ken From on his new appointment as CEO 
of SaskEnergy. I know Ken to be a very capable and 
forward-thinking, intelligent person, and we certainly sincerely 
wish him well at the head of SaskEnergy, one of our important 
public utilities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’d also join with the minister in thanking Doug Kelln for 
the very capable and strong lead that he has provided for many 
years, both at SaskEnergy, but also over the course of his 
34-year career. So again, on behalf of the official opposition, 
I’d like to say congratulations and thank you to both of these 
men. Thank you. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Lloydminster. 
 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
 
Ms. Young: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Crown and Central Agencies to report Bill No. 
17, The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2016 without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Minister of 
Justice and Attorney General. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I request leave 
to waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill 
and that the bill now be read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 17, The 
Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2016 and that the bill be 
now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 
Bill No 17 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2016 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of SaskPower. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I 
move that the bill be now read the third time and passed under 
its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the Bill 
No. 17, The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2016 be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 

ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: — On division. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried, on division. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government Whip. 
 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to order the 
answers to questions 219 through 226. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has ordered the 
responses to questions 219 to 226. 
 
[11:00] 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 

Benefits of Free Trade to Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan was once known as 
the breadbasket of the world. It was a designation that we wore 
with pride. We were the tillers of the soil. We tended the herds. 
We fed the world. We put our backs into our labour, and the 
hungry of the earth were the benefactors. It was always held up 
to us that without Saskatchewan the rumbling stomachs of the 
world were unlikely to be satisfied. 
 
The problem with this image was of course that while we were 
given credit for our sweat and toil, our province was still an 
economic backwater. We entered the 21st century as the poor 
cousin of Confederation. And like our beloved Saskatchewan 
Roughriders, we were relegated to being a poster child for the 
next year country, the place where it was nice to come from, but 
where opportunity was sadly lacking for our young people. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, with the advent of the Saskatchewan Party 
government in 2007 this picture began to change. Like a 
colleague from Manitoba recently said, it was like watching 
someone flip a switch. Almost immediately Saskatchewan 
transformed from a province where our main export was our 
young people, to a diversified economy where our youth began 
to think about a future much closer to home. 
 
A large part of this transformation, this shift, was due to trade. 
Trade is absolutely vital to the Saskatchewan economy. 
According to EDC, Export Development Canada, one of out of 
every three jobs is dependent on trade. Our government made 



1480 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2016 

trade a top priority and has worked as quickly as possible to 
provide the support and create the environment for our 
exporters to flourish. 
 
The numbers that demonstrate these changes are astounding. 
Saskatchewan exports to our largest trading partner, the United 
States, totalled 7.6 billion in the year of 2000. By 2010, after 
three years of the policies of the Saskatchewan Party 
government, Mr. Speaker, it had almost doubled to 14.7 billion. 
And by 2015 it had increased again to 17.7 billion. 
 
Asia illustrates the turnaround even more dramatically. In 2000 
the province’s exports to Asia totalled 2.3 billion. By 2010 it 
had more than doubled to 4.8 billion. And by 2015 it had almost 
doubled again to 8.8 billion. Mr. Speaker, keep in mind that 
Asia has almost been completely undervalued by the previous 
governments as a potential trading partner. In fact one of the 
first things the NDP did the last time they formed government 
was to close our trade offices there. Asia’s now one of the focal 
points of our efforts and continues to grow as a destination for 
Saskatchewan exports. 
 
Nearly 70 per cent of what Saskatchewan produces is exported 
to over 150 countries around the world. The United States is 
still our primary trading partner, but we are making significant 
inroads into markets in China, India, Brazil, Japan, and many 
other countries. And helping this effort is the Saskatchewan 
Trade and Export Partnership, known as STEP. 
 
STEP is a Saskatchewan government agency that has existed 
for 20 years. And while it was initiated under the previous 
administration, it seems to have only reached its potential in the 
last 10 years. It is membership-based and while the agency is 
consistently seeking out new markets, it also dedicates much of 
its energies to increasing existing and established markets. 
Exporters are able to customize programs, including market 
intelligence and sorting out challenges of international financial 
and logistical diversities. 
 
As some of our most significant exports come in our agriculture 
sector, our government’s recent budget included a 7.5 per cent 
increase in funding for our Agriculture ministry. It further 
provided almost 15 million for agriculture business 
risk-management programs and 27 million for agricultural 
research. It will solidify Saskatchewan positions as a world 
leader in innovative and safe technology which world markets 
are clamouring for. Saskatchewan exports 95 per cent of our 
agricultural production. Only 5 per cent is consumed in Canada. 
Once again, trade is absolutely vital to our provincial economy. 
 
Seed Hawk in the Moosomin constituency, a world leader in 
precision drilling equipment, is just one example of how 
Saskatchewan is leading the world. And our government’s 
policy have given companies like Seed Hawk the opportunity to 
succeed. And, Mr. Speaker, we have done this by cutting red 
tape, rewarding innovation, and contributing to a supportive 
business environment. The opportunity to succeed, Mr. 
Speaker, that is what our government stands for. It will provide 
the support, conditions, and opportunities, and if we can get out 
of their way, our Saskatchewan companies will flourish. 
 
Again the numbers that bear out our success of our 
government’s policies are extraordinary. In the last 10 years, 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has increased its wheat exports by 
$4.2 billion or 141 per cent. Lentil exports have increased by 
2.5 billion for an astounding 992 per cent. Perhaps we should be 
known as the protein basket of the world. Canola, in the last 10 
years, an increase of 467 per cent; canola oil, an increase of 864 
per cent; peas, 217 per cent; uranium, 99 per cent. And potash, 
did you know, Mr. Speaker, we have the largest reserves of 
potash in the world? In the last 10 years, we’ve exported over 
$6.6 billion worth, an increase of 153 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are now making significant inroads into the 
Chinese markets. In 10 years we have increased our export 
activity to China by 347 per cent. I’ll emphasize that — 347 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker. Canola and canola oil, potash, peas, 
soybeans, and much more — a total of 3.4 billion of 
Saskatchewan products were exported to China in 2015. 
 
And the big picture, Mr. Speaker, shows us that in 2015, 
Saskatchewan exports reached $32.6 billion. That’s roughly 
$30,000 for every man, woman, and child in this province, an 
amazing achievement by any economic measure. As a note of 
comparison, Mr. Speaker, the last NDP government of 
Saskatchewan had a grand total of $6.4 billion in exports in 
2007. That is less than 20 per cent of last year’s exports. 
 
Our government also strongly supports trade agreements such 
as CETA [Canada-European Union Comprehensive Economic 
and Trade Agreement] and TPP [Trans-Pacific Partnership]. 
Trade agreements are another very important piece of the 
puzzle and are a key to keeping us competitive globally.  
 
A good case study to support the value of pursuing trade 
agreements can be found by looking at our trade relationship 
with South Korea. Saskatchewan exports to South Korea were 
nearly $300 million in 2011. About that same time, our 
competitors in that market signed free trade agreements with 
South Korea and quickly became suppliers of choice. Our 
exports then shrunk to $85.5 million by 2014. Canada’s free 
trade agreement with South Korea was implemented a year later 
and our exports then rose to $104 million. In 2016, year-to-date 
statistics indicate a 150 per cent increase in our exports to South 
Korea, proof of the potential of what trade agreements can 
accomplish. 
 
Mr. Speaker, growing world populations mean that the world’s 
nations not only have to feed their people but they must also 
increase production, and we know Saskatchewan is ready and 
able to play a central role in fulfilling these needs. Mr. Speaker, 
in the fastest growing economies of the world where they prize 
food security and energy security, we find ourselves very well 
positioned. Saskatchewan is truly a food, fertilizer, and energy 
superpower. 
 
We almost take for granted the tremendous talents and 
resources that we have in this province. Saskatchewan provides 
65 per cent of the world’s lentils, 55 per cent of the world’s 
peas, 39 per cent of the world’s durum, 30 per cent of 
worldwide production of potash, 15 per cent of the world’s 
production of uranium, and Saskatchewan is the second-largest 
exporter of oil in Canada. There is no other jurisdiction in 
Canada that can even come close to what people of 
Saskatchewan export per capita. 
 



November 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1481 

But as much as I’d like to continue to amaze you with the 
statistics regarding Saskatchewan exports outside Canada’s 
borders, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to move on to another initiative 
in which our government has taken a leading role, and that is 
the New West Partnership Trade Agreement. Since 2010 the 
New West Partnership has been a driving force in the Canadian 
economy, resulting from an agreement between the 
governments of Saskatchewan, Alberta, and British Columbia. 
When it took full effect in 2013, it represented 9.8 million 
people and 610 billion in GDP [gross domestic product]. In the 
three years since then, those numbers are now 11 million people 
representing a GDP of 750 billion. 
 
We are very pleased now to announce that Manitoba will join 
the New West Partnership in 2017. That province’s new 
Premier, Brian Pallister, made the announcement recently 
stating that business owners, community leaders, and chambers 
of commerce from across Manitoba have long called on our 
province to pursue new opportunities for growth and reduce 
trade barriers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the partnership will represent 94 per cent of 
Canada’s natural gas production, 85 per cent of our nation’s 
arable land, and major exports of beef, potash, uranium, gold, 
and copper. As free trade between western provinces is at the 
heart of this agreement, the Pacific Gateway Alliance, which 
resulted from a New West Partnership transportation and 
infrastructure summit in Regina, has been meeting with 
producers to address transportation issues such as high volume 
seaports, adequate integrated highway systems, upgraded rail, 
and improved and expanded pipelines. 
 
Improving our trade infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, will not only 
create jobs but it will improve our overall competitiveness. 
Saskatchewan has led the way in establishing regional 
transportation performance measures and targets, starting with 
the grain sector. Additional target tables in forestry, energy, 
potash, and coal are slated for the completion in 2017. 
 
The single economic region established by the New West 
Partnership will go a long way in creating what our government 
knows will be Canada’s most open and competitive economy. 
Certified workers and professionals will now be able to enter 
workforces throughout the West without being subject to 
additional training requirements. This will help foreign-trained 
workers encounter more consistent regulations in having their 
qualifications recognized. In addition, Mr. Speaker, 
apprenticeship mobility protocols will be established to 
facilitate the movement of apprentices throughout the region. 
 
Procurement agreements are being negotiated with thresholds 
low enough to ensure that small businesses in the region will 
have more opportunities to bid on government contracts and 
ensuring the best value for our tax dollars. An example of this 
would be the joint purchasing of government vehicles. Vehicle 
inspection regulations on newer and recently inspected cars will 
be changed to create fewer inconsistencies and on movement 
between provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the New West Partnership, Energy, and 
Environment ministers along with industry representatives are 
also exploring a common approach to performance metrics for 
oil pipeline monitoring. Each province has committed to 

develop open education resources for post-secondary students. 
Our government, Mr. Speaker, has already provided grants to 
the universities of Saskatchewan and Regina and Sask 
Polytechnic to develop made-in-Saskatchewan open course 
modules which will be shared throughout the region. 
 
Unnecessary differences in business standards and regulations 
will be eliminated. This will allow for goods, services, 
investment, and workers to flow freely across the region’s 
borders. This will not only boost trade but it will make it easier 
for businesses to expand into other provinces, lowering costs 
for businesses and taxpayers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we welcome the entry of Manitoba to the New 
West Partnership. Together with the Western provinces, we will 
continue to take the lead in reducing trade barriers and creating 
an open and stable marketplace in our region. The Government 
of Saskatchewan is proud of the role we have taken in 
continuing to be a part in development and growth of this 
economic powerhouse, and encourages investors, nurtures 
innovators, and rewards the best instincts of our people to 
improve themselves and the world in which they live. 
 
I’d just like to go back, Mr. Speaker, to highlight some of the 
markets that we’re working on now, and I’d just like to go back 
to the Chinese markets in Asia, what we’re doing. In 10 years, 
we have increased export activity to China by 347 per cent. 
These are huge numbers, Mr. Speaker. In the big picture that we 
. . . In Saskatchewan this year, we’ve had $32.6 billion worth of 
exports. Or in 2015, sorry. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How much did the NDP have? 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Oh, not as much as that. Mr. Speaker, to that end, 
because of the absolutely critical role that trade plays in the 
Saskatchewan economy, I’d like to move the following motion. 
And that is: 
 

That this Assembly recognizes the importance of free 
trade, both within Canada and outside our borders, and 
acknowledges the benefits that trade brings to our 
province. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Moosomin has moved the 
following motion: 
 

That this Assembly recognizes the importance of free 
trade, both within Canada and outside our borders, and 
acknowledges the benefits that trade brings to our 
province. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the 
Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As ever, 
I’m good to take my place in this Assembly, join debate, and 
offer a few thoughts on the motion before the Assembly. And 
certainly, as is often the case with various of the initiatives of 
this government, there are certain things where, you know, of 
course they’re worthy of support, Mr. Speaker. Of course 
they’re important. And again the . . . I’d compliment the 



1482 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2016 

member from Moosomin on his fine rendition of what’s 
happening in the landscape in terms of the way that 
Saskatchewan goods and services are being exported 
throughout Canada and indeed the world. But as an individual 
tasked with a Legislative Secretary position for trade, I guess, 
Mr. Speaker, we’d expect no less. 
 
[11:15] 
 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, I was also interested to note what 
was absent from the member’s speech. And certainly there was 
some places where it got skirted around and some places where 
it was, you know, glaringly absent, that kind of insight that 
you’d be expecting from a person with a specific task in this 
regard — to serve the legislature, to serve the Premier, serve the 
minister for trade — in terms of that particular work. That 
certain of these things were absent from the member’s 
comments is a bit disappointing, Mr. Speaker. But who knows, 
maybe the things we’re looking for will emerge in the speeches 
yet to come. 
 
But one thing in particular, Mr. Speaker, I note that there was 
no absence of the tremendous uncertainty that is there in the 
global trade arena that has been set off by such things as the 
Brexit vote, and certainly with, you know, the impact that will 
have on the future of CETA. But also what is the future of 
documents such as NAFTA [North American Free Trade 
Agreement] itself? What’s going to happen with the bilateral 
agreements on things like softwood — and the impact that has 
on the forestry sector here in Saskatchewan — with the United 
States? 
 
And then of course, the election of a new president in the 
United States, and what impacts are anticipated from that 
occurrence, Mr. Speaker. And certainly, you know, there’s a 
playlist been put out by the new president-elect, and one of 
those is that one of the actions that’ll be taken within the first 
100 days, and indeed within the first day of that presidency, if 
memory serves correct, Mr. Speaker, is that the Trans-Pacific 
Partnership will be no more. 
 
So I guess if we’re going to have an informative discussion here 
today, Mr. Speaker, it would’ve been good to hear what the 
latest developments are and what actions the provincial 
government is taking to protect the interests of Saskatchewan in 
that environment, and what the different plans are to make sure 
that if that’s not a go-forward, then what is the plan, Mr. 
Speaker. And again when we see, you know, on different files 
. . . And again the member gave a fine speech. So maybe I’ve 
got a bias towards folks that come from Wolseley, but you 
know, it was a fine speech. But again it was silent in an 
unhelpful way, Mr. Speaker, on some of the developments in 
the current landscape but also on some of the more glaring 
failures on the part of this government on matters related to 
trade and matters related both internal to Canada and certainly 
in terms of the global situation. And it would have been good to 
have had some recognition of those issues, but that was not 
there. 
 
And certainly one issue that I think of, Mr. Speaker, is the way 
that this government has been laggards rather than a leader 
when it comes to matters of tendering and the way that other 
jurisdictions have aggressively promoted their own particular 

provincial interest. But the way that, you know, the member 
from Saskatoon Northwest, kind of late to the dance in terms of 
some of the moves that this government had played in serving 
as Boy Scout to the Canadian context, Mr. Speaker, in terms of, 
you know, not advantaging, not making certain that every last 
ounce of local benefit was there to be derived for Saskatchewan 
companies, for Saskatchewan workers, and for the 
Saskatchewan family as a whole, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again it took some kicking and screaming to get that 
government dragged to the realization that local benefit should 
play a much more active consideration in terms of where 
they’re at, so that when you’re putting forward projects such as 
the Regina bypass, that those dollars are maximized here in 
Saskatchewan instead of exporting dollars to France in that 
particular case, Mr. Speaker. Or the way that other international 
concerns are, you know, at the front of the line and making, you 
know, piecing in the local economic interest in sort of a 
haphazard way, instead of that being the first and foremost 
consideration. That when we, as the Government of 
Saskatchewan, is making those expenditures, you know, 
spending Saskatchewan people’s tax dollars, that the maximum 
benefit should go to Saskatchewan people. That should be 
straight ahead. 
 
We’ve seen other jurisdictions pursue that interest aggressively, 
Mr. Speaker, and we’ve seen this government kind of late to the 
dance when it comes to defending those interests. So that was 
nowhere in that member’s speech other than a brief reference to 
the thresholds around small business. And now I hear the 
business guru from Moose Jaw Wakamow chiming in. This is 
of course is the, you know, most recently notable for voting 
against the Moose Jaw Wakamow Valley Authority Act, you 
know, and not really having a good answer for the people of 
Moose Jaw Wakamow when it came to pulling the funding for 
the Moose Jaw Wakamow Valley Authority, Mr. Speaker. So 
you’ll forgive us if we take his advice with a massive grain of 
salt. 
 
In terms of other places where this government has fallen down, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to see when it comes to the 
possible entry into the Saskatchewan market of a player like 
Yancoal, a Chinese national entity, what is the answer that they 
have on the environmental front but certainly on the economic 
front, and what impact that will hold for Canpotex and where 
the economic benefit — or lack thereof — analysis is, Mr. 
Speaker. And we don’t see that from this government. And we 
certainly didn’t hear that in the 15-minute speech from the 
member from Moosomin. And again perhaps we’ll hear that in 
speeches to come. 
 
But we want to hear about the current landscape certainly, but 
you know, far too often this is a government that is quite 
content to put the greatest hits on the turntable, Mr. Speaker, 
you know, get the headphones on, and just have a great listen 
and think of better times because there are . . . And that doesn’t 
cut it, Mr. Speaker, because there are challenges on the horizon 
and there are challenges in the landscape. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, if we’re going to build on 
Saskatchewan’s strength, if we’re going to make sure that 
Saskatchewan workers and Saskatchewan families are the 
benefit of this proud tradition of trade and export that we have 



November 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1483 

in this province, if we’re going to make sure that Saskatchewan 
taxpayers’ dollars are being spent in the best interest of 
Saskatchewan people which, you know, is as common sense as 
it comes, Mr. Speaker, that we’ve got a massive common sense 
deficit racking up on that side along with their $1 billion deficit, 
Mr. Speaker, in terms of the finances. 
 
If we can’t have those things addressed in a speech like this . . . 
I mean I understand it’s Thursday and I understand the 
members have got time to fill, but I’m expecting more from an 
individual that has been tasked with being the Legislative 
Secretary for trade. And I’m certainly expecting more from that 
government, Mr. Speaker, in terms of the defence and the 
advances they should be making for Saskatchewan trade, 
Saskatchewan workers, Saskatchewan communities, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So you know, maybe that will be corrected in the speeches to 
come, but if, you know, some of those individuals could tell us 
what the impact is of something like Yancoal coming into the 
market here in Canada and in Saskatchewan, what impact that 
will have on Canpotex where, you know, just yesterday we 
have the kind of pressures that that sector is already under. 
What analysis has been done? If they can talk about that, Mr. 
Speaker, that would be helpful. And what kind of, what kind of 
take do they have on their ideological cousin Donald Trump 
being elected president of the United States? And with that, Mr. 
Speaker, I look forward to the other interventions in this debate. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today in support of 
the motion calling on this Assembly to recognize the 
importance of free trade, both within Canada and outside of our 
borders. And I would like to acknowledge the benefit that trade 
brings into our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on November 17th, 2016, Manitoba joined the 
New West Partnership. This is great news for our Western 
provinces and for our Canadian economy. The New West 
Partnership was initiated in March 2009 by the premiers of 
British Columbia, Alberta, and Saskatchewan, and its purpose 
was to explore opportunities to expand trade and investment 
opportunity and to reduce impediments to trade, investment, 
and labour mobility. 
 
Moving forward, Mr. Speaker, a year later the premiers of 
British Columbia, Alberta, and Saskatchewan signed the 
far-reaching New West Partnership Trade Agreement. The 
agreement created the largest, most open, and most competitive 
interprovincial marketplace in Canada, eliminating obstacles to 
trade, investment, and labour mobility among the three 
provinces. On May 3rd, 2010, Mr. Speaker, from the other side 
of the House, John Nilson called the New West Partnership 
trade deal, and I quote, “a sellout trade deal.” In today’s 
economy, we need to remove the barriers to trade and create 
opportunity for Saskatchewan’s economy to diversify and grow, 
both within Canada and internationally. 
 
The new west premiers last met in November 2014 in Regina, 
and since then significant progress has been made, including 
work with industry to improve the transportation system and 
supply chain through the Pacific Gateway Alliance, joint 

government purchasing of fleet vehicles to improve efficiency 
and reduce costs to taxpayers, mutual recognition of 
apprenticeship training to improve apprentices’ mobility, 
waiving vehicle inspection requirements for people moving 
between northwest partnership provinces, and developing open 
education resources for post-secondary students. Manitoba 
joining the NWP [New West Partnership] will create even more 
opportunities in the West. Saskatchewan is looking forward to 
working with the other jurisdictions to build on our competitive 
advantage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the addition of Manitoba, this economic and 
political partnership is now representing over 11 million people 
with combined GDP over 750 billion in GDP. With the 
inclusion of Manitoba, the NWP will now cover over 30 per 
cent of the Canadian population. Mr. Speaker, NWP energy 
ministers, along with industry, are exploring a common 
approach to perform metrics for oil pipeline monitoring through 
the western regulatory forum and the National Energy Board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, modernizing internal trade in Canada will help us 
strengthen our province’s economy as well as the Canadian 
economy. The new Canada free-trade agreement will do that by 
expanding procurement opportunities for Saskatchewan 
business in other parts of Canada, ensuring labour mobility for 
our workers. And it will tackle hidden barriers to trade created 
through our regulatory difference using a new regulatory 
co-operation mechanism. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our premiers are committed to finalize the new 
CFTA [Canada free-trade agreement] before the end of this 
year, but we will only sign on this agreement if it meets 
Saskatchewan’s interest: that means fair treatment and reduced 
barriers for our business and for our citizens. A new Canada 
free-trade agreement will benefit Saskatchewan people and 
businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at the July 2016 Council of the Federation 
meeting, premiers were able to resolve a number of . . . 
[inaudible] . . . issues and announced an agreement in principle 
that will strengthen Canada’s economic union for the benefit of 
Canadian businesses, workers, and consumers. Trade ministers 
have been asked to resolve outstanding technical issues and 
present a final agreement with hope that the new agreement 
comes into effect for Canada’s 150th on July 1st, 2017. 
 
[11:30] 
 
Mr. Speaker, since December 2014 negotiators have been 
meeting face to face on a monthly basis, and trade ministers 
have met five times. Mr. Speaker, some key achievements 
under the new CFTA would include a comprehensive 
agreement that covers all aspects of the economy, better 
transparency of what is covered and not covered by the 
agreement by using a negative-list approach, a regulatory 
co-operation mechanism, a comprehensive review of the legal 
regulatory regime in Canada that will be completed within two 
years. Recommendations will be made to the ministers for areas 
of improvements such as personal import limits, 
direct-to-the-consumer sale, markup rates, bottle size, and 
increase the monetary penalties that will strengthen the dispute 
resolution mechanism. Architecture of a new agreement will be 
more similar to the New West Partnership Trade Agreement in 



1484 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2016 

that general rules will be used rather than sector-specific 
chapters. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now that our eastern neighbouring province has 
joined the New West Partnership Trade Agreement, 
Saskatchewan looks forward to continue to work with our 
partners to reduce hurdles affecting long-term businesses, 
opportunities, and make Western Canada even stronger. The 
agreement commits each jurisdiction to enhance trade, 
investment, and labour mobility, and to remove barriers to 
movement of goods, services, investments, and people within 
and between the provinces. 
 
There has been a lot of positive reaction to Manitoba joining the 
New West Partnership. Mr. Speaker, Manitoba Premier Brian 
Pallister remarked that: 
 

Business owners, community leaders and chambers of 
commerce from across Manitoba have long called for our 
province to pursue new opportunities for growth and 
reduced trade barriers. Joining the New West Partnership 
will bring these advantages. We look forward to working 
with British Columbia, Alberta and Saskatchewan to 
expand opportunities and support stronger economies right 
across western Canada. 

 
BC [British Columbia] Premier Christy Clark noted that: 
 

Western provinces are leaders in reducing barriers to trade, 
and bringing Manitoba into the New West Partnership 
Trade Agreement can only strengthen our open market. By 
joining forces, we can continue to expand our economies 
and benefit all Canadians. 
 

Mr. Speaker, even Alberta Premier Rachel Notley was pleased 
to welcome Manitoba into the new partnership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, according to the Bank of Canada, removing 
interprovincial trade barriers would be comparable to the 
projected economic benefit from international trade deals such 
as CETA and the proposed Trans-Pacific Partnership within 
Asian countries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish to wrap up my remarks today by reminding 
members of the principle of the New West Partnership: 
 

Eliminate barriers that restrict or impair trade, investment 
or labour mobility; 
Enhance competitiveness, economic growth and stability; 
Increase opportunities and choice for workers, investors, 
consumers and businesses; 
Reduce costs for consumers, businesses and governments; 
Provide access to information to facilitate trade, investment 
and labour mobility; 
Promote sustainable and environmentally sound 
development, and high levels of consumer protection, 
health and labour standards . . .  
Minimize the impact of other measures that may adversely 
affect trade, investment or labour mobility; 
Resolve disputes in an effective, inexpensive and timely 
manner; 
Support ongoing trade and investment liberalization both 
nationally and internationally; and 

Demonstrate the benefit of freer trade within Canada by 
simplifying and expanding upon the scope and coverage of 
the agreement on international trade. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to finish by saying that I am proud to 
support the motion brought forward by the member from 
Moosomin. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Brkich): — I recognize the member 
from Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to enter into this debate on trade. And it’s an important 
debate that we have, you know, because it’s been something in 
Saskatchewan’s history for a long, long time. And we have 
some comments here, but I was just busily working, looking up 
at this book. I’m not going to go long into this, but I did want 
to . . . 
 
You know, it was interesting. I was up at La Ronge a few years 
ago, and I saw a beaver pelt, you know, put up on the wall of 
the store. And I said, well that’s interesting. That’s an 
interesting thing. Then all of a sudden the owner of the store 
said, well there’s a long story behind that beaver pelt. And 
really, truly in Saskatchewan with the whole issue of trade, it 
goes back a long, long way. 
 
And as I was listening to the people speak here, I just want to 
say — and this would be of interest to some of the members 
opposite — that I come from Mortlach, Saskatchewan. And we 
just talked about Wanuskewin. And I just want to take . . . If 
people have read this book, A World We Have Lost: 
Saskatchewan before 1905, talks about the Mortlach site. I 
won’t go long into it, but the whole thing about Mortlach was 
the whole issue of where they traded. 
 
And I quote from page 82: 
 

An obvious explanation is that the Mortlach people secured 
whatever foodstuffs they required from the 
Missouri-Mississippi villages through trade, and that the 
prize items they could offer in return were bison meat and 
other bison products. This exchange network enabled them 
to take advantage of renewable resources, the great herds at 
their disposal. 

 
So what was interesting, we were having trade in this province 
from around Mortlach — if you know, is a little west of Moose 
Jaw — down into Mississippi and that whole thing. So this has 
been going on for about 1,000 years, trade. And so I just wanted 
to highlight that, Mr. Speaker. I won’t go into a long, long 
discussion about that. 
 
But I do want to say that this is an important discussion because 
we are a trading nation, a trading province. And as the member 
from Moosomin went through the statistics, and we’re very 
proud of that, of the kind of good work that we do here in 
Saskatchewan. But I do want to say that this whole idea that all 
of a sudden — and he used the metaphor of a switch — I don’t 
think quite is very accurate. And we talked about this in this 
House, that somehow the members opposite feel a switch came 
on on that November day, in November of 2007. That wasn’t 
the case at all. 



November 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1485 

We have over the decades, over the decades, been building on 
trade, and we know that’s an important area here in our 
province. There was no switch. There was no switch for potash. 
There was no switch for oil. We know those things were 
building and building. 
 
And in fact what was interesting, I know the member from 
Kindersley, who was the economic minister at the time, was 
talking about how they wouldn’t change the royalties or the 
structure around potash because they liked the way the NDP 
had done that, the way Premier Calvert had set that up to seize 
the opportunity of, you know, those great prices that we could 
see in potash. But we needed to make sure we had the structure 
here in Saskatchewan to seize the moment. 
 
And the other thing that’s so important to make sure we are on 
the record in Saskatchewan is that STEP, Saskatchewan Trade 
and Export Partnership, was founded in the ’90s, I believe, by 
Premier Romanow’s office. And so we have a long, long 
history within the NDP, within the CCF [Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation], understanding that trade is so 
critically important. 
 
Now one of the members was talking about a former member 
here in his speech, Mr. Nilson’s speech of 2015, November 
24th, and I do want to quote from that speech he gave. And I 
think it was one of his best speeches if not his best speech 
really. And I often tell people to take back and take a look, read 
that because he went through and talked about the trade 
partnership . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well TPP . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . Yes, the TPP agreements that we 
were . . . Trans-Pacific Partnership trade agreement. And he 
gave a great speech. He did go on a bit, but I think that was 
okay because he covered a lot of territory, and it was very, very 
important. But I want to quote from him, and he says, and this 
is from November 24th, 2015: 
 

And I think I want to start from a perspective where the 
New Democratic Party and the New Democratic Party 
governments over many decades in Saskatchewan have 
always been pro-trade. We’ve always been a party that’s 
[been] promoting what’s happening in Saskatchewan 
 
We’re concerned about getting an open market for 
Saskatchewan products, and we’ve always held that 
perspective. But we’ve also held the perspective that 
Saskatchewan citizens deserve the best, they deserve 
protection, and they deserve careful review of any 
document. It was very distressing, you know, a few weeks 
ago when the Minister of Trade for Saskatchewan made 
the comment about our party saying, “I’m hopeful that they 
don’t say that they need to see the details.” 

 
And I’ll read that little quote from what the minister of trade for 
Saskatchewan, the current member from Meadow Lake: “I’m 
hopeful they don’t say that they need to see the details.” Mr. 
Speaker, that speaks volumes, volumes about the management 
style of this government. 
 
You know, here we are, just this week, getting the mid-term 
report. We’re $1 billion in debt in the operating funds here in 
Saskatchewan, and this just shows . . . And we’ve seen the 
scandal. We’ve talked about the GTH daily, daily about how 

it’s important to know those details and be able to talk about 
details. 
 
And here we have the government side proposing a motion that 
generally sounds good on paper, but really when you dig into it, 
we need to see what this government is all about. 
 
And even this morning, even this morning we heard that they 
couldn’t even deal with a request for a proposal in Carrot River, 
in Carrot River. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Couldn’t run a three-car parade. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Couldn’t run a three-car parade. And here we 
have them back to the drawing board on a very, should’ve been 
a pretty straightforward piece of work for them to be able to 
handle the RFPs for selling off the liquor board stores. And 
within a few days, within 48 hours we’ll see if we get more of 
these situations as it comes out. But here we have one example 
of how they have a problem. 
 
Well here’s another problem that we see. And this is one that 
we were very proud of as a province in terms of making sure 
our own people had the chance to participate in the economy in 
a meaningful, meaningful way. And you know, our leaders 
often talked about how the French won the contract to build the 
Ring Road here in Regina. 
 
But here we have a headline, “Alberta companies cleaning up 
abandoned Saskatchewan oil wells.” Well that’s an interesting 
thing people have a lot of questions about. Here we have a 
Premier wanting the federal government to chip in and help 
Saskatchewan workers clean up abandoned oil wells. And here 
we have, “About 40 cents on every dollar spent to clean up oil 
wells in Saskatchewan is going to Alberta.” How does that 
sound like Saskatchewan oil workers are getting the benefits of 
this good trade deal? And I’ll just read a little bit more: 
 

The province’s Saskatchewan Oil and Gas Orphan fund put 
up a request for proposals in January looking for 
companies to, “successfully conduct the down hole 
abandonment(s) on oil, gas and industry related wells, flow 
line abandonments and well . . . decommissioning.” 

 
That’s what they’re looking for. But this is what Brad Wagner, 
the director of the Economy ministry’s petroleum and natural 
gas says: “We don’t show any preference to local Saskatchewan 
companies.” 
 
Now it just seems really odd. On one hand you have the 
government calling for action, and they’re going to do 
something, but here’s something they could actually make 
happen. They could actually make happen and say, here we in 
Saskatchewan are going to support our Saskatchewan oil 
workers. They are hearing one thing, but on the ground they are 
seeing something completely, completely different and that’s 
because of the New West Partnership. 
 
Now we’ve seen that in the Crowns, and how they’ve had to cut 
back on local shopping. And in fact this government over here 
has been very clear about their stance on our bill about 
supporting local governments. 
 



1486 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2016 

So, Mr. Speaker, with that I’ll conclude my remarks. I look 
forward to hearing the next speaker on this issue. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at the 
outset I want to make it perfectly clear that I unequivocally 
support the motion brought forward by the member from 
Moosomin, recognizing the vital role played by free trade 
within Canadian economy and the international economic 
sphere and acknowledging the many benefits that free trade has 
brought out in our fair province of Saskatchewan. 
 
[11:45] 
 
Saskatchewan’s economy is heavily focused on exports. Our 
province exports goods to over 150 countries. Saskatchewan 
exports are ranked number one in Canada at $29,000 per capita, 
Mr. Speaker. The total value of Saskatchewan exports doubled 
from 16.4 billion in 2006 to over 32 billion in 2015. Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan provides 65 per cent of the world’s 
lentils, 55 per cent of the world’s peas, 39 per cent of the 
world’s durum wheat. Over 30 per cent of the total worldwide 
production of potash comes from Saskatchewan, and 15 per 
cent of the world’s production of uranium. Saskatchewan is also 
the second-largest exporter of oil in Canada. As well, Mr. 
Speaker, we ship over $5.8 billion in manufactured goods every 
single year, including dryland farm equipment and mining 
machinery. According to Export Development Canada one in 
every three jobs in Saskatchewan is dependent on our exports. 
 
It goes without saying, Mr. Speaker, that free trade offers many 
substantial benefits to Saskatchewan’s economic development 
and our sustained prosperity by opening up new opportunities 
for people, investors and businesses, and eliminating barriers to 
trade and facilitating economic exchanges between our 
provinces here in Western Canada. Vital to the economic 
growth and benefits afforded by free trade are trade deals and 
partnerships that establish regulations, mutually benefit market 
exchanges between different regions. 
 
Nowhere are these partnerships more vital to the establishment 
of stable and prosperous market relationships than they are 
between Saskatchewan and its fellow Western provinces of 
Alberta, BC, and Manitoba. As such, dynamic and expansive 
trade agreements such as the New West Partnership and the 
prospective Canadian free trade agreement are a pivotal 
component of our relationship with our fellow provinces and an 
important driving force in our economic success. 
 
Originally here signed in Regina in 2010 as an economic 
partnership between Saskatchewan, Alberta, and British 
Columbia, the NWP has acted as a pillar of economic activity in 
Western Canada for years. Membership in this agreement 
commits each province to improve trade, investment, and most 
importantly the mobility of labour, as well as eliminating 
barriers designed to obstruct the free movement of people, 
goods, services, and investments between the member 
provinces. 
 
Between Saskatchewan, Alberta, and BC, the NWPTA [New 
West Partnership Trade Agreement] represents over 5.4 million 

workers and $651 billion in GDP, a figure which comprises a 
full third of Canada’s national gross domestic product. Thus the 
NWPTA area represents the largest and most open and most 
competitive inter-provincial trade market in Canada. 
 
The most tangible benefits of membership in the NWP are 
enhanced labour mobility, streamlined business registration and 
regulations, increased competiveness, best value for public 
spending, collaborations on infrastructure, and our sharing of 
educational resources. Mr. Speaker, NWP’s labour mobility 
provisions enable certified workers to practise their occupation 
in any of the market provinces without being required to 
undertake additional certification exams or training. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that part is the most important to me and 
to my family. Way back in 1996, Mr. Speaker, our family was 
looking to move out of Saskatchewan and into Alberta because 
it seemed like everybody else had. So we decided to take a look 
at the market; we decided to take a look and see what 
opportunities were out there. 
 
I had no problem. My wife however was a hairdresser, and 
apparently hair is different in Saskatchewan than it is from BC 
or Alberta. As a hairstylist, she would have had to go back to 
school, spend about $9,000, take another test, go through the 
apprenticeship, and then write her journeyperson’s certificate, 
Mr. Speaker, to style hair. Now I’m not sure how hair differs 
from Saskatchewan to BC, but apparently it was a huge 
difference, and it would have cost our family over $25,000, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now as my son enters Sask Polytechnic to take the automotive 
service technician program, once he’s completed his 
apprenticeship and his journeyman certificate, Mr. Speaker, 
he’ll be allowed to practise anywhere in the Western provinces, 
Mr. Speaker. Business registrants in member provinces are now 
enabled to register in all other provinces at the same time as 
their first incorporation with all previous residency 
requirements removed. As well, all unnecessary differences in 
business regulations and standards have been removed under 
the NWP. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the free passage of capital, goods, 
services, and workers across the borders of member provinces 
significantly streamlines the process for businesses to expand 
into other provinces, lowering the cost for corporations and 
taxpayers in the process. In addition, the NWP’s open 
procurement policies make it significantly easier for small- and 
medium-sized businesses to make bids on our public contracts. 
 
The NWP also aims to reduce costs for consumers, 
governments, and businesses; increase access to information; to 
facilitate economic exchanges; increase co-operation between 
member provinces; and provide support to ongoing trade at both 
a national and international level. As well, the agreement is 
designed to encourage the resolution of disputes in the most 
effective, fair, and timely manner possible. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it is likely due to these substantial benefits 
that an exciting milestone recently has been achieved in the 
history of the New West Partnership. Earlier this month, the 
Government of Manitoba concluded negotiations with 
Saskatchewan, Alberta, and BC to join the NWPTA. This 



November 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1487 

signals a welcome expansion of the largest, unobstructive 
interprovincial market in Canada. 
 
Manitoba’s government is eager to join the NWP and begin 
mutually beneficial joint work with its partner provinces under 
the agreement. The hard-working citizens and entrepreneurs of 
Manitoba will also reap the benefits of the agreement, including 
greatly increased mobility and streamlined regulations for 
accessing and engaging with interprovincial markets. With the 
addition of Manitoba, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the NWPTA 
comprises a common market of more than 11 million 
Canadians, bringing the combined GDP up to more than $750 
billion. The NWP now includes over 30 per cent of Canada’s 
total population. 
 
Despite the welcome addition of Manitoba to the NWPTA, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, relations between our province and Alberta 
recently came under strain because of the Alberta NDP’s 
government’s imposition of an unfair beer markup to brewers in 
the NWP area, including Saskatoon-based Great Western 
Brewing. 
 
In October, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Alberta Gaming and 
Liquor Commission announced a new markup regime for beer 
products, dividing products into four tiers of increasing markup 
based on annual worldwide production volumes. In July of 
2016, the Alberta Gaming and Liquor Commission modified 
that beer markup regime so that — and I want to get this 
straight — as of August, all brewers were subject to 
$1.25-a-litre markup. However this change also coincided with 
the announcement of a grant program for small brewers just in 
Alberta, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which effectively offsets the costs 
of that increased markup. Mr. Speaker, that’s the NDP in 
Alberta. 
 
However in October of 2016, Great Western launched a 
challenge on the constitutionality of the Alberta markup regime. 
The Government of Saskatchewan is pleased to note that Great 
Western breweries has successfully applied for an injunction 
stopping Alberta from applying its unfair beer markups to Great 
Western products, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We continue to support 
Great Western as it continues to challenge NDP Alberta’s 
discriminatory markup system and look forward to a full 
resolution on this matter. 
 
The Alberta government’s unfair beer markup is not an outlying 
incident, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Far from it. On the contrary, it 
fits within a much larger record of New Democratic opposition 
to trade agreements, which in turns stands in stark contrast to 
the Saskatchewan Party’s consistent embrace of free markets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I would like to emphasize my support 
for the motion affirming this Assembly’s support for free trade 
within and outside of Canada and the many advantages that this 
trade brings to our province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure and honour to rise and join in on this debate. To put it 
simply, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a funny choice for a 
75-minute debate because of course the Sask NDP have always 

been supportive of free trade, and we’ve been very vocal in that 
and critical of the Sask Party when they fail miserably in terms 
of their inability to effectively advocate on behalf of the people 
of Saskatchewan on many important trade files, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And it’s been interesting listening to the members 
opposite’s comments. It’s quite an interesting fictional display 
of the history of the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I know that the backbenchers on the government side and 
members opposite have a lot of time on their hands, Mr. 
Speaker; you know, there’s not a whole lot that they have to do. 
And I don’t know if they’re all taking a group class in creative 
writing 101, if that’s being offered to the backbenchers on the 
opposite side of the House, Mr. Speaker, but regardless to say, 
it’s been quite an entertaining ride, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
terms of a creative — which is a very generous word to say — 
take on the history of the province in terms of trade. 
 
If you listen to the members opposite, you’d think that trade 
was created in 2007 when the Sask NDP formed government, 
which is a ridiculous thing to say. Mr. Speaker, not only is it 
wrong, but it flies in the face of hundreds of years of 
hard-working Saskatchewan people. I’m pretty sure the 
province of Saskatchewan wasn’t created in 2007, and the 
hard-working values of this province weren’t created in 2007. 
The innovators and the entrepreneurs that have been here for 
decades, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s an offensive comment to say 
to them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
In fact even just one small point to correct the record from the 
members opposite, it was a Saskatchewan NDP government in 
the 1990s, well, promoting free trade because guess what? We 
agree with free trade. We created . . . well not me because I was 
a child at the time . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I’m having some difficulty hearing 
the member so I would ask the members to restrain their 
enthusiasm. I recognize the member from Regina Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It was in fact 
an NDP government in the ’90s that created the Saskatchewan 
Trade and Export Partnership group which is a very successful 
organization that highlighted and promoted trade at that time, 
and continues to highlight and promote trade to this day. 
 
So that’s one of the many things that the Sask Party seems to 
like to take credit for, but forgets the actual, the history behind 
the organization, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again as I said, this is 
yet another example of many examples of the Sask Party taking 
credit for things they have no right to take credit for. And then 
again, similar to what we see now, when times get tough and 
the economy slows down, they run away from any type of 
ownership, which doesn’t do anything, frankly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to serve the people of Saskatchewan which is what 
we’re all elected here to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
As I said, trade is extremely important to Saskatchewan’s 
economy. We’ve been an import-export province since 
inception essentially, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want to run off a 
few numbers for you. 
 
In 2012 Saskatchewan’s agri-food exports totalled $11.1 billion. 
The top Saskatchewan agri-food exports were grains such as 



1488 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2016 

non-durum wheat, barley, and oats at $3.7 billion; oilseeds like 
canola and flaxseed at $3.1 billion; and oilseed products like 
rapeseed oil at $2.3 billion; as well as dry pulses at $1.3 billion, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 2012 exports of primary agricultural 
products, which are also very important for the economy, Mr. 
Speaker, were valued at $8.5 billion in 2012, and accounted for 
77 per cent of Saskatchewan’s agriculture and agri-food 
exports. 
 
These are important things for the economy of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s really important that we’re doing all we can to 
ensure that there’s an open line for both imports into this 
province as well as exports out of this province, and that the 
government is doing a good enough job of advocating for the 
people of Saskatchewan to ensure that the people of 
Saskatchewan are both getting not only an open source but also 
a fair deal in the whole thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
[12:00] 
 
Exports of processed products were valued at $1.7 billion in 
2012 and account for 23 per cent of Saskatchewan’s agriculture 
and agri-food exports as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And there’s 
been several comments on the different types of agricultural 
products that get exported to other, not only other provinces but 
around the world, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but it’s a really 
important part of our economy. We have a really great, strong 
agricultural history and agricultural industry that still exists, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
So it’s important, I think, to list off some of the great products 
that come from Saskatchewan, such as chickpeas, canary seed, 
lentils, durum wheat, flax, mustard seed, field peas, oats, 
industrial hemp, canola, spring and winter wheat, rye, and 
barley are just a few of those examples, Mr. Speaker. From 
what I understand, out of the total amount of exports that 
Saskatchewan produces, agri-foods account for almost half of 
that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And most recently, the most 
significant increase we’ve seen in terms of exports are in lentils, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as the demand for that increases 
throughout the globe, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So as I said, the people of Saskatchewan deserve a government 
that is going to work hard for them, both to ensure that trade is 
open for them, that our markets are available to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and also that it’s being done in a fair way. And 
the failures from the Sask Party in this regard essentially show 
absolutely no end, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There’s many, many 
examples in the last nine years that I could choose from to 
provide as examples that the members opposite have failed to 
acknowledge, failed to gloss over. 
 
It’s too bad. You’d think in these debates we could have a 
reasoned, logical discussion about perhaps what’s been done in 
the past, what’s good, what could be done better, and maybe 
what are some of the challenges for the future, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. But that never seems to be the case as I said at the 
beginning of my remarks, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I don’t think 
that’s part of the members opposite’s creative writing 101 class, 
so of course that won’t come up yet. I’m hoping that maybe in 
the next couple of years they’ll take a bit more of a . . . another 
class perhaps in types of logical reasoning or investigative 
journalism or something to that effect, so that when we come to 

these 75-minute debates and they have speeches, that they’re a 
little bit more logically sound and we can have a better 
discussion about the challenges that actually exist in this 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This government has a propensity to outsource government jobs 
and contracts. We’ve seen that time and time again, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. So when we want to talk about trade, we want to also 
talk about it, and the government wants to talk about what a 
great job they’re doing. They should maybe also look in their 
own backyard and see what they’re doing in terms of helping 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Once again I would just ask the 
members to restrain their enthusiasm for the debate and let the 
member from Regina Douglas Park make her comments. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If you look, 
as an example, to SaskEnergy, you’ll see the amount of 
government jobs that have been contracted out now to different 
out-of-province contractors, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m not too 
sure if that’s their idea of a strong export-import economy and 
that’s good trade to them, but it’s not good trade to the 
Saskatchewan NDP, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Another obvious one that this government has failed to do is 
getting us a new pipeline to trade water for the ability for us to 
export our resources, our natural resources. This government 
has failed time and time again to do that. They’ve had nine 
years to advocate and get that and they have failed. Instead, we 
see a Premier who would rather have Twitter tantrums and 
Facebook battles with, for example, the Prime Minister of 
Canada or it depends on who it is of the day, basically. I think 
the most recent Twitter tantrum was about A&W, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
So instead, I’d like to see a Premier show some leadership, a 
Premier who takes his seat and his job seriously and be a good 
diplomat for the people of Saskatchewan and ensure that he’s 
working hard to ensure that our reputation, both 
interprovincially as well as globally, is as strong as it should be, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that’s the most important thing. I 
think that’s what the people of Saskatchewan want to see in 
terms of improving trade in this province, which is extremely 
important. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Gardiner Park. 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks so much, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Sorry, we had a few seconds left for 
debate. I’m not sure if the member is up for questions or not. 
Before I call for questions, I am going to remind the members 
to put their questions through the Chair and their answers also 
through the Chair. And seeing that it’s a government motion, I 
will recognize a member from the opposition. I recognize 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — There you go. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My question is 
concerning this news story I referenced earlier about Alberta 
companies cleaning up abandoned Sask oil wells. We know the 



November 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1489 

Premier’s gone on at length about that. And it’s calling for the 
decommissioning of 100 orphan flow lines and 200 orphan 
wells, and about 10 of the 15 companies that applied to those, to 
clean up those orphaned sites were Saskatchewan based, but the 
government chose four Alberta-based companies to do the 
work. Alberta got the work. And so I’m wondering, to the 
member from Moosomin, how he can possibly defend that the 
four companies that got the work were from Alberta, under this 
trade agreement? Thank you. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Mr. Speaker, this process was open and 
transparent. It’s in line with the New West Partnership. It 
follows all of the rules of the New West Partnership and further 
to that, Canadian Free Trade Agreement also. And it’s just 
ironic to me that the member from Saskatoon Centre would 
bring this question up when their campaign expenses mostly 
were outsourced, 72 per cent of their campaign expenses were 
outsourced to companies from Ontario who aren’t even in the 
New West Partnership, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Gardiner Park. 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s great to 
finally be up. We know the member from Saskatoon Nutana, 
she supports the radical Leap Manifesto. I suspect many of the 
other members do privately. We know one of the tenets of this 
very problematic document is the call for “an end to all trade 
deals.” That speaks directly to the motion before the House 
today. My question, I want to know from the member from 
Douglas Park: will you stand up against your colleague from 
Nutana and support the trade deals that Saskatchewan exporters 
rely on? Or do you also support the job-killing Leap Manifesto? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member knows 
perfectly well, and we’ve said time and time again, that she 
does not support the Leap Manifesto, so maybe . . . [inaudible] 
. . . question that does not . . . [inaudible] . . . of Saskatchewan. 
We’ve said that time and time again. We’ll continue to support 
trade on this side of the House, and continue to make sure that 
trade is free and fair for the people of Saskatchewan. Maybe the 
members on the other side should stop trying to throw up shiny 
objects of distraction and instead talk to the people of 
Saskatchewan about their massive deficit. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Again we’ll give him advance notice so he can, you know, 
fasten his seat belt and get ready to answer the question, the 
member from Moosomin. In terms of the abandoned oil well 
cleanup program and 40 cents of every dollar this government 
is spending going to Alberta, is the member from Moosomin 
saying that under the rules of trade that there’s nobody in the 
Moosomin constituency or indeed in southeast Saskatchewan 
that can do that work and indeed should be doing that work? Is 

that what that member’s trying to tell this House? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Mr. Speaker, of course there’s qualified 
companies in Saskatchewan. There’s qualified companies in 
Alberta. There’s qualified companies in BC. This is an open 
and transparent process. This is part of the New West 
Partnership. This is why we have an economic zone that has 
$750 billion worth of GDP last year. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, is there no one in Saskatchewan who knows 
how to get from Regina to Saskatoon without having the help of 
a company from Ontario? I find it ironic that they keep asking 
questions like this. Can’t they find a company in Saskatchewan 
who could plan a tour for their election campaign? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Estevan. 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know that the 
members opposite have been opposed to the New West 
Partnership Trade Agreement. In fact, on May 3rd, 2010, 
former NDP MLA John Nilson said, and I quote, it’s a “sell-out 
trade deal.” 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, my question is for the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. How can your party oppose a trade 
agreement that has created new opportunities for Saskatchewan 
people and businesses and investors by removing barriers and 
opening trade with Western Canada? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Well it’s funny, Mr. Speaker. Of course on this 
side of the House we support trade that works for Saskatchewan 
workers, for Saskatchewan companies, for Saskatchewan 
families. That’s what we support on this side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I guess the member opposite need look no further than her 
seatmate and maybe have a good conversation about how is it 
that, when cleaning up abandoned oil wells is the big cause 
célèbre over there, that under the terms of the agreements that 
they’ve signed onto, Mr. Speaker, that 40 cents on every dollar 
being spent in this effort goes out of the province to Alberta, 
when in Moosomin and in Estevan, I’d venture to say, Mr. 
Speaker, you’ve got people and companies that can darn well 
do that work? So maybe the member could talk to her seatmate 
and get him straightened out on how that should be working for 
the people of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, day after day 
we’ve being trying to get to the bottom of the GTH scandal. 
And the GTH was designed to be an important part of our 
Saskatchewan trade strategy, but we’ve only seen 
mismanagement and scandal from the Sask Party when it comes 
to the GTH. And they don’t want to seem to answer the 



1490 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2016 

questions. 
 
To the member from Saskatoon University: why isn’t this 
government more concerned about their scandal of the GTH 
and how it’s going to hurt Saskatchewan’s trade? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon University. 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
member for the question. You know, I think that those 
questions have been asked and answered on that section of the 
government, you know, many times. And you know who did 
answer it, Mr. Deputy Speaker? It was the auditor. 
 
On trade, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s very clear that we 
stand up for the people of Saskatchewan. We stand up for the 
businesses in Saskatchewan. And when we’re talking about oil 
wells and orphaned oil wells and how come 40 cents of every 
dollar went to Alberta, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would say, you 
know what? How many Saskatchewan companies are working 
in BC? How many Saskatchewan companies are working in 
Alberta? How many Saskatchewan companies are going to be 
working in Manitoba now and helping our economy that way, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker? That never happened over there. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Westview. 
 
Mr. Buckingham: — Speaking of fiction, this is not fiction, 
Mr. Speaker. For years the NDP in Saskatchewan and Manitoba 
refused to engage with other provinces to reduce barriers to 
trade within Canada. Since the NDP has been thrown out of 
office, both Saskatchewan and Manitoba have signed on to the 
New West Partnership. But now the NDP government of 
Alberta is trying to rebuild trade barriers, exemplified by their 
new, unfair beer markup scheme. 
 
My question to the member from Regina Douglas Park: will 
you call on your Alberta cousins to abandon their protectionist 
measures and to recommit themselves to working with other 
provinces to promote domestic free trade? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Douglas Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I’ve said time and 
time again, the Sask NDP will continue to support the people of 
Saskatchewan to ensure that trade is working for the people of 
Saskatchewan. We will not be the ones that are throwing stones. 
Instead we’ll be using diplomacy to get the best results for the 
people of Saskatchewan. That’s where this government 
continuously fails. This beer example is one stark example of 
that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s quite a shame that he would use 
this as that example, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Elphinstone-Centre. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Question 
to the member from Regina Pasqua. Now Regina Pasqua’s 
situated in the city of Regina in such a way that you get to the 
one boundary of it, you can see the GTH from there. So 

certainly that member should have some kind of concern about 
the way that scandal has continued to smoke along in terms of 
the actions of that government and the impact that that has on 
the good reputation of the province of Saskatchewan, not to 
mention the way that you’ve got people being ripped off in that 
deal and the kind of questions that continue to not be answered 
in terms of the debate in this Assembly. 
 
[12:15] 
 
So the question to the member is this: if they’re so concerned 
about trade, how is it they can sit back and whistle Dixie while 
the scandal at the GTH continues to go on and on? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Pasqua. 
 
Mr. Fiaz: — Because the Saskatchewan Party government is 
moving forward with the same momentum they moved 
backwards in the last 16 years . . . [inaudible]. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Time for the 75-minute debate has 
expired. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 2 — Calls to Action in the Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission’s Report 

 
[The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by Mr. Belanger.] 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I’m pleased to rise to my feet, although I’m somewhat plagued 
by a cold today. So I’ll do my best to be as clear as I can. 
 
We know the Truth and Reconciliation Commission travelled 
across Canada and did a lot of really important work in terms of 
listening to people, listening to First Nations, Métis, Inuit 
people, listening to non-First Nations people, and listening very 
carefully to the impact of the residential school system amongst 
other oppressive colonialization programs that First Nations 
have been subjected to in Canada right from the get-go, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And you know, here in Saskatchewan, I like to point out and am 
proud to see that our relationship with First Nations and Métis 
people is proudly represented right here in the Chamber, Mr. 
Speaker. And we have on our Table, we have the Métis sash 
representing the Métis people. And we also have a beautiful 
beaded banner right on the Clerks’ Table that demonstrates the 
promise of the treaty relationship that we have here in 
Saskatchewan. And virtually all of our province is covered by 
the numbered treaties that were signed in the 1870s and onward, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 



November 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1491 

This beaded tapestry has an indication of one of the key phrases 
that describes the treaty relationship, and it says, as long as the 
sun shines and the rivers flow, the First Nations will have those 
connections to the land. And we have a beautiful sunshine day 
with forest and a river and a plain flowing through, beautifully 
beaded, Mr. Speaker. We also have our mace situated on a 
pillow made with beaver pelt and beading representing the four 
directions, Mr. Speaker, and it’s a very important part of First 
Nation sacred teachings. 
 
And I think the fact that our ceremonial mace is situated on top 
of that pillow talks to me a lot about where our sovereignty 
comes from here in Canada. And as you know, Mr. Speaker, 
sovereignty is an important feature of nationhood, and our 
sovereignty has always been based on the British parliamentary 
system. 
 
And there’s some things in the calls to action that I want to talk 
about today from the Truth and Reconciliation Commission that 
causes us to think very seriously about how Canada became a 
sovereign commonwealth nation. But I think the fact that the 
symbol of our sovereignty and the mace lies on a pillow of First 
Nation, a sacred First Nations pillow, tells us how important the 
sovereignty of First Nations is as well. And that’s something 
that we have forgotten about. 
 
That’s something that we’ve forgotten about over the years, and 
certainly I think as the waves of colonialism and the enthusiasm 
for settling in Canada from Europe, and particularly western 
Europe, came across in the late 1800s, early 1900s, sometimes I 
think the enthusiasm for colonialism completely obliterated the 
sovereign rights of First Nations people, to the point that by the 
time we got around to negotiating treaties in the 1870s many of 
these First Nations, because of the disappearance of the buffalo, 
were starving. 
 
And when you think about the bargaining table that those chiefs 
came to, when Lieutenant Governor Morris came out and was 
negotiating the treaties, I think the unequal power of those two 
parties, when you had a starving people who were decimated by 
disease, they were decimated by the ravages of alcohol, and 
they were also starving — when they came to the table to sign 
the numbered treaties, they knew all they had was the land. And 
that was their only bargaining chip, Mr. Speaker, and starvation 
and death was the only alternative for those First Nations. 
 
So we do have the treaty relationship. They were negotiated, 
and a number of very important promises were made to the First 
Nations, and as you have often heard, Mr. Speaker, we are all 
treaty people. Anyone who lives here in this province is part of 
the treaty relationship. 
 
One of the important I think recommendations for me in 
particular in the call to action — and I think of the call to action 
from the TRC [Truth and Reconciliation Commission] has a 
total of 94 various calls to action — one that speaks to me 
personally is no. 28, and I’ll share that with the Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

We call upon law schools in Canada to require all law 
students to take a course in Aboriginal people and the law 
which includes the history and legacy of residential 
schools, the United Nations Declaration on the Rights of 

Indigenous Peoples, treaties and Aboriginal rights, 
indigenous law, and Aboriginal-Crown relations. This will 
require skills-based training and intercultural competency, 
conflict resolution, human rights, and anti-racism. 

 
And I have to tell you, Mr. Speaker, when I went to law school, 
this was before the legacy of the residential schools was 
revealed and before the lawsuits started coming in. Out of 
curiosity I decided to sign up for an Aboriginal law class. And I 
had a professor; his name was Professor Norm Zlotkin, and this 
would have been probably 1992 or ’93. And I guess I was 
awestruck and dumbstruck by my lack of knowledge in that 
area when I started learning about the relationship of First 
Nations here in Saskatchewan. I had no idea, Mr. Speaker. I 
didn’t know treaties were there. I didn’t know how First 
Nations had come to be settled on reserves. I knew nothing 
about the residential school process. I knew nothing about the 
promises that were made in the treaties. 
 
And I remember particularly when we had a guest lecturer come 
to our class. His name was Sákéj Youngblood Henderson, and 
he is a Chickasaw member from Oklahoma who came to 
Canada to teach at the Native Law Centre, which is a very 
important feature in law education here in Canada. When he 
spoke, Mr. Speaker, I realized there was a whole side of this 
story that I knew nothing about. And so at that point I was very 
interested in moving on to study the second level of Aboriginal 
law at law school and I was very fortunate to be in Sákéj 
Henderson’s class. And I can tell you that that man changed the 
way I thought. He was an amazing, powerful teacher. He was an 
amazing leader, and he challenged everything that I took for 
granted, Mr. Speaker, and kind of turned my world view upside 
down to the point where then in my labour law class I actually 
did a paper on property law and the difference in world views 
between First Nations and indigenous people’s world view in 
relationship to the land as opposed to western European 
relationships to land. 
 
And I think one of the most telling pieces that we studied was a 
piece by a very famous British writer named John Locke. And 
he wrote a treatise on something called “Of Property.” And 
John Locke was writing, I think in the early 1800s, when for 
him the notion of all these lands in North America were actually 
empty and that they were available for the British people to 
come in and enclose those lands. That was very much the 
thinking of British settlers, British governments, colonial 
governments. As they moved further and further west in North 
America, they brought those notions with them. 
 
The doctrine itself is called terra nullius, and it’s actually 
mentioned twice in the calls to action for the . . . maybe more 
than twice in the calls to action under the Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission. But in particular you find it under 
the 45th call to action. And what this call is, is to redevelop a 
new royal proclamation. But this one . . . The royal 
proclamation was usually issued by the king back in 1763 when 
the Hudson’s Bay Company was given, basically handed the 
entire Hudson’s Bay area, the largest land mass I think ever 
granted by a British Crown. 
 
Of course the British Crown didn’t have title to it at that time, 
but that really wasn’t an issue for the monarch. And that was an 
interesting approach to just taking over land without having any 



1492 Saskatchewan Hansard November 24, 2016 

sort of legal right to do so. And the doctrine was called terra 
nullius, and section 45 or the call to action no. 45 says we have 
to repudiate . . . This is subsection (i): “Repudiate concepts used 
to justify European sovereignty over Indigenous lands and 
peoples such as the Doctrine of Discovery and terra nullius.” 
 
And terra nullius means “empty land,” and John Locke often 
talked about the savages and that they couldn’t possibly have 
any rights to the land because somehow they were substandard, 
and that they didn’t have the legal structures that they needed to 
form and have sovereignty over the land. Clearly, Mr. Speaker, 
he was making it up, but sometimes when things get made up, 
people start believing them. And I think there’s documented 
historical documentation that shows how the concept of terra 
nullius and the doctrine of discovery, which is a doctrine 
whereby . . . It was amongst European nations, and the notion 
was whatever European nation discovered a land before the 
other European nation, they had rights to it. 
 
And that happened through the West Indies. That happened 
through Central America, South America, and certainly North 
America, Mr. Speaker, where you see differing colonies like 
France establishing a colony, New France; New England being 
established by England. The Dutch were claiming territories in 
the United States, and the Portuguese all across the entire 
colonial age, Mr. Speaker. That was the doctrine of discovery. 
But that doctrine never ever addressed the sovereignty rights of 
the First Nations who actually were present, who were 
functioning, high-level societies that were present in those 
territories that were claimed as their own by European 
colonists, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So that’s one of the main features I think of my experience with 
indigenous rights, is the rights to the land. I was very 
disappointed that this government failed to take the opportunity 
in Bill 34 to recognize and take an opportunity to commence 
that reconciliation through our relationships with land, and they 
never even mentioned the treaties or the Truth and 
Reconciliation Commission at all when they were undertaking 
to do a complete modernization of our provincial lands Act, Mr. 
Speaker. And I think that is I guess indicative of the weight that 
this government puts on those recommendations in the Truth 
and Reconciliation Commission. And for me, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
very disappointing. 
 
Now I could go on for that for some time, but I do want to 
touch on a report that just came out regarding child and family 
poverty in Saskatchewan. And again I think the principles in the 
Truth and Reconciliation Commission can guide our approach 
to issues affecting First Nations families. And I think what’s 
staggeringly disappointing in this report that just came out this 
month — I think it was released today in fact, Mr. Speaker, but 
it came out this month — and here’s some statistics that should 
chill the blood in our veins, Mr. Speaker: 
 

For children in First Nations families, the poverty rate in 
2010 was 59.0 per cent. Among those families indicating 
they were Métis, 25.9 per cent were in low-income 
households. In 2010, of the 55,000 poor children in 
Saskatchewan, 31,000 were in First Nations or Métis 
families. 

 
And of course as you know, Mr. Speaker, the percentage of 

First Nations people is much lower than that, so it’s an abject 
failure on the part of our societies when we get these kinds of 
numbers. What’s even more concerning, Mr. Speaker, is when 
they talk about the depth of poverty. Some people are just 
below the poverty line, but many people are way below the 
poverty line, and in this report they let us know that: 
 

Depth of poverty was greater in the Prairie provinces than 
in other Canadian provinces. In Saskatchewan in 2014, the 
income for one-half of families in poverty was at least 
$12,000 to $13,000 below the poverty lines shown in 
Table 1. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s half. The depth of their poverty is 50 per 
cent — or I guess 100 per cent — more than the poverty line. 
And when you think about those kinds of staggering numbers, 
and these children that are living in these situations, it’s 
heartbreaking. 
 
[12:30] 
 
It’s a failure on us as a society, and we need leadership. We 
need to use the guidelines and the calls to action in the Truth 
and Reconciliation Commission report to motivate us to say, 
what can be done? How can we as a collective whole — and 
certainly we’re calling on our government to be part of that — 
how can we ever take it upon ourselves to fix that problem for 
those children? 
 
I think of my own children and the benefits they’ve had of 
being born who they were without any choice on their part. And 
then I think of these children who are living in abject poverty. 
They didn’t ask for that, Mr. Speaker, and they certainly don’t 
deserve it. Those families, a disproportionate rate are found in 
single-parent families as well. We know that the economic 
impact of those kinds of situations as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that there was a report done by an 
economist, Mr. Howe, who suggested that this isn’t just a social 
issue. It’s an economic issue. We’ve talked about it many a time 
and my colleagues on this side of the House have talked about 
that as well. 
 
So the issue is profound. I think the TRC leads the way. It 
provides us with an opportunity to refocus, and we will be 
looking to this government and the new Minister for 
Government Relations to put some meat onto the bones of this, 
Mr. Speaker. The previous minister indicated that they were 
addressing many of these. This was back in January. We’d like 
an accounting of that. We’d like to know what positive actions 
this government has taken and how they measure up to the calls 
for action in the Truth and Reconciliation Commission. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that is the extent of my comments, and I 
appreciate the opportunity to be able to rise in the House and 
address the House. 
 
The Speaker: — Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 



November 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1493 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Call in the members. 
 
[The division bells rang from 12:32 until 12:35.] 
 
The Speaker: — All those in favour please rise. 
 

[Yeas — 56] 
 
Wall Moe Stewart 
Wyant Reiter Morgan 
Harpauer Doherty Duncan 
Beaudry-Mellor Hargrave D’Autremont 
Heppner Boyd Cheveldayoff 
Marit Tell Eyre 
Merriman Harrison Ottenbreit 
Ross Weekes Brkich 
Hart Kirsch Bradshaw 
Steinley Makowsky Phillips 
Lawrence Wilson Campeau 
Docherty Michelson Doke 
Olauson Steele Young 
Fiaz Dennis Bonk 
Carr Nerlien Lambert 
Buckingham Kaeding Wotherspoon 
Chartier Belanger Sproule 
Forbes Rancourt Beck 
McCall Sarauer  
 
The Speaker: — Those opposed to the motion? 
 

[Nays — nil] 
 
Principal Clerk: — Mr. Speaker, those in favour of the motion, 
56; those opposed, 0. 
 
The Speaker: — The motion is carried. I recognize the 
Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this House be now adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved this Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until Monday at 1:30. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 12:40.]  
 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Michelson ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1469 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1471 
  McMorris ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1472 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1469 
  Bonk ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1469 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1469 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1470 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1470 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1470 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1470 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1471 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1471 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 First Nations National Land Governance and Economic Development Conference 
  Lambert ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1472 
 International Day for the Elimination of Violence Against Women 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1472 
 Truth and Reconciliation Flag Raising Ceremony 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1472 
 Regina Citizen Named Red Cross Humanitarian of the Year 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1473 
 Team Canada Wins Silver at World Para Reining International Championships 
  Wilson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1473 
 Rose Valley Roadrunners Win Provincial Championship 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1473 
 New Affordable Supported Living Units in Prince Albert 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1474 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Auditor’s Report and Details of Land Transactions 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1474 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1474 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1475 
 State of the Provincial Economy 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1476 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1476 
 Support for Agriculture 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1476 
  Stewart ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1477 
 Funding for Lighthouse Emergency Shelter 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1477 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1477 
 Release of Long-Term Care Facilities Reports 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1477 
  Reiter ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1477 
 Support for Education 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1478 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1478 
 New Request for Proposal for Liquor Store 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1478 
  Harrison ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1478 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 Appointment of New President of SaskEnergy 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1478 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1479 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES. 
 Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies 
  Young ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1479 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No 17 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2016 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1479 



 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1479 
SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 Benefits of Free Trade to Saskatchewan 
  Bonk ............................................................................................................................................................................... 1479, 1489 
  McCall ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1481, 1489 
  Fiaz ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1483, 1490 
  Forbes ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1484, 1488 
  Olauson .......................................................................................................................................................................... 1486, 1490 
  Sarauer .......................................................................................................................................................................... 1487, 1489 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 1489 
  Carr .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1489 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1490 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
ADJOURNED DEBATES 
PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 Motion No. 2 — Calls to Action in the Truth and Reconciliation Commission’s Report 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1490 
 Recorded Division....................................................................................................................................................................... 1493 
 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


