


















































Hansard: October 24, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 29A  MONDAY, OCTOBER 24, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (Ind.) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10; Independent (Ind.) — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 789 
 October 24, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
The Speaker: — I’m prepared to rule on the point of order that 
was raised by the Government House Leader immediately after 
question period on Thursday, October 20th, 2016. The 
Government House Leader alleged that the Leader of the 
Opposition had said that the Premier cannot be trusted. In 
response to that point of order, the Opposition House Leader 
contended that the Leader of the Opposition used language that 
was within the accepted rules and usage of this Assembly. 
 
I reviewed Hansard, and on page 771 the Leader of the 
Opposition stated, and I quote, “And we should be able to trust, 
we should be able to trust what the Premier is saying about the 
finances.” 
 
Members are well aware that it is not permissible to accuse or 
suggest other members were not being truthful. This practice is 
codified in the rule 51(f) in paragraph 484(3) of Beauchesne’s 
Parliamentary Rules & Forms, 6th Edition, and on page 618 of 
The House of Commons Procedure and Practice, 2nd Edition, 
2009. 
 
In this Assembly, many Speakers have ruled that the integrity of 
members should not be questioned, and the imputations of 
intentional falsehoods are not permissible. While it is not 
unparliamentary to criticize statements made by members as 
being contrary to the facts, the integrity, motives of the 
members, whether individually or collectively, should not be 
questioned directly or indirectly. 
 
After reviewing Hansard, I find that the Leader of the 
Opposition’s comments were not directly specified at the 
Premier; rather, they were directed at the accuracy of 
information provided by the Premier related to the finances of 
the province. 
 
As outlined by Speaker Toth in his ruling on March 29th, 2010, 
and I quote, “Members’ understanding of the facts often differ, 
and that is why we have debate in this Chamber.” For this 
reason, I find the point of order not well taken. In closing, I 
would like to caution all members to avoid words and phrases 
that could be constructed as a reflection of another member’s 
personal character. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
request leave of members to make an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much. To colleagues and 
Mr. Speaker, it is an honour today to make a very special 
introduction to the Assembly today and through the Assembly 
to all those that might be watching, to the province. It’s a great 
pleasure to introduce, in your gallery, His Excellency Kenjiro 
Monji, the ambassador of Japan to Canada. Accompanying 
Ambassador Monji today are Mr. Kunihiko Tanabe, the consul 
general of Japan in Calgary; Mr. Akinori Ando, the consul for 
economic affairs at the consulate in Calgary; and Mr. Paul 
Price, an adviser to the consul general. Mr. Speaker, also 
joining the ambassador’s delegation is someone that needs no 
introduction at all to members of the House, or to really 
anybody in the province of Saskatchewan, I would think, by 
now. Victor Sawa is the honorary consul of Japan in Regina, 
and we want to welcome Victor to his Legislative Assembly as 
well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ambassador and his delegation are here for a 
three-day visit to the province. They have already met with 
officials from the University of Regina. They met with officials 
from Viterra. They met with the Minister of Agriculture and the 
Minister of Economy. I’ll be meeting with the ambassador a 
little bit later this afternoon, as will the ministers of Advanced 
Education and Energy and Resources. Tomorrow the delegation 
heads to Saskatoon for meetings with Cameco as well as the 
University of Saskatchewan. They’re also going to tour 
PotashCorp’s Lanigan mine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province has a long-standing and important 
relationship with the government, with the people, and with the 
companies of Japan. Japan is our fourth largest export market. 
Last year we shipped nearly $890 million worth of goods their 
way, mostly in agricultural commodities. And so I think it’s 
very important, whenever presented with an occasion like this, 
that we would say thank you through the ambassador to the 
people of Japan. There are any number of families in this 
province who depend on that $890 million in trade with that 
great country. 
 
Over the years, we’ve sold a lot of potash and we’ve sold a lot 
of uranium to Japan, as well as those agricultural products. Mr. 
Speaker, I can also share with members of the House that the 
fourth most popular malting barley used in Sapporo and Asahi 
beer comes from Biggar, Mr. Speaker. It comes from Biggar, 
Saskatchewan, where in fact together with the folks at the 
University of Saskatchewan, a special breed of malting barley 
meeting the exacting standards of brewers in Japan has actually 
been developed for that particular market. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we have been to Japan for meetings, we’ve 
been grateful for meetings with government officials, but we’ve 
been also very grateful to meet with very important 
organizations, large international companies like Sojitz 
Corporation, Tokyo Electric Power, and the Japan-Canada 
Uranium Company, among others. 
 
Japan companies are also playing a major role here in the 
province of Saskatchewan, assisting with leadership in carbon 



790 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2016 

capture and sequestration, Mr. Speaker. And we’re grateful for 
Mitsubishi Hitachi Power Systems and their partnership with 
the international CCS Knowledge Centre at the University of 
Regina. And we’re grateful, I would say, Mr. Speaker, that 
Japan is joining us in developing CCS [carbon capture and 
storage], which will be a critical technology in the battle against 
climate change. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our relationship with Japan has many dimensions 
and it is long standing. We’re very honoured to have the 
ambassador here today and the officials from the consulate, as 
well as Victor. And I just want to say on behalf of this House 
and on behalf of the province of Saskatchewan on the public 
record how grateful we are, how thankful we are for the 
relationship in general and this visit in particular, Mr. Speaker. 
I’d ask all members to join with me in welcoming the 
ambassador and his colleagues and Victor to the Legislative 
Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, it’s my honour to join with the Premier and 
welcome this very important delegation from Japan here today. 
As noted by the Premier, this is a long-standing and very 
important relationship to Saskatchewan and to Canada, one that 
we value greatly. Your presence here means a lot. 
 
I want to welcome His Excellency Kenjiro Monji, Mr. Tanabe, 
Mr. Ando, Mr. Price. I welcome you to Regina and to 
Saskatchewan. And it’s a pleasure, as the Premier mentioned, to 
welcome, I want to say maestro, but Mr. Victor Sawa to his 
Assembly. This is in fact someone who has enriched and 
enlivened our communities in so many ways, particularly as a 
leader within the arts as conductor and director of the Regina 
Symphony Orchestra for many, many years. And so, thank you 
so very much. 
 
I understand that they have a busy agenda, with meetings lined 
up that look to be incredibly constructive and of mutual benefit 
both for Saskatchewan, and I certainly hope for Japan, meetings 
that will include meeting with leaders in agriculture and 
education, in mining and our manufacturing sectors. I’m 
thankful for our relationship from an economic perspective, 
certainly from an educational perspective, and from a cultural 
perspective. And I think that it’s important that we recognize 
that when we trade our knowledge and our strengths with each 
other, we’re all made stronger, which is why I’m so thankful for 
your presence here today, so thankful for your partnership with 
our province, and looking forward to that relationship 
continuing to grow for the mutual benefit of both Japan, 
Saskatchewan, and Canada. Welcome to your Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I am pleased to welcome a few guests today seated in 
your gallery. These individuals are with the group, Keep 
Meewasin Vital. We have the co-founder, Lorna Shaw-Lennox. 
Lorna, if you want to give us a wave. Lorna’s a constituent of 
Saskatoon Willowgrove. Joining her are a number of youth: 
Elizabeth Lennox-Quiring, Blake Davis, and Wyatt Davis. I 

look forward, Mr. Speaker, to meeting with this group later 
today. Please, I ask all the members to help me welcome them 
to their Legislative Assembly today. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join the minister in welcoming these friends to the legislature. 
It’s important work that they do, specifically Lorna 
Shaw-Lennox in her work of co-founding the Keep Meewasin. 
You know, it was an important signal that we value all our 
conservation agencies and urban parks throughout the province. 
And I hope the meeting is very fruitful today, and we hear 
positive things in the days that come forward. 
 
I want to welcome as well Elizabeth, Blake, and Wyatt to their 
legislature. Thank you for coming down from Saskatoon. Thank 
you very much. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Gardiner 
Park. 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and all the members, a group of 20 or so grade 12 
students from F.W. Johnson Collegiate here in Regina. And 
their teacher accompanying them today is Mr. Scott McKillop. 
 
It’s great to see Mr. McKillop again. He’s very diligent in 
bringing students every session down to watch the democratic 
process, have a chance to chat with him after routine 
proceedings. All members, please help me welcome them. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. The 
season is upon us where the Saskatchewan legislative interns 
have made their picks for the first season. And I’m one such 
lucky Member of the Legislative Assembly to have been 
matched up with Anna Tsui with the Saskatchewan Legislative 
Internship Program. 
 
Anna is a graduate with high honours from the University of 
Saskatchewan. Born and raised in Saskatoon and, you know, 
came through a program in the Aboriginal public administration 
program, again where I believe she was graduated top of the 
class, most outstanding graduate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And Anna is an individual that’s got a lot of interests locally 
and globally. She’s been seeing those interests through in work 
around human trafficking as a high school student, but certainly 
with the World University Service of Canada in places like 
Tanzania. And has also taken some time to learn some French 
language at the Université de Laval in Quebec this past summer 
and is again a great example of the kind of sharp, engaged 
people that come through the Saskatchewan Legislative 
Internship Program. 
 
And certainly, it’s going to step . . . I’m going to have to step up 
my game, Mr. Speaker, in terms of keeping up with someone so 
intelligent, so passionate, and with such a great array of 
interests. So please join me in welcoming Anna Tsui to her 
Legislative Assembly. 



October 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 791 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask 
my colleagues for leave for an extended introduction, please. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Mr. Speaker, it’s to you and 
through you I’m really proud today to introduce members of the 
University of Regina Rams football team who are seated up in 
the gallery. The Rams are a highly successful sports 
organization with a long and proud history which can be traced 
back to the early 1900s. More than 50 players have advanced on 
to the CFL [Canadian Football League]. I don’t know what the 
U of S’s [University of Saskatchewan] record is but I’m not 
sure it’s not the same. 
 
In 1999 the Rams and the University of Regina formed a 
community partnership enabling the team to join the Canada 
West conference of the Canadian intercollegiate athletic union, 
and just one year later, they made a huge impact on CIAU 
[Canadian Interuniversity Athletic Union] football by winning 
the Canada West conference championship and playing in the 
Vanier Cup. 
 
And earlier this year, Rams alumni Stephen Bryce took the 
helm as the team’s new coach, bringing more than a decade of 
coaching experience. And I can personally attest to his skills 
and his leadership as he worked with my son on the U14 Sask 
Selects that went to the Texas School of Football in Arlington 
last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Friday the Rams, I note, clinched a playoff spot 
with an exciting 35-33 victory over UBC [University of British 
Columbia], which means that they will play host to a semifinal 
game here on November the 5th, which I’m pretty excited 
about. 
 
But the University of Regina Rams, and why I wanted them 
here today, is that they’re more than a football team, Mr. 
Speaker. The team’s focus is not only on excellence in sports 
but on developing players as role models in our community. 
And this is emphasized when they walk into the locker room, 
where for many years this poem has been displayed. It’s called 
“A Man of Worth.” 
 

To be true, faithful, devout to the ideals of what is a man 
To understand and practise the virtue of honesty, the 
quality which gives one peace 
To have empathy for a less fortunate suffering soul and 
compassion to make a difference in that life 
To recognize what needs to be changed and possess the 
courage and patience to change it 
To be discerning and steadfast in love, the condition all 
men fear, yet long for 
To be resolute and firm in oneself while owning the 
dignity to be humble 
To have the will to commit to a cause, the passion to seize 
it, holding a vision, pursuing a goal 

To believe and trust in a higher power guiding the path of 
all humanity 
To determine what is moral and right and then stand for it 
To know what is honour and strive for this cradle of 
justice 
To be loyal to a friend yet remain bold and brave in your 
own convictions 
To be co-operative and protective of your planet in 
reaching to discover, to know, and to learn 
To be generous and thoughtful, giving of your life to a 
better world, seeking no reward or fame from this gift 
To be genuine, to be wise, to be caring is to be a man of 
worth. 

 
[13:45] 
 
The Rams work hard to be men of worth, getting involved in 
special events and important causes throughout the city. Today 
marks the beginning of the Violence Prevention Week in 
Saskatchewan, and I’d like to highlight that the Rams are 
participating in the university’s landmark UR Safe Gendered 
Violence Prevention Project at the U of R [University of 
Regina]. And this week they will be participating in a Man Up 
Against Violence workshop as a team as well. 
 
And with that, I’m proud to introduce members of the Regina 
Rams, starting with head coach Stephen Bryce, offensive 
coordinator Mark McConkey, defensive lineman Bryce 
McKinnon, defensive lineman Kerrick Huggins, defensive back 
Marcus Kuling, linebacker Travis Semenok, defensive back 
Josh Tipton, defensive back Kahlen Branning, and linebacker 
Alex Rorke, as well as the video coordinator for Thomas 
Retzlaff. 
 
So I ask the member for Athabasca, he’s going to have to be 
careful today because we have some linemen in the room. I 
would like you all to join me in welcoming the University of 
Regina Rams to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’d like to join with the minister opposite and 
welcome these leaders to their community who are seated in 
your west gallery. Certainly the Regina Rams have an 
incredible record as part of our sporting history in our province, 
and this year’s been special. 
 
It’s nice to welcome Coach Bryce here today, and we’ve been 
enjoying watching the success on the field and watching Noah 
Picton light it up game after game, and that incredible team that 
you’ve been putting on the field earning that home playoff berth 
on November 5th and, I believe, ranked eighth in the nation 
here right now. 
 
So those exploits themselves deserve recognition here, but the 
second part of your efforts are in fact the game changers in 
many ways within our community. And we want to say thank 
you to all members of the Regina Rams, the entire organization 
along with all out at the University of Regina and other partners 
who are teaming up together to Man Up Against Violence to 
change cultures of sexual violence within our community. And 
certainly the Rams and those players are in an incredibly strong 



792 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2016 

position to be leaders on this front. 
 
Certainly the Rams organization, based on the motto or the 
message that was shared here today by the minister, have long 
been focused on developing more than just great players but 
great people, and that character and those values to go with it. 
But I am so very thankful for the participation of the Regina 
Rams along with all of the partners in the UR Safe and the Man 
Up Against Violence. So I welcome these leaders here today 
and I wish them well on November 5th as well. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
to you and through you to all members, I noted in the . . . seated 
in your gallery is a gentleman today that really needs no 
introduction to this Chamber, Mr. Speaker, but I think it’s 
appropriate that we do acknowledge his presence: Mr. John 
Hopkins, the president and CEO [chief executive officer] of the 
Regina and District Chamber of Commerce. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you might be aware of the fact that the Premier 
had the opportunity last week to address the Regina and District 
Chamber of Commerce luncheon with hundreds of hundreds of 
people at that luncheon, and Mr. Hopkins made it clear on that 
day the Regina and District Chamber of Commerce position on 
the federally imposed national carbon tax, Mr. Speaker. I think 
it’s apropos he’s here today as we debate that very important 
issue later today. I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming 
John Hopkins to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And on 
behalf of the official opposition, we too would like to extend 
greetings to Mr. Hopkins and really thank you for your 
leadership in the Regina Chamber of Commerce and throughout 
the community of course. I had some fruitful meetings earlier 
and look forward to continued dialogue so that we have 
understanding of where the Regina Chamber of Commerce is 
going, and I really appreciate that opportunity. So I would like 
to welcome Mr. Hopkins to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
While I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I also see, seated beside 
Mr. Hopkins, Mr. Chad MacPherson from the Saskatchewan 
Stock Growers Association, a venerable organization in our 
province, a long-standing organization. And certainly Chad is 
working very hard to represent the interests of the stock 
growers of Saskatchewan, does a great job. And we’d like to 
welcome him to his Legislative Assembly as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Hon. Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I notice 
Mr. Chad MacPherson in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. And he’s 
the executive director of the Saskatchewan Stock Growers 
Association, a long-standing organization of cattle producers in 
this province of more than 100 years, Mr. Speaker. And we are 
always happy to be associated with the stock growers, and I ask 
all members to welcome Mr. MacPherson. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
want to join the Premier and my leader in welcoming His 
Excellency, Kenjiro Monji, Mr. Tanabe, Mr. Ando, and of 
course Mr. Price. 
 
I would point out that my niece travelled to Japan as part of her 
studies to become a teacher. She really enjoyed an excellent 
time there when she visited your country several years ago. She 
spoke very highly of the gracious, resilient people. And she just 
loved the cities and the countryside, and she really enjoyed her 
visit to your great, gracious country. 
 
And I also want to point out that, from our perspective, I live in 
the North where much of our mining occurs for the company 
called Cameco. And I want to put a plug in for the company 
called Cameco. Cameco has done a wonderful job working with 
the Aboriginal community. Of course, there’s always work to 
be done, but certainly their history and some of the work and 
investment they made in the northern Aboriginal communities 
is great. 
 
So I would certainly want to encourage you, when you meet 
with Cameco, to share our support. And I hope that your visit 
with the province on all fronts is very productive and, once 
again, thank you for visiting our Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour today to 
introduce, seated in your gallery, Ms. Alicia Miller. Alicia and 
her colleagues David, Anna, and Rachelle, as has been 
previously noted, are the 2016-2017 Saskatchewan legislative 
interns. 
 
And I’m very happy to be paired with Alicia. Alicia is a very 
accomplished young woman. She is a graduate of Stewart 
Russell Elementary School in Regina, a graduate of Campbell 
Collegiate in Regina where she obtained an IB [International 
Baccalaureate] certificate. She also has a degree in international 
studies with a focus on international affairs, and with that, she 
graduated with great distinction and had some of the highest 
marks in her faculty. 
 
In addition to that very, very busy and accomplished work, she 
also spends a lot of her time volunteering, including for the 
Regina Sexual Assault Centre. She is an avid environmentalist 
and is very active in a number of activities such as kayaking, 
camping, hiking and, I think to note, has been for the last three 
years a year-round cyclist. And those of us who spend winters 
in Regina know what an accomplishment that is. So I know that 
she’s destined for very great things, and I’m so pleased that she 
has chosen to spend some time with us while she’s on that path. 
And I invite all members of this legislature to invite Alicia and 
her colleagues to this Legislative Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 



October 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 793 

Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my pleasure to 
rise again to present a petition to improve PTSD [post-traumatic 
stress disorder] coverage for all Saskatchewan workers, Mr. 
Speaker. The petitioners point out that post-traumatic stress 
disorder, or PTSD, can severely impact the lives of 
Saskatchewan workers and that delaying diagnosis and 
treatment for PTSD can be detrimental to recovery. The 
petitioners point out that PTSD is not on the list of workers’ 
compensation illnesses presumed to be work related in 
Saskatchewan and that many workers suffering from 
work-related PTSD are burdened by lengthy investigations and 
approval processes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Saskatchewan government to 
make the necessary changes to ensure that if Saskatchewan 
workers are exposed to traumatic events on the job and are 
then diagnosed with PTSD, it is presumed to be caused by 
the worker’s employment, and the worker will 
subsequently be covered under workers’ compensation and 
receive the same benefits as others with work-related 
injuries. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by citizens from 
Saskatoon. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Melfort. 
 
Mr. Phillips: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I would like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of Melfort, 
Tisdale, Kinistino, Archerwill, Fairy Glen, Prince Albert, 
Saskatoon, Star City, Naicam, Yorkton, and Nipawin. I do so 
present. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I am 
rising to present a petition to reverse the cuts to the Lighthouse 
program. In April 2014 the Minister of Social Services said that 
the Lighthouse in Saskatoon would “. . . take pressure off of 
existing detox facilities, hospitals and police cells, while 
keeping people safe, especially in our brutally cold winters.” On 
the same day the Minister of Health said, “We want to ensure 
that individuals with mental health and addictions issues have a 
safe place to stay.” These ministers are now trying to place the 
responsibility for repairing budget deficits on those 
experiencing addictions, unemployment, and poverty and who 
are living from day to day without proper services. 

I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately reverse 
their recent cuts to funding that allows extremely 
vulnerable people to access the services of the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit in Saskatoon, and revisit their imposition 
of a strict and narrow definition of homelessness on 
November of 2015 which forced the Lighthouse to cut 
back its hours of central service in February of 2016, and 
take immediate steps to ensure that homeless people in 
Saskatchewan have emergency shelter, clothing, and food 
available to them before more lives are lost. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so submit. These individuals are from Saskatoon. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition in support of Wakamow Valley Authority. And we 
know that as a result of the passage of The Wakamow Valley 
Authority Amendment Act, 2016 on June 30th, the Wakamow 
Valley Authority lost its statutory funding of $127,000 from the 
Saskatchewan government in addition to $30,000 in 
supplementary funding. This loss of annual funding negatively 
affected the ability of Wakamow to maintain and conserve its 
lands and repair its facilities and provide services to its 
community. So on June 21st the provincial government 
members voted in favour of this bill, resulting in cuts to 
Wakamow and the subsequent job losses. I’d like to read the 
prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately repeal The Wakamow Valley Authority 
Amendment Act, 2016 and reinstate statutory funding to the 
Wakamow Valley Authority. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from Moose 
Jaw, Lumsden, Saskatoon, and even La Ronge. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
present to you a petition condemning the Sask Party’s cuts to 
the SAID [Saskatchewan assured income for disability] 
program. After nearly a decade of wasting the economic boom 
and blowing through the savings, this government is now 
forcing the province’s most vulnerable people to pay for the 
Sask Party mismanagement. The Sask Party’s latest 
cold-hearted cuts will take money away from people who are 
unable to work due to a disability. The many people who are 
being hurt by the Sask Party cuts live with serious illnesses such 
as multiple sclerosis, cancer, autism, and many other illnesses. 
And contrary to the Minister of Social Services’ claim, the 



794 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2016 

government underfunds clients in regards to shelter allowance, 
and that shelter allowance should be reflective of the current 
rental costs. I will read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to stop their plans to cut 
the SAID funding and immediately restore funding for 
those living with a disability; that shelter allowance is 
reflective of the current rental costs; and that the 
Saskatchewan Party government implement the 
recommendations of the advisory group on poverty 
reduction. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing these petitions are from 
Saskatoon, Shaunavon, and Maple Creek. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition on 
the taxation of child care centres in Saskatchewan. Across 
Saskatchewan licensed, non-profit child care centres are taxed 
inconsistently and many of our licensed, non-profit child care 
centres pay commercial taxes. This is not done in Alberta, 
Manitoba, Ontario, BC [British Columbia], or New Brunswick. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Child care is essential to the economy, yet most centres struggle 
to balance their budgets. This issue threatens both the number 
of child care centres and the quality of care. Quality child care 
has an enormous positive impact on our child’s future outcomes 
and yields high rates of economic return. Child care centres are 
institutions of early learning and childhood development. It’s 
appropriate that they have the same tax treatment as schools. I’d 
like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognize 
that licensed, non-profit child care centres provide 
programs that are foundational to a healthy society by 
including them in the Saskatchewan Education Act; and 
that we exempt all licensed, non-profit child care centres in 
Saskatchewan from property tax through changes to the 
appropriate legislation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those signing this petition are from Regina. I do so 
submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition calling for the stop to the Sask Party 
sell-off of SaskTel: 
 

The petitioners, in the prayer that reads as follows, 
respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan call on the Saskatchewan Party government 
to keep their promise, stop their plan to sell off SaskTel, 
and keep our valued Crown corporation in the hands of the 
people of Saskatchewan. 

 

Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by individuals 
from Sedley, Shaunavon, and Maple Creek. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition calling on the government to stop privatizing 
public liquor sales and profits. The signatories to this petition 
wish to bring attention the following: that the Government of 
Saskatchewan intends to privatize 40 Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority stores, which will result in millions of 
dollars being channelled into private profits instead of being 
used to pay for public services like health care, education, and 
highways; that hundreds of good jobs across Saskatchewan will 
be lost; and that rural economies will be weakened. I’d like to 
read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan stop the 
privatization of Saskatchewan’s publicly owned liquor 
stores and instead direct SLGA to expand its store network 
and selection to meet Saskatchewan’s growing needs. 

 
I have 1,535 signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, and they 
come from all over this great province including, but not limited 
to, Estevan, Bienfait, Kipling, Watson, and Saskatoon. I do so 
submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
to stop the redirection of funding of the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, Inc. A recent report showed that 
94 per cent of NORTEP [northern teacher education program] 
grads found employment in the North. NORTEP has improved 
teacher-retention rates in the North. NORTEP has a positive 
economic impact on northern Saskatchewan. 
 
NORTEP provides high-quality, face-to-face instruction and 
services to students. The province’s financial deficit cannot be 
fixed by cutting indigenous education in the North and the 
program that has served the North for over 40 years. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the 
Saskatchewan Party government to immediately restore 
their five-year agreement to fund the Northern Teacher 
Education Program Council, Inc. and to continue funding 
NORTEP/NORPAC programs in La Ronge. 

 
It is signed by many good people of the North. I so present. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Prince Albert Police Service Celebrates 130th Anniversary 

 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was pleased to 
attend the celebration held to honour the 130th anniversary of 



October 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 795 

the Prince Albert Police Service. A free barbeque was held at 
the Cornerstone parking lot, with officers cooking burgers and 
serving the public. Two former police chiefs provided the 
entertainment. A tent was set up as a museum and people 
enjoyed looking at the old uniforms and learning a lot more 
about the history of our police service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our police service is older than the province of 
Saskatchewan. The first town constable was William Dilworth. 
The first duty he was tasked with was to deal with wild dogs 
running through the town. Our police service has come a long 
way since then. From a one-person operation in 1886, the 
Prince Albert Police Service has grown to today’s department 
of 91 police officers, five bylaw officers, 28 civilian support, 
and a dispatch centre. 
 
The Prince Albert Police Service is the busiest police force in 
Saskatchewan. Our officers respond to more incidents than 
police services anywhere else in the province, even more than 
in the two biggest cities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members join with me in 
congratulating Chief Troy Cooper and the Prince Albert Police 
Service on their 130th anniversary and acknowledging the great 
work done in our community by its members. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 

Remembering Corporal Nathan Cirillo and 
Warrant Officer Patrice Vincent 

 
Mr. Lawrence: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Two years ago 
Saturday, we watched in horror as the Parliament building in 
Canada was locked down as a violent shooting took place. We 
learned quickly that not only was the shooting in the halls of 
parliament, but it started with the tragic killing of Corporal 
Nathan Cirillo who at the time was standing sentry over the 
Tomb of the Unknown Soldier at the National War Memorial. 
Further, it was only two days prior that a vehicle deliberately 
rammed two servicemen as they left a shopping mall, killing 
Warrant Officer Patrice Vincent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we pay tribute to these men who were not 
killed in the heat of battle but rather on our own soil in 
peacetime. We saw in those two days, two years ago, some of 
the greatest cowardice imaginable as these terrorists tried to 
instill fear into our nation. Yet, Mr. Speaker, I can say they 
failed in their objective. It was not fear they caused but rather 
an outpouring of courage. In both instances, bystanders ran to 
the aid of the men attacked and did everything they could to 
save them. We saw our nation rally together in support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today remember that our freedom came with a 
price. I invite all members of this Assembly to join me in 
remembering the sacrifice of Corporal Cirillo and Warrant 
Officer Patrice Vincent. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 

Resolutions at New Democratic Party Convention 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 

weekend more than 400 people from across Saskatchewan came 
together in Saskatoon for our party’s annual convention. And I 
know members on that side jumped to conclusions about what 
would come out of our convention, but Saskatchewan New 
Democrats are excited about some great resolutions we passed 
to help support Saskatchewan families and stop the waste by the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
We called for a judicial inquiry into that government’s GTH 
[Global Transportation Hub] land scandal that has wasted 
millions of taxpayers’ dollars — millions that we are now 
seeing cut from schools and from hospitals. We called for an 
immediate action to address the long-standing suicide crisis 
facing First Nations and Métis communities of our province. 
We talked about the need to restore funding to the Lighthouse 
and the SAID program so that vulnerable people won’t have to 
pay for the Sask Party’s mismanagement any longer.  
 
We talked about honouring the funding agreement with 
NORTEP and NORPAC [Northern Professional Access 
College], and helping more women find work in the trades so 
that they can create more good-paying opportunities for our 
people of Saskatchewan. We stood together, shoulder to 
shoulder, to oppose the Premier’s plan to sell SaskTel in order 
to pay for his decade of bad choices and failure to diversify our 
economy.  
 
We are standing up for Saskatchewan values, Mr. Speaker, and 
we’re building together to make sure everyone in Saskatchewan 
is as strong as they can be so that we all could be as strong as 
we should be. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Saskatoon Achievers in Business Excellence Awards 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to rise 
today to congratulate a number of outstanding Saskatchewan 
businesses that were celebrated at the Saskatchewan Chamber 
of Commerce’s 33rd annual tribute to achievers in business 
excellence. 
 
I along with the Deputy Premier, the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview, and the member from Saskatoon 
Churchill-Wildwood, attended the 2016 ABEX [Achievement 
in Business Excellence] awards gala which was held on 
Saturday at TCU Place in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, more than 50 finalists were nominated for awards. 
The winners included Hospitality Network Canada; Viterra; 
Crestline Coach; Cornerstone Credit Union; the Park Town 
Hotel; Saskatoon Co-op; Black Bridge Brewery; and Standard 
Motors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a number of additional businesses and 
entrepreneurs were recognized at the gala. Prairie Mud Service 
was inducted into the Saskatchewan Business Hall of Fame. Pat 
Tenney from Lloydminster received the Roger Phillips 
Chamber Builder Award. Gavin Semple, chairman of the 
Brandt Group of Companies, was presented the Business 
Leader of the Year Award. Elysia and Natasha Vandenhurk of 
Three Farmers Products were recognized as the young 



796 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2016 

entrepreneurs of the year. Finally, Hillberg & Berk was the 
biggest winner of the evening, taking home both the Marketing 
Award and, top prize, the Business of the Year Award. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating all of the 
outstanding nominees and winners of the 2016 ABEX Awards. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Battleford. 
 

Battlefords Business Excellence Awards Gala 
 
Mr. Cox: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m also pleased to rise 
today to congratulate a number of Battlefords area businesses 
that were recognized at the 23rd annual Battlefords Business 
Excellence Awards gala. This sold-out event was hosted by the 
Battlefords Chamber of Commerce and was held at the Dekker 
Centre for Performing Arts in North Battleford on October the 
4th. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a record 41 finalists were nominated for awards in 
six categories this year. The winners included All Out Graphics 
& Design Ltd. in the category of New Business Venture; 
Fisher’s Drug Store for Customer Service; Lakeland Veterinary 
Services for Community Contribution; Gold Eagle Casino in 
the category of Marketing; Jewellery Connection Inc. in the 
category of Microbusiness; and Anderson Pump House Ltd., 
winner of the Battlefords Best Employer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, two additional groups were recognized for their 
exceptional business contributions in the Battlefords area. The 
Dekker family was honoured with the Heritage Award for their 
dedication to broadcasting and community involvement. The 
family’s 60 years of involvement with Battlefords area radio 
stations came to an end last year when David Dekker retired 
from his role as general manager of CJNB, Q98, and 93.3 The 
Rock. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the evening culminated with the member from 
Biggar-Sask Valley presenting the Business of the Year Award 
to Fortress Windows and Doors Ltd. 
 
I ask all members to join me in congratulating all of the 
outstanding nominees and winners of the 2016 BBEX 
[Battlefords Business Excellence] awards. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Rochdale. 
 

Girls Self-Esteem Workshop 
 
Ms. Ross: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. On October 
the 2nd, the Minister of Central Services, the Minister of Social 
Services, Dr. June Zimmer, and myself had the privilege of 
hosting the 6th annual Girls Self-Esteem Workshop here in 
Regina, with over 200 in attendance. Girls ages 10 to 13 are 
invited to participate in the workshop with their mothers or their 
mentors free of charge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 7 in 10 girls believe they are not good enough or 
don’t measure up in some way, including their looks, 
performance in school, relationship with friends or family 

members. We want to change these girls’ negative views about 
themselves. Every young person deserves to grow up feeling 
confident about the way they look and feel so they are able to 
reach their full potential. 
 
The purpose of this workshop is to show young girls that they 
are valued, that they can have a positive impact on the world 
around them, now and in the future. Strong girls grow up to be 
strong women, and we need to encourage and champion our 
youth to become the leaders of tomorrow. We want our youth to 
be proud, to be bold, to be strong, to be brave, and to be 
themselves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank our sponsors Girls in the 
Game, Tim Hortons, the Saskatchewan Heavy Construction 
Association, and Western Litho Printers. I would also like to 
say a big thank you to all the girls and the mentors who 
attended this wonderful event. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 

Former Deputy Premier Receives Shevchenko Medal 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on the 
evening of October the 1st I was pleased to bring greetings on 
behalf of the Premier and the province to the XXV Congress of 
Ukrainian Canadians. The Ukrainian Canadian Congress meets 
every three years, and this was the first time ever, Mr. Speaker, 
that it was held here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Canadians of Ukrainian descent from all over Canada gathered 
to celebrate their 75th anniversary of their organization, the 
Ukrainian Canadian Congress or UCC. In attendance that 
evening was the Vice Prime Minister of Ukraine, the Ukrainian 
ambassador, federal ministers Dion and Goodale, and a number 
of senators and members of parliament. 
 
During the evening, the UCC presented their highest award, the 
Shevchenko Medal, to a number of well-deserving Canadian 
Ukrainians. The medals were awarded in areas of education, 
community development, culture and arts, and public service. 
An individual from Saskatchewan was awarded the Shevchenko 
Medal for Public Service. 
 
That individual, Mr. Speaker, was formerly deputy premier, 
Ken Krawetz. The UCC recognized Ken for his many years of 
service to this province, starting out in the classrooms, later on 
with the Saskatchewan School Boards Association, private 
business, and for many years serving in this Chamber, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join with me in 
congratulating Ken Krawetz on receiving the Shevchenko 
Medal, Mr. Speaker, a very well-deserved award. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
[14:15] 
 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 



October 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 797 

Role of the Global Transportation Hub 
in Land Acquisitions 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, let’s try this again. The 
Premier’s lines last week simply weren’t supported by the facts. 
We know that the Ministry of Highways was actively working 
to acquire the east parcel of lands, and then all of a sudden 
instead, the government swooped in with the GTH. Question to 
the Premier: why did he purchase these lands through the GTH 
instead of having Highways do it and save millions of dollars? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
member for his question. The Provincial Auditor that did a 
review of the land transaction indicated that there were 
problems within government with respect to this transaction. A 
lot of the problems she identified centred around 
communications. 
 
The auditor . . . Well the Leader of the Opposition just shook 
his head. That’s what the report says. The report says that 
different areas of government were not communicating properly 
during the process. This is why, this is why GTH officials were 
unaware that Highways was engaged in a broader land 
assembly. They should have been. There should have been 
better communications; there wasn’t. We’ve taken action to 
remedy that situation going forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I would point out that same Provincial Auditor’s report 
indicated that there was no fraud, that there was no wrongdoing, 
that there was no conflict of interest. And in a subsequent 
interview the auditor, in July of this year, said there were no red 
flags with respect to any of those issues in the report. But there 
are problems she identified and we are going to respond to 
those and we take responsibility for those issues. And one of 
them was a communications issue between Highways and other 
parts of government. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — We have a communications issue on the 
floor of this Assembly with a Premier who won’t answer a very 
simple question. Highways, we know, were actively acquiring 
those lands. They would have saved millions of dollars. To the 
Premier: why did he use the GTH instead of using Highways? 
What’s the real answer on this front? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the fact that the Leader of the 
Opposition doesn’t like the answer makes it no less an answer. 
It is precisely, it is precisely the answer in this particular case. 
And the auditor noted the fact that different parts of government 
were not communicating properly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also point this out: Highways doesn’t 
actually, under the policy that existed during the transaction . . . 
It was the long-standing policy of the Ministry of Highways, 
including when they were in government, that until an entire 
land assembly plan is done, until entire planning is done for any 
particular interchange or roadwork, they do not pull the trigger, 
so to speak, on purchasing the land, purchasing the land. And so 

when it was discovered that Highways was looking at this, the 
timelines didn’t match up with respect to the need for the 
Global Transportation Hub to move forward with the assembly, 
and the decision was made that the Hub would make the 
purchases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are questions that were all before the 
Assembly and before the province when the Provincial Auditor 
. . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Well the Deputy Leader of the 
NDP [New Democratic Party] doesn’t want to hear the answers, 
Mr. Speaker, and we know why: because it doesn’t fit with their 
narrative; it doesn’t fit with their agenda. 
 
The bottom line is all of these questions, including the one the 
Leader of the Opposition just asked, were before the province, 
were available to the auditor. Cabinet documents were turned 
over to the auditor. She said there is no conflict of interest. 
There is no fraud or evidence of wrongdoing. There were no red 
flags, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve answered the question with 
respect to Highways versus GTH. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Not a single adequate answer from that 
minister. Saskatchewan people deserve answers, not tired 
talking points from the Premier. So we’ll try another one to the 
Premier. In April of 2012, who called the scandal-plagued Sask 
Party minister responsible to suggest the scandal in this land 
deal? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
I’ve indicated with regard to the phone call that was referenced, 
the member for Kindersley doesn’t recall who the call was 
from. The facts are the call wasn’t followed up on by the GTH 
or by the Ministry of the Economy, and the auditor didn’t feel 
that the call was germane to her audit. The auditor had full 
authority to look into all of the matters with respect to the 
transaction, had access to all of the cabinet documents and all of 
the individuals whom she wished to speak to, and her 
conclusion was that there was no wrongdoing, that there was no 
fraud, and that there was no conflict of interest. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The auditor’s report was scathing and it 
exonerated no one. And the question was to the Premier, not to 
the junior minister to jump up with an answer like that. And I 
guess the question, honestly, to the Premier: how does the 
scandal-plagued minister remember who it wasn’t, but not who 
it was? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well you know, as I’ve said, Mr. 
Speaker, the auditor had full authority to look into all of the 
matters with respect to the transaction that we’re discussing on 
the floor of the Assembly. The auditor had access to all of the 
documents, all of the individuals. The auditor identified 
challenges, Mr. Speaker, with respect to communication 



798 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2016 

between the GTH and with respect to the Ministry of Highways 
and Infrastructure. 
 
We’ve accepted the 10 recommendations that were made by the 
Provincial Auditor. We’re moving forward on implementing 
those recommendations. We’re moving forward in terms of 
governance improvement at the Global Transportation Hub 
Authority. That’s what our focus is on, Mr. Speaker — how we 
can move the file forward, how we can make the Global 
Transportation Hub the success that we know it’s going to be. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The question was to the Premier. How 
did the scandal-plagued minister know who it wasn’t but not 
who it was? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well I’ve addressed the issue with 
respect to the phone call being referenced and I’ll reference it 
again. The member for . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve 
indicated, the member for Kindersley doesn’t remember who 
the call was from. I would note that there was no follow-up on 
that call from the Global Transportation Hub Authority or from 
the Ministry of the Economy. And frankly the auditor didn’t 
feel that that call was germane to her audit. 
 
So you know, as I said, the conclusion of the Provincial Auditor 
after fully canvassing all of the issues with respect to this 
transaction was that there was no wrongdoing, that there was no 
fraud, and that there was no conflict of interest. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Question was to the Premier; no answer 
again. So let’s just be clear here. You’re telling me that through 
all this time in the investigation and this period of time, that no 
one from government ever went over to that minister until last 
week to ask him who had called him on April of 2012? Is that 
seriously the story this Premier wants to stick to? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I think we’ve fully gone through the facts with regard 
to the call. The member from Kindersley doesn’t remember 
who the call was from. The fact is that there was no follow-up 
on that call from either the GTH or from the Ministry of the 
Economy, and the auditor herself didn’t feel that that call was 
germane to the conduct of her audit. 
 
What she did identify were challenges in terms of 
communication, particularly between the GTH and the Ministry 
of Highways. She made 10 recommendations. We accept those 
recommendations. We’re working hard on implementing those 

recommendations. And we feel that those recommendations are 
going to be improvements in terms of the communication 
between MHI [Ministry of Highways and Infrastructure] and 
the GTH. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — The question wasn’t answered; it was to 
the Premier. To the Premier: this has been a scandal that’s gone 
on for months. It’s wasted millions of dollars. Are you telling 
the people . . . Is the Premier telling the people of Saskatchewan 
that last week was the first time the scandal-plagued minister 
was asked that question about that phone call? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
conclusion of the Provincial Auditor, after fully canvassing and 
having full authority to look into any matter to which she 
considered important with respect to this transaction, her 
conclusion was that there was no wrongdoing, that there was no 
fraud, and that there was no conflict of interest. 
 
The Provincial Auditor did identify challenges in terms of the 
communications between the Ministry of Highways and 
Infrastructure and the Global Transportation Hub. We take 
those recommendations very seriously. We’re working very 
hard on implementing those recommendations and we’re 
focused on moving forward in terms of making the GTH a great 
success. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, this is unbelievable and 
it’s pathetic. To the Premier: when was the first time that his 
government asked the question of that scandal-plagued 
minister, who had called him on April 2012? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Economy and 
GTH. 
 
Hon. Mr. Harrison: — Well thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. You know, as I’ve responded repeatedly, the member 
for Kindersley indicated that he doesn’t remember who that call 
was from. The call was not followed up on — that’s a fact — 
by either the Global Transportation Hub Authority or the 
Ministry of the Economy, and the auditor herself didn’t see that 
the call was germane enough to follow up on in terms of her 
audit. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what we know though is what the conclusion 
of the Provincial Auditor was, which that there was no 
wrongdoing; there was no fraud, and there was no conflict of 
interest. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 

Support for the North 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker, there is a price being paid for 
the Sask Party’s scandals, waste, and mismanagement, and it is 
the people of Saskatchewan who are being forced to pay it. And 



October 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 799 

no more than the people in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the TRC [Truth and Reconciliation Commission] 
had recommendations related to health care and to many more 
to build hope in our communities, but this government has just 
failed. They failed to apologize for the Sixties Scoop. They 
failed to keep their promise for the NORTEP-NORPAC. 
 
From job training to court worker programs, they have failed. 
Now with the tragic crisis we are facing, this government is 
sending short-term solutions. What commitment will they make 
to support the North in the long term and to stop failing our 
communities? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations and First Nations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and as the 
member opposite should know, our government’s plan for 
growth outlines a number of initiatives for the entire province 
including the North. We recognize the importance of the North, 
the people of the North and the resources of the North, and how 
vital they are to our province. 
 
In reference to the truth and reconciliation, Mr. Speaker, we 
have . . . 22 of the 34 recommendations that refer to provincial 
responsibility have been supported or are being worked on, Mr. 
Speaker, and we will move forward with First Nations people 
and northern people on furthering those initiatives. Many of 
them, Mr. Speaker, have been in the area of education because 
we feel education is vital for our northerners and the northern 
students in order for them to be able to enjoy the success of our 
province. So, Mr. Speaker, that is something that we will be 
working with our northern communities and our northern 
leaders in order to move that agenda forward. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Funding for Emergency Shelters 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, this government needs to stand 
up and own up to the consequences of their cuts. On Saturday 
hundreds and hundreds of people gathered at a rally to protest 
the cuts to the Lighthouse and to tell the government how 
wrong these cuts are. People are coming together because these 
cuts are cold-hearted and wrong. They cut $70,000 from the 
Lighthouse in Saskatoon. Now, instead of people staying at the 
Lighthouse, they are being picked up by the police. And instead 
of people staying at the Lighthouse, they are being dropped off 
at the emergency room. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this government is unmoved by the human 
consequences and they think they are saving money with this 
cut, they need to do the math again. The cost of having people 
in ERs [emergency room] and jails is huge when compared to 
the Lighthouse. To the Minister of Social Services: how do 
these cuts make sense? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, there 
have been no cuts to the Lighthouse. We continue to fund the 

Lighthouse the exact same funding as the previous year and in 
the exact same way that we fund every other emergency shelter 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
In addition to that, we have a cold weather strategy, Mr. 
Speaker, whereas anyone who presents themselves to a shelter 
is either referred to another shelter to spend the night and/or is 
given a meal voucher and a hotel room to spend the night in 
cold weather, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, it isn’t just Saskatoon where 
the Sask Party has made these backward cuts. In fact their cuts 
to the Lighthouse in North Battleford made national news. The 
Lighthouse in North Battleford serviced not only that city but 
all the communities surrounding it. Front-line workers and 
community members have told us about the devastating 
consequences to these cuts. Most governments would have 
fessed up and reversed this terrible decision, but not the Sask 
Party. They have gone further and cut deeper. Mr. Speaker, how 
does this make any sense? 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Mr. Speaker, we have no 
contract with the North Battleford Lighthouse, and we will be 
meeting with the Saskatoon Lighthouse to discuss longer term, 
sustainable planning. But let’s remember that our government 
has created 252 new shelter spaces in Saskatchewan as a 
government, which is more than double what existed before. 
We’ve also increased the per diem rates up to eight times since 
2008, and we’ve increased our investments in 332 units for 
those who are hard to house — exactly the kinds of people who 
are looking for longer term, sustainable housing that exist here. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Funding for Health Care 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, the consequences are real; in 
fact they are record-breaking. Just last Friday there was a new 
all-time record set for hospital over capacity. Between RUH 
[Royal University Hospital] and St. Paul’s alone, they were 116 
people over capacity and they had 49 people in their ERs 
waiting for admission. That’s a record 165 people waiting in 
hallways, pods, and the emergency room — 49 people waiting 
in emergency rooms for admission. 
 
That is pretty astounding since this government promised no 
waits, and is building their new hospitals with tiny waiting 
rooms. This record comes even before the flu season hits. We 
are in crisis now and it is only going to get worse. Beds are still 
in hallways. They’ve been shuffled around so they aren’t 
blocking paths to exits, but this is not a solution. To the 
minister: how can the government be getting things so wrong? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 



800 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2016 

Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Since we’ve 
been given the privilege of forming government, we’ve seen a 
dramatic increase in the population in the province. The 
province has grown by almost 150,000 people, Mr. Speaker. 
That adds strain to our health care facilities. Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
responded by increasing acute care bed capacity across the 
province, but Mr. Speaker, these incidents do arise from time to 
time. The member opposite mentioned flu season. Potentially 
during flu season . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I’m finding it increasingly difficult to hear the 
minister’s response. I would ask all members to please . . . 
who’s asking the question and replying, that we give them the 
decency to listen to their responses well. I recognize the 
Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, at different times of the year, 
incidents arise which cause extra strain on capacity. This isn’t 
new to Saskatchewan, and this isn’t new across the country, Mr. 
Speaker. The other day I mentioned I was recently at a meeting 
of Health ministers across the country who are all grappling 
with the same sort of issues. We’re working with the health 
regions who in turn are working with the hospitals to ensure 
that we’re doing things in a most efficient manner possible to 
ensure that patient care always comes first. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, we know that programs have 
been cut in the community, and we know that this is 
contributing to over-capacity issues and long waits in the 
emergency room. 
 
This government cut 20 positions in the RQHR [Regina 
Qu’Appelle Health Region], and those were to mental health 
services. In the government’s own report on mental health and 
addictions, Dr. Stockdale Winder said, “By far the area I heard 
identified as needing the most improvement throughout the 
consultation was enhancing the access and capacity for services, 
followed by prevention and early intervention.” 
 
We need to enhance the access and capacity for service, and the 
Sask Party’s solution to this is to cut 20 front-line care workers 
from mental health. How can they justify this? Do they not 
realize it is this lack of access to care that is making issues 
worse? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Reiter: — Mr. Speaker, on the issue in the Regina 
Qu’Appelle Health Region, the health region is in the best 
position, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that any decisions they make 
don’t affect patient care. Mr. Speaker, that’s what they’re 
attempting to do. We have faith that they’re doing their job 
appropriately. Mr. Speaker, they publicly said that there won’t 
be a reduction in services to mental health. They won’t halt 
programs. And any of the mental health unit beds will not 
change as a result of the layoffs. 
 

What they’re doing, Mr. Speaker . . . In fact this is a quote from 
the CEO [chief executive officer] of the health region that says, 
“During this process, the region will not be reducing services, 
closing beds, or halting programs related to this initiative.” 
That’s in the news release from Regina Qu’Appelle Health 
Region, from CEO Keith Dewar on September 16th, 2016. Mr. 
Speaker, we trust health regions will make the appropriate 
decisions. 
 
Back to the original issue that the member opposite was raising, 
the same came from the CEO of St. Paul’s Hospital. In an 
interview, Jean Morrison said:  
 

[They’ve] affirmed the government is committed to fixing 
the problem. 
 
“They’ve prioritized patient flow as a provincial priority,” 
. . . adding it’s not as simple as building a new hospital. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we’re working hard through the ministry with the 
health regions and the hospitals to make sure they have the 
appropriate resources and that they’re doing things in the most 
efficient way possible. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 

Funding for Education 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has to stop making 
light of these cuts and start taking ownership for them. Instead, 
on Thursday they showed that they are the biggest bullies on the 
playground. The member from Lloydminster, a previous school 
board Chair, proclaimed and I quote, “. . . if students in this 
province are not receiving the supports they need, it can only be 
laid back on school boards for not making appropriate decisions 
which are in the best interest of students.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is unacceptable. This government is solely 
responsible for funding education and yet we now see them 
throwing school boards under the school bus. Mr. Speaker, that 
minister has ultimate control over funding and that minister 
refused to fully fund the teachers’ contract that he signed. So 
from where do they get the audacity to drag school divisions 
through the mud? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition is on record as supporting the autonomy of 
individual school divisions. In the funding that the school 
divisions get, they receive allocations that they can reapportion 
between teachers, TAs [teaching assistant], and a variety of 
other things that they choose to do. Mr. Speaker, the overall 
funding that this government has provided to school divisions 
since 2007 has increased from $1.6 billion in 2007 to $2.8 
billion . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, the operating funding has 



October 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 801 

gone up some 33 per cent in that period of time, from $1.4 
billion to $1.8 billion, an increase of 33 per cent. Enrolment 
during that time, Mr. Speaker, increased by only 9 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. The school divisions received significant funds, 
dollars from this government. Mr. Speaker, we value and 
respect the work that’s done by our teachers . . . [inaudible] . . . 
We will provide funding and we respect the autonomy of the 
divisions to make decisions appropriately and fairly for students 
in our province. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Mr. Speaker, so we’re clear, let’s make this more 
simple for the minister. A simple yes or no will do. School 
boards used to set their own mill rates, but do school boards 
now have the ability or control to generate their own revenue? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I’d encourage the 
Education critic, if she doesn’t want to take my word for it, 
simply do a drive down Elphinstone Street. Part of that is in her 
constituency. When she takes that drive she will see the new 
Scott Collegiate under construction. She will see a new Sacred 
Heart school under construction. She will also see a new school 
for Connaught under construction, a school, Mr. Speaker, which 
she in fact opposed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are going to stand up and tell the people in that 
area that this is something we’re providing because that’s 
something . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I know it’s the second week in, guys, but 
please show respect to the critic asking the question and the 
minister answering the question. I recognize the Minister of 
Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re going to be telling the people in that neighbourhood that 
the member opposite opposed the new school in Connaught, 
which is in her constituency. Mr. Speaker, that is something that 
is needed by that community. We are going to provide that to 
the school. And, Mr. Speaker, we value and respect our 
education partners in this province and we will not take advice 
from the people opposite. We will continue to fund our schools, 
Mr. Speaker. We value our students and we value our teachers. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 

Position on Climate Change and Carbon Tax 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Thank 
you very much, Mr. Speaker. Today members of this House 
will engage in a very, very important debate in terms of this 
province’s economy. And may I suggest, I think a very, very 
important date in the eternal question in this confederation of 

jurisdiction between the federal government and the provincial 
government. Mr. Speaker, at the end of my remarks I will be 
making a specific motion with respect to the issue of the 
nationally imposed carbon tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by way of context . . . And actually just before I 
provide that context, Mr. Speaker, I want to acknowledge some 
of the groups that will be in attendance here today for part or all 
of the debate. There are many other groups in the province who 
have weighed in in opposition to the federal, to the 
Liberal-imposed carbon tax, Mr. Speaker, but some have joined 
us today. John Hopkins from the Regina Chamber of 
Commerce was introduced a little bit earlier on. John and the 
Regina Chamber have been a clarion voice for the growth of the 
province of Saskatchewan, for the growth of Regina. They 
played an instrumental role, as I recall, in making sure the facts 
were brought to light in the referendum on P3s [public-private 
partnership] in the city of Regina that really helped inform this 
government’s plan going forward and created support in our 
capital city for the notion that we need to be pragmatic and 
practical when it comes to infrastructure solutions. And John 
has brought that same pragmatism to the issue of the carbon tax, 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of his members. 
 
Todd Lewis with APAS, the Agricultural Producers Association 
of Saskatchewan, have indicated concern about the carbon tax. 
Chad MacPherson was introduced earlier on from the stock 
growers. Levi Wood is with the wheat growers, Mr. Speaker. 
And these folks are certainly welcomed in their Legislative 
Assembly today. And we will be hearing from other groups as 
well in the coming days, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I noted in fact that just a few days ago without a lot of fanfare 
the Canada West Equipment Dealers, who represent some very 
key businesses right through urban and rural Saskatchewan, 
came out in strong support of the Government of 
Saskatchewan’s position that this carbon tax was the wrong 
approach of the federal government, and that we needed to be 
focused on the actual solutions, the actual technological 
solutions for worldwide emission. 
 
So I want to thank those groups for coming forward. We’ve 
noted the support in Saskatchewan from the people of the 
province. It ranges between 70 and 75 per cent support, 
depending on the survey or the poll you’re looking at. This 
represents a full-throated, firm support for the Government of 
Saskatchewan’s position and against the position of the federal 
government. 
 
We’ve also heard some muted support from members opposite. 
Now I’m hoping that in the course of this debate, they will be 
able to take their places, stand in their places, and provide a 
much clearer position with respect to carbon taxes — not just 
timing of them, but a universal carbon tax versus the kind of 
carbon pricing that our province might be able to, willing to 
engage in when the economy strengthens, for example a heavy 
emitters tech fund, Mr. Speaker. We look forward to hearing 
from members opposite. 
 
A little while ago, I guess now just about a week ago, I had the 
chance and the honour to present to the Regina Chamber of 
Commerce. Normally at that time of year we’d present a state of 
the province address. This was obviously going to be different. 



802 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2016 

This was going to be about not just laying out the opposition of 
our party to what the Prime Minister has unilaterally 
announced, but also to propose an alternative. 
 
And I’d like to just summarize the remarks that I made at the 
Regina chamber, if I can. But the context is important, Mr. 
Speaker, because we know that when the current Prime 
Minister was a candidate for this high office as leader of the 
Liberal Party, he made some solemn commitments with respect 
to federalism. 
 
He criticized the predecessor, former prime minister Harper, for 
what he depicted as sort of a unilateral or at least a bilateral 
approach to provincial-federal relations, and said when the 
country, and if the country were to elect a Liberal government 
and he would be the Prime Minister, it would herald in a new 
era of collaborative federalism. 
 
[14:45] 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, based on what we saw three weeks ago in 
the House of Commons, I don’t hold out much hope for a new 
era of collaborative federalism. What we’ve seen in the days 
since that announcement with respect to health care and the 
health accord doesn’t give me a lot of hope that this current 
federal government will keep its promise to have a more 
collaborative approach to the provinces. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, there are three provinces that 
walked out of the Environment ministers’ meeting. I’ll talk a 
little bit more about that in a moment. And I’m happy to note 
that the Environment minister’s actually still in the room right 
now. He’s not . . . He’s stayed with us. 
 
It’s interesting to note that as a result of that minister’s 
meetings, we’ve had subsequent interactions with the federal 
government on different files, and there seems to be anything 
but a collaborative approach coming from the federal 
government. 
 
Picture this, Mr. Speaker. While Environment ministers of this 
country are meeting in Montreal, ostensibly to do the final work 
of the working groups — the federal-provincial working groups 
to which we agreed in Vancouver when the Prime Minister 
convened the first ministers’ meeting on climate change — 
while they were working on the final recommendations of 
working groups to be sent then to the first ministers’ meeting 
when we meet in early December for a final discussion and 
deliberation and decision, while they’re doing that work in this 
new collaborative approach, at the very time of that work, the 
Prime Minister stands in his place in Ottawa and makes the 
unilateral announcement on the most important part of any 
climate change plan. 
 
The meat of the federal government’s approach to climate 
change was announced in a unilateral way in the House of 
Commons, and frankly there hasn’t been a lot of criticism about 
that. I’ve been surprised at the lack of criticism either from 
perhaps observers or pundits or, well certainly there’s been 
some observations by political people that they don’t appreciate 
that tactic. But really it’s sort of come and gone. And obviously 
now we’re debating the merits of what’s been proposed by the 
federal government with a little discussion about how that 

approach differed significantly from what they promised in an 
election campaign. 
 
We came out very early on . . . And I want to credit now, if I 
may, the leadership of the Minister of the Environment who 
worked in advance of and during that meeting to make sure that 
we could avoid what we have since been unable to avoid as a 
result of unilateral action by Prime Minister Trudeau. But the 
Environment minister did an excellent job of working with 
colleagues at that table, as we all know. And I was in constant 
contact with the Minister of the Environment throughout that 
meeting, and he was more comfortable frankly after that, well 
that very disrespectful act of the Prime Minister in the House of 
Commons, just to cut short the meeting, there wasn’t really 
much to talk about after the Prime Minister had announced the 
carbon price issue. And so Saskatchewan had resolved that we 
didn’t really need to be a part of that meeting anymore. 
 
And I’m happy to report to the House something they well 
know already, that Nova Scotia and Newfoundland and 
Labrador agreed, and they also left that meeting. I was in 
contact, both texting regularly and in a phone conversation, 
with Premier McNeil of Nova Scotia and also Premier Dwight 
Ball of Newfoundland and Labrador after the meeting. And I 
want to also put on the record that the province of 
Saskatchewan is grateful for their actions and their courage to 
leave that particular Environment ministers’ meeting. 
 
In the days following, we’ve tried to lay out the reasons why we 
might be opposed to what the federal government has 
announced. And let’s be clear. The federal government has 
announced that beginning in 2017, there will be in every 
province — territories exempted — but there will be in every 
province a price on carbon or a tax on carbon of $10 per tonne. 
That will be the number in 2017, and it’ll escalate to $50 a 
tonne by 2022. 
 
We knew we had some of our homework done as to what a 
carbon tax or price would cost the province of Saskatchewan, 
but we were able to quickly point out to Saskatchewan people 
and the country that on average this tax, when fully 
implemented, would cost Saskatchewan households about 
$1,250 on an annual basis. And we were also able to point out 
that, based on our level of emissions and what they’re forecast 
to be, it would take out two and a half billion dollars by 2022 
from the economy. And then there’s a bit of a debate that 
ensued about revenue neutrality. And more on that in a 
moment. 
 
But a carbon levy, a carbon tax by definition is going to hit 
carbon-intense industries more, in a greater way with greater 
pain, than other sectors that are not as carbon intense. So do we 
have carbon-intense industries in this province? Well yes we 
do. And you know what? We’re proud of those industries. Oil 
and gas is a carbon-intense industry. Mining is a carbon-intense 
industry. Agriculture is seen to be — not by those inside our 
province, not by agricultural leaders or our Agriculture minister 
— but there’s a perception that agriculture is a heavy-emitting, 
a carbon-intense industry when you don’t give them credit for 
natural absorption and sequester. And more on that in a moment 
as well. 
 
So you can see, Mr. Speaker, the very things that form the 



October 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 803 

bulwark of the economy of this province, that provide for 
livelihood, that provide for income and jobs and a way of life, 
those very industries would be hit hard by a carbon tax — never 
mind if it’s revenue neutral. The cost of operating a farm in 
southern Saskatchewan will be higher and significantly higher. I 
saw the news on CTV [Canadian Television Network Ltd.] 
where someone involved with the Western Wheat Growers did 
the quick math on his farm. His farm alone, I think the costs 
were going to be $80,000 every single year, right out of that 
farm near Davidson, Saskatchewan. 
 
So he, by the way, is a price taker. Our farmers take the world 
price. He competes with, for example — if he grew any lentils 
and I bet he did; he probably does — let’s use the example of a 
lentil farmer in North Dakota. He now faces a higher cost 
structure than his farmer does in North Dakota — same market, 
taking the price. Principally the market’s in Asia and, more 
specifically, in India where we have a strong market share. You 
know, north of 80 per cent of all the lentils they would have to 
import come from the province of Saskatchewan, come from 
about 18,000 amazing pulse farmers in Saskatchewan. So we 
know that farmer is at a competitive disadvantage 
notwithstanding revenue neutrality. 
 
What about a potash mine in Saskatchewan? With whom do 
they do they compete for world market share? Well they 
compete, for example, with mines in Russia or Belarus. I would 
say to the Prime Minister, through this Assembly and to the 
people of Saskatchewan, to just think reasonably about this for 
a minute. Do we believe that Putin will ever implement a 
carbon tax that would be the equivalent that we are facing in 
this country on his potash mines? Of course not. 
 
Here again our potash producers — and we have 40 per cent of 
the world’s reserves in this province — here again, our potash 
producers are price takers. They can’t just jack up the price to 
China if their costs go up. And yet Mr. Trudeau’s plan and the 
federal Liberal plan will unilaterally and arbitrarily increase 
their cost structure. 
 
What about oil and gas? You know the Bakken Formation 
where the Minister of Energy and Resources is from, in that 
general area of Saskatchewan, we share that formation with 
North Dakota and with Montana. Begrudgingly, but we share it. 
And so we always have to be competitive. 
 
We have to compete with oil rigs to have them in our province 
to create jobs and sustain jobs on our side of the border, to 
create investment that pays for highways and schools. In 
question period we talked a lot about funding education and 
health care. It all comes from the ability to successfully 
compete for investment dollars, see those investment dollars 
spent in a growing economy, and thereby have a tax base so you 
can support all the things you want to do in Saskatchewan. 
 
What are the chances for Saskatchewan to compete successfully 
with North Dakota, with the North Dakota share of the Bakken 
Formation for example, if we’ve got a $50 a tonne additional 
cost to Canadian producers? The Minister of Energy and 
Resources was talking to one of the major companies that has 
actually kind of voted with their money about what kind of 
policies and environment they want. About 90 per cent of their 
drilling, even though they’re Calgary-based, happens in our 

province. A little bit in Colorado and a much smaller bit than 
that yet in the province of Alberta, where they have some real 
concerns about policies in that particular province — policies 
we don’t ever want coming back to this province, may I just 
say, by the way. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Never will. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Never will. But he does invest in, that 
company invests in the United States. So have we made, has 
Prime Minister Trudeau’s plan made his decision easier to 
invest in the US [United States] rather than in the province of 
Saskatchewan or in any other Canadian jurisdiction with an 
additional $50 a tonne? That’s exactly what has happened with 
this carbon tax, or will happen with this carbon tax, and that’s 
why we categorically reject the notion of revenue neutrality.  
 
And I’ve heard, and I’ve seen on my Twitter feed, there’s a lot 
of supporters of the opposition, of the NDP, say, just sort of 
spout this federal government notion that, well it’ll be revenue 
neutral. Even the minister for the province of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Goodale, was on a local radio station. He said, yes it may 
take 2.5, the carbon tax might take two and a half billion dollars 
out of your economy but, don’t worry, you can pay it all back in 
income tax relief. 
 
Well how does that help the energy worker near Weyburn, 
Saskatchewan who lost his job because we’re not competitive 
anymore? And how does that help the Evraz worker, 900 of 
them who’ve lost their job because Evraz has said, look we 
can’t compete here anymore, we’re going to have to go to some 
of our US bases to invest in the future? And how does that help 
the lentil farmer from . . . [inaudible] . . . Saskatchewan who’s 
probably laid off people that he’s got working on his farm 
because the $80,000 he’ll lose to the Trudeau carbon tax has to 
come from somewhere? And how does that help a potash 
mineworker that’s not working to full capacity — or worse, laid 
off — because now they have a higher cost structure in 
Saskatchewan, thanks to this federal Liberal carbon tax, than 
they do in Russia or Belarus? 
 
How does income tax relief help any of those people if they’ve 
lost their job? And that’s our message not just in this House 
today but to the entire country, and specifically to the federal 
Liberal government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, more than simply just complain about this 
carbon tax, to point out that it’s not neutral and to point out . . . 
By way, one other issue we have with the carbon tax is its 
efficacy. Does it work? Have these carbon taxes . . . And again 
on social media, I had a few people say today, well why don’t 
you check out . . . When I asked for where’s the economic 
impact assessment from the federal government before they 
announced this transformational change, some people were able 
to share with me, well why don’t you just look at the BC 
example because they’ve had a carbon tax since 2008. Well you 
don’t need an economic impact assessment because you can use 
their real-life example. Oh yes, we can use the real-life example 
of British Columbia. Here’s the bottom line, Mr. Speaker: a 
carbon tax in that province at $30 a tonne, at $30 a tonne, has 
seen an increase in emissions from 2010. What is the point of a 
carbon tax universally applied? That emissions would come 
down. 



804 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2016 

Now I’ve had people say — and I mentioned this at the Regina 
chamber speech — I’ve had people say to me, well you know, 
to be fair, you have to note the fact that the carbon intensity has 
come down in BC. In other words, the GDP [gross domestic 
product] has increased and so the emissions haven’t maybe kept 
. . . They’ve gone up, but they haven’t kept pace with GDP 
increases. Or they’ve said, look, there’s a per capita 
consideration. The population’s grown. Well the same 
considerations can be made in the province of Saskatchewan 
where finally we see population growth at historic levels. 
 
And that’s not what the Paris Declaration is all about. Paris is 
about absolute reductions, not per capity . . . per capita and not 
intensity . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . and maybe not about 
per capity either. They’re about, Mr. Speaker, absolute 
reductions which have not come to bear as a result of the 
longest standing, universally applied carbon tax that we’re 
aware of in Canada. 
 
They say, well what about other examples around the world? 
Australia implemented a carbon tax. They cancelled theirs. 
What about France where the Paris Declaration quite obviously 
was signed? There are reports today, there are reports today, 
Mr. Speaker, out of Paris that they have amended legislation in 
their counterpart to parliament that removes the carbon tax on 
coal-fire plants. They’re walking away from a carbon tax in 
France, and we’ll know more about that in November. 
 
So if this is the way forward, if this is the answer, why do 
emissions increase in BC where they’ve had them? And why 
did Australia move away? And why did France move away? 
And at such a time as that, why is our federal government 
moving ahead without so much as an economic impact 
assessment to determine what the impact would be on people’s 
jobs or their household budgets? 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, on that front I want to point out that 
COPA [Canadian Oilseed Processors Association] — and this 
circles back a little bit, but that’s the Saskatchewan canola oil 
processing industry — COPA has done their review of the 
federal government’s impact on carbon tax. I gave a preliminary 
number at the Regina chamber speech. I talked about it being 
about $1 million increased cost for every $10 of the federal 
Liberal carbon tax. But I was wrong. COPA has calculated the 
impact of the carbon tax on four plants in Saskatchewan to be 
$3 million additional cost for $10 per tonne, 15.2 million at $50 
a tonne. 
 
So are those canola plants going to operate in this province or 
would those canola plants locate closer to some of their markets 
in China or would they locate in the United States where there’s 
no such carbon? And so what would the federal Liberal income 
tax relief do to the families that work in Clavet, Saskatchewan 
at that canola plant? It would do nothing because they wouldn’t 
have income to pay income tax to reduce in the first place. 
 
[15:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know there’s others that want to speak. I can 
probably go on a little bit longer. I do want to share a few things 
very quickly. We don’t think it’s enough simply just to 
complain in the province. We’ve presented a white paper that 
builds on our track record on this issue already. And I said at 

the Regina Chamber of Commerce and I’ve said it to our 
provincial media, I say it again in this place. If Saskatchewan 
people are listening and watching this debate and they’ve had 
someone tell them, well you’re not really doing enough in 
Saskatchewan; you haven’t done your share in the first place — 
don’t let them say that to you is my message, Mr. Speaker. 
Because there’s not another jurisdiction in all of this nation that 
has made a larger public sector investment in actually doing 
something about CO2 emissions, and that’s the Boundary dam 3 
project near Estevan. 
 
That’s the only post-combustion capture unit in the world that’s 
today operating, and successfully operating, a project that only 
months ago our friends across the way wanted to wind down, 
and thank goodness that we didn’t. 800 000 tonnes will be 
captured this year alone. That’s the equivalent of 200,000 cars 
off the road. But it is the largest per capita in public investment 
made in the country. So if someone says to you as a 
Saskatchewan resident, well you haven’t done your share, you 
can actually point out that fact that the Boundary dam 3 is 
actually representative of us doing a per capita more of our 
share than anywhere else we’re aware of, not just in Canada but 
perhaps of any subnational government in North America. 
 
Almost a year ago now we announced another part of our plan, 
and that was simply to move SaskPower to 50 per cent 
renewables by 2030. I think that’s a goal that was shared by 
members opposite. That’s part of our plan to actually do 
something about emissions, not price it or cap it and trade it and 
shift it around and try to hopefully find a market that might 
work, but actually do something about the problem. 
 
We added to that, Mr. Speaker, in our white paper. We talked 
about the importance of increasing support for adaptation 
because the evidence of climate change is real. And you only 
have to talk to a territorial premier and they’ll tell you about 
what’s going on. And yet in this country we spend a paltry $250 
million a year to deal with adaptation, to deal with the fact that 
Premier Pasloski in Yukon has a school falling in on itself 
because the permafrost is melting. 
 
We’ve got $250 million in all of this federal government 
programming on climate change to actually deal with 
adaptation. So that’s point number one. We asked that the 
federal government would double that, and for our part we’re 
going to continue to increase supports to our University of 
Saskatchewan Crop Development Centre. A big part of 
adaptation is food security. We need to grow crops that are 
resilient to climate change and we need to continue to research 
crops that actually fix nitrogen to the soil because that also 
captures, that absorbs CO2 as well and that’s part of adaptation. 
 
The second part’s about innovation and our continued efforts in 
CCS, Mr. Speaker, that aren’t just about BD3 [Boundary 
dam 3] but also about the test station at Coronach where other 
companies can come in and test their own technologies. 
 
It’s also about Aquistore where we’re testing new ways to store 
CO2. What we need to get to, I would say, members of the 
House and Mr. Speaker, where we need to get to is the point 
where what’s working in Boundary dam 3 is not reliant on 
enhanced oil recovery to make it work financially and that we 
can store CO2 efficaciously in things like aquiformations, 



October 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 805 

geological aquiformations. And we’re doing that research here 
too in the province. 
 
That research will be available to the world. And I would say 
that that’s pretty important, Mr. Speaker, and here’s why. 
Because while we’re having this debate about a carbon tax in 
this country which, if successful, would help reduce a third of 
1.6 per cent of global initiatives . . . That’s what we’re talking. 
In our province, by the way, where we’re responsible for 10 per 
cent of emissions, it’s 10 per cent of 30 per cent of 1.6 per cent 
of global emissions. While we are focused on a carbon tax to 
achieve that reduction of 1.6 per cent, about a third of 1.6 per 
cent of global emissions, according to the Paris accord there are 
2,400 coal plants on the books or being built around the world 
and the emissions from those coal plants represent 6.5 billion 
tonnes per year. 
 
The amount of reductions we’re after in Canada to reach our 
target — 221, 221 million tonnes, that’s the reduction we’re 
after. So we could hit our target, Mr. Speaker, and a carbon tax 
won’t do it. We know that from the BC example, but let’s just 
say it might. Carbon tax gets us to 220 million tonnes less; 
meanwhile when these plants are built there’s 6.5 billion tonnes 
being emitted in coal. 
 
So we say in the province of Saskatchewan, we’re got to find a 
solution for coal. And that’s a role we can play. Maybe other 
provinces can pick out their spots in terms of technological 
innovation. Here’s our spot we can pick out because we made 
this investment going back years. Because this technology is 
working. Because 31 countries from around the world have 
come to Estevan to find out what’s going on. Because the 
United Nations, in advance of Paris when they canvassed all the 
countries that were participating to find a highlight of success in 
each country, they found one in Canada that they noted before 
the Paris conference and it was Boundary dam 3. That’s our 
spot. That’s our spot. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Jim Yong Kim is the president of the World Bank. 
Here’s what he said about coal in Asia. This is very recently, 
and I quote: “If Vietnam goes forward with 40 gigawatts of 
coal, if the entire region implements the coal-based plans right 
now, I think we are finished.” 
 
What he’s referring to there is Paris. What he’s referring to 
there is trying to reduce the temperature by 2 degrees, the 
growth by 2 degrees. That’s the goal of Paris. The president of 
the World Bank — not some Sask Party politician or someone 
trying to advance some interest in fossil fuels — the president 
of the World Bank says unless we do something about Asian 
coal plants, and specifically Vietnam, we are finished. 
 
And what have we been doing in our country? We’ve been 
spending all of the oxygen and all of the resources and all the 
time around debating a carbon tax, a carbon price that if 
successful — and again, it’s questionable — would reduce 
emissions around the planet by one-third of 1.6 per cent. 
 
That’s what our white paper says. It says Canada should be 
aspirants to more than that. We can be technological leaders 
because of what’s going on in our province. That’s what we 
should be doing. That is the focus that we would want to 
present to our federal government and why we’re opposed to 

this particular carbon tax. 
 
Make no mistake, Mr. Speaker: this tax may be revenue neutral 
I guess in principle, but it is not sector neutral. And it is not 
neutral as to the regions of this country. There are two 
provinces that will pay mightily with jobs that Saskatchewan 
and Alberta families depend on if this tax goes ahead. And all 
the revenue-neutral bell whistles don’t change the fact that 
when you make this carbon-intense part of Canada’s economy 
uncompetitive, it’s going to go somewhere else, and so will 
those jobs. 
 
Do you know, the economists call it carbon leakage. And here 
we call it layoffs, in Saskatchewan. We call it declining 
business and declining opportunity. And if we let that happen, 
Mr. Speaker, we have less of a tax base upon which to provide 
better health care and better education and to fix more roads, 
and we are determined that it not happen in Saskatchewan. 
 
If pricing is to happen in the province, it’ll be through a tech 
fund. It’ll be through a levy, and only when the economy has 
returned to strength, only when such an initiative would not cost 
jobs, cost Saskatchewan families. There have been thousands of 
layoffs in the oil and gas sector, and we will fight any effort 
from the federal government to make that situation worse for 
either those families or other families who depend, frankly, on a 
federal government that might understand the situation here. 
 
For many, many, many years, these provinces of Saskatchewan 
and Alberta have provided — and they still do today — 
opportunity for other Canadians. And we’ve seen them come 
and work here and then go back, sometimes, to Atlantic 
Canada. But that’s when the country’s working at its best, and 
well we are proud to play that role. 
 
That’s a role we didn’t always play in this country. We’re proud 
that we play that role as a have province. We say to the federal 
government, let it continue. Let’s actually focus on the real 
problem. And let us not go down the road with an ill-considered 
and reckless carbon tax that will cost the jobs of Canadians 
without any relief in sight, Mr. Speaker. And so I will move this 
motion: 
 

That this Assembly supports the Government of 
Saskatchewan’s position on climate change as outlined in 
the climate change white paper released on October 18, 
2016; and further 

 
That this Assembly opposes the federal government’s plan 
to impose a national carbon tax. 

 
The Speaker: — The Premier has moved: 
 

That this Assembly supports the Government of 
Saskatchewan’s position on climate change as outlined in 
the climate change white paper released on October 18, 
2016; and further 
 
That this Assembly opposes the federal government’s plan 
to impose a national carbon tax. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Leader 
of the Opposition. 



806 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2016 

Mr. Wotherspoon: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thank you 
for allowing me to enter into this debate on the motion brought 
forward by the Sask Party today on carbon pricing. 
 
I do want to welcome as well some of the stakeholders across 
Saskatchewan industries within our province that are here, 
industry leaders: APAS, the Regina Chamber and John 
Hopkins, the Wheat Growers, the Stock Growers. We 
appreciate your presence and your involvement. It’s critical that 
you’re being directly engaged meaningfully by your 
government at this critical time to make sure that plans that are 
being advanced address what we’re trying to accomplish and 
make sure that we respond to the needs of your members. 
 
Without question, members on this side of the House are 
opposed to anything being imposed on Saskatchewan, our 
province, without the input — by Ottawa — without the input 
of Saskatchewan at the table. Our party has a long history of 
standing up to Ottawa when it chooses that it’s going to impose 
something upon our province without our involvement, and 
we’ll continue that great tradition as well and not waiver from 
that position. But as wrong as it is for Ottawa to be imposing 
this action upon our province, it’s the Sask Party’s lack of 
leadership on climate change that has left a void, that has left an 
invitation, and has left this potential for this imposition onto our 
province. 
 
The reality is, they haven’t taken any meaningful action to 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions here in our province, Mr. 
Speaker. They haven’t in fact even implemented their own plan 
to reduce emissions. That’s right, Mr. Speaker. The Sask Party 
actually passed a price on carbon through this House a few 
years ago, and they never, they never passed it; they never 
signed it into law. 
 
It’s almost hard to believe that the Sask Party proposed the bill 
— of course we supported it — and then they did nothing. By 
doing nothing, the Sask Party has thrown away so much of their 
credibility on this very important issue and given up in many 
ways Saskatchewan’s voice at a time we need that voice to be 
strong, and a voice that’s going to be effective with Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they cut funding for addressing climate change 
year after year after year. First order of business, they drained 
the $300 million legacy fund that was there to act and provide 
leadership for generations on climate change. Then they threw 
sand in the gears — sand in the gears, Mr. Speaker, by way of 
renewable power generation that would have had us making 
progress and would have provided us some leadership. In fact, 
not long ago before this government came into power, by way 
of renewable power we were leaders and now we’re laggards, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now of course there’s no tech fund, no levy for heavy emitters. 
And you know, I hear the Premier talking a bit about that again. 
And oil price has been up and it’s at a challenging place right 
now. But I think the question for the Premier is, well when is 
the right time to implement that fund? Certainly it wasn’t, it 
would appear, when he brought it forward and we supported it. 
 
And they have no credibility on climate change, no leg to stand 
on when it comes to standing up for Saskatchewan families. 
And the Premier, I sat in my chair and I listened to him rant and 

rave, Mr. Speaker, and he can shout and heckle across the floor 
all he wants, but it’s a lack of voice with Ottawa is the problem, 
and his lack of action has put us in this position. 
 
The Premier mentioned in his remarks, and we’ll agree on this, 
we’ll agree on this, that the plan being imposed by Ottawa, if 
left to be imposed, definitely puts at risk trade-exposed 
industries within our province. This is why we need the 
Premier’s voice, not just to grandstand and to chase headlines, 
but to provide constructive solutions at this point in time that 
will protect those industries and allow us to act on climate 
change. So on that point, we may agree. 
 
We need to make sure that farm families are protected. We need 
to make sure that steelworkers are protected. We need to make 
sure that our miners and that our oil and gas workers across our 
province have protection because they certainly do have a lot to 
lose. But they haven’t been well served by this government that 
failed to act in their interests, failed to diversify our economy, 
failed to create jobs with renewable power and conservation 
efforts that right now could be putting people to work in our 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
[15:15] 
 
He talks about his tech fund of course, Mr. Speaker, something 
that we’ve supported, something that we support on the floor of 
this Assembly. It’s been highlighted by the Conference Board 
of Canada that in fact had the Premier not sat on that tech fund, 
he would have actually created 8,500 jobs within 
Saskatchewan. When I look at the reality that Saskatchewan 
families are facing today, and 10,000 more people unemployed 
this year than last year alone, those 8,500 jobs would have been 
welcomed, Mr. Speaker. So it’s that Premier’s lack of 
leadership on these files that are costing us, not just 
environmentally, not just with our voice with Ottawa, but 
economically as well, and that’s why his approach is so 
damaging. 
 
And if we look at actually what his approach is and what he’s 
touting here again today, it’s the last thing that the very 
industries that he pretends that he’s supporting can afford. It’s 
the very last thing that families across Saskatchewan can afford 
when we look at what he wants to double down on. Let’s just 
make sure we understand what he wants to double down on: his 
carbon capture debacle, $1.5 billion for just a hundred and some 
megawatts of power — a very small portion of power within 
our power grid for $1.5 billion. 
 
This is a carbon capture tax that Saskatchewan people can’t 
afford. It’s this Premier’s carbon . . . [inaudible] . . . And it’s 
one that Saskatchewan people have been paying for already 
with three rate increases of 5 per cent each, two of them within 
the last six months alone. This is something farm families are 
paying for. This is something industry across our province is 
paying for. This is something families are paying for. And if the 
Premier wants to get high and mighty about economic analysis 
— and this stuff does matter and studies matter — we need to 
see the economic analysis that justified spending $1.5 billion of 
the hard-earned dollars of Saskatchewan people’s dollars on his 
carbon capture tax that shows up on our power bills, month in, 
month out, Mr. Speaker. 
 



October 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 807 

So what we also need is honest . . . [inaudible] . . . with all the 
facts whenever possible, Mr. Speaker. And it does not help to 
have a Premier simply chase his way to headlines and then get 
called out on his facts, Mr. Speaker. In fact there was one 
feature that reviewed some facts and said that the Premier didn’t 
even meet the test of the basic baloney meter, Mr. Speaker. I 
think that it was assessed that he was full of a whole lot of 
baloney, I believe was the assessment. 
 
We need a Premier right now that’s not going to torque the 
facts. We need a Premier right now that’s not simply going to 
grandstand, looking for entry into national stories. We need a 
Premier that’s going to take a principled and strong stand for 
Saskatchewan by working with and respecting Saskatchewan 
people and all those involved in our economy, Mr. Speaker, 
looking to the future. 
 
And of course the lack of action has cost us. It’s cost us our 
voice at a time where really it would appear pretty much every 
other province has a seat at the table and a position to negotiate 
with the federal government. We need to make sure that we’re 
working constructively to make sure that jobs are protected and 
that are built upon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We see a government next door, Mr. Speaker, that’s focusing 
on expansion of pipelines and getting our product to market. 
And you know, that’s clearly, that’s something that this Premier 
wasn’t able to get done even though his buddy was in 24 Sussex 
for a good decade, Mr. Speaker. So we need a more 
constructive, substantive debate and a strong voice for 
Saskatchewan with Ottawa right now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, instead of leadership and meaningful advocacy, 
time and time again we have seen this Premier and his party 
pass on the chance to invest in renewable energy and 
technologies that would lower emissions and create good 
mortgage-paying jobs for Saskatchewan people — the kind of 
jobs that would be driving and helping our economy right now, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
When there’s so much at stake for Saskatchewan people, we 
need leadership. We need Saskatchewan action and a 
made-in-Saskatchewan plan. Doing nothing isn’t going to cut it. 
The Premier’s response of doing nothing and sitting on this just 
won’t cut it. 
 
Do we need to act on climate change? We certainly do. It’s 
unfortunate that this Premier has denied Saskatchewan people 
having that opportunity to be leaders from this point into this 
debate, Mr. Speaker, and as such has given up the voice that we 
should have. 
 
So I’ll propose the following amendment to the Premier’s 
motion: 
 

That all words in the motion after “supports” be struck out 
and replaced with the following: 

 
the implementation of The Management and Reduction 
of Greenhouse Gases Act so that Saskatchewan can once 
again show leadership in reducing carbon emissions and 
earn back credibility on this file; and further 
 

That this Assembly condemn the Premier for his failure 
to address climate change after nearly a decade in power, 
and for giving up Saskatchewan’s voice and credibility 
when it comes to protecting Saskatchewan’s interests in 
our environment; and further 
 
That this Assembly opposes the federal government’s 
plan to impose a national carbon tax. 

 
I so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — The Leader of the Opposition has moved the 
following: 
 

That all words in the motion after “supports” be struck out 
and replaced with the following: 
 

The implementation of The Management and Reduction 
of Greenhouse Gases Act so that Saskatchewan can, 
once again, show leadership in reducing carbon 
emissions and earn back credibility on this file; and 
further 

 
That this Assembly condones the Premier for his failure 
to address climate change after nearly a decade in power 
for giving up on Saskatchewan’s voice and credibility 
when it comes to protecting the Saskatchewan interest in 
our environment; and further 

 
That this Assembly opposes the federal government’s 
plan to impose a national carbon tax. 

 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? I recognize the Minister 
of Advanced Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Mr. Speaker, last week there was a lot of 
sympathy for federal International Trade Minister Chrystia 
Freeland when she walked out of meetings with the now 
famous Walloons in Belgium. She was depleted, frustrated, 
exhausted. She chided the European Union to finally get its 
economic house in order. 
 
All ironies aside here, and there are plenty including that the 
Trudeau government chided the UK [United Kingdom] 
post-Brexit for daring to criticize the free trade machine that is 
the European Union. That was until the plucky Walloons came 
on the scene. 
 
But there is another irony, Mr. Speaker, and that is the very 
different reaction in many quarters, including the federal 
government, when our own honourable Minister for the 
Environment, our colleague, walked out of the meeting last 
month in Halifax with his fellow ministers from 
Newfoundland-Labrador and Nova Scotia. He had walked in in 
good faith. As a province, we had been assured, he had been 
assured that we would be talked to, collaborated with, and 
included as the federal government formulated its so-called 
policy. 
 
But no, the Prime Minister blindsided Environment ministers 
during their own meeting. He stood up and announced that the 
federal government would act unilaterally and impose a carbon 
tax on the provinces. That was perfectly acceptable to most 



808 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2016 

pundits. And much like their view of the recalcitrant Walloons 
as provincial hicks who couldn’t properly read a trade 
agreement, so they reacted when we — all of us in spirit — 
walked out along with the Minister of the Environment on the 
shocking unilateral treatment of the provinces. 
 
It was hard not to feel deflated and demoralized, Mr. Speaker, 
hard not to feel as if the tide was against us, as if most quarters 
were engaging in nothing but wolf pack literalism on climate 
change. Of course that’s not true. Most Saskatchewanians 
certainly know in their common-sense hearts that it takes a 
much deeper, nuanced reaction to climate change than a 
slap-and-dash tax. 
 
So what did we do? What did the Premier do, Mr. Speaker? He 
released a response, a sophisticated white paper, an in-depth 
counter-argument and it should be heralded from the rooftops, 
from this copper-domed rooftop, Mr. Speaker. This paper is a 
victory of far-sightedness on this issue, a victory for common 
sense, and I can only hope that it is picked up and circulated 
internationally which is what it deserves to be. 
 
Just consider as background, as the Premier referenced, the 
more than 2,400 new coal-fired power plants being planned or 
under construction around the world which will emit 6.5 billion 
tonnes of carbon dioxide a year, nearly nine times Canada’s 
annual greenhouse gas emissions. Of course something needs to 
be done to wean those countries off CO2, but it’s not to impose 
a carbon tax on us. After all, Canada overall accounts for less 
than 2 per cent of the world’s CO2 emissions. In Saskatchewan 
we’re talking 10 per cent of Canada’s total, 10 per cent of 1.6 
per cent. That just does not make sense, Mr. Speaker. The 
federal government shouldn’t punish us in these challenging 
economic times, shouldn’t punish the thousands of people in 
this province who make their livings in trade-exposed, 
carbon-intensive industries that are so vulnerable right now. 
They should help us help those countries whose carbon 
emissions are exploding. 
 
And we can. That’s where the white paper comes in. The 
federal government, it argues, should redirect funding for 
climate change adaptation research and target areas specifically 
affected by the impacts of climate change such as remote 
northern communities. That makes sense. Entities such as the 
Crop Development Centre, the Global Institute for Food 
Security of course should be better supported to continue to 
work on new crop varieties that are better able to withstand 
climate change. The federal government should partner with 
SaskPower and other agencies to develop the next generation of 
CCS, carbon sequestration, a made-in-Saskatchewan solution 
for export worldwide. 
 
And let’s not forget this is the same carbon sequestration 
technology that the federal environment minister called very 
important when she visited Boundary dam 3 last spring. BD3, 
Mr. Speaker — we have been committed to real solutions 
through technology, through innovation there for years. How 
can members opposite say, how can they say that BD3 is 
anything but the only real solution Canada is offering? It is a 
tangible solution that is actually putting this country on the 
map. 
 
Finally the federal government should of course redeploy its 

$2.65 billion five-year commitment to developing countries to 
deal with climate change and use that funding for research and 
innovation in Canada to reduce emissions worldwide with 
technologies such as CSS and small nuclear reactors. That’s not 
anti-developing countries; it’s pro, providing them with the best 
climate-change-fighting tool that money can buy, CO2 capture 
technology. As for small nuclear reactors, SaskPower VP 
[vice-president] Tim Eckel had said, while conventional power 
plants are too large for the province’s needs, small modular 
reactors could be a game changer not only for Saskatchewan, 
but they could cut emissions worldwide which is really what 
we’re supposed to be about here. 
 
Of course renewable energy should also play a role. But it’s 
also a no-brainer, as the white paper points out, that 
emission-reducing carbon offsets such as hydro exports from 
BC, Manitoba, Quebec and the CO2 that’s perpetually absorbed 
by Canada’s vast forests and wetlands and farm land should all 
be taken into account. The most recent report by the prestigious 
Australia-based Global Carbon Project, Mr. Speaker, found that 
of the 36 billion tonnes of global human-induced CO2 
emissions, 36 per cent roughly stays in the atmosphere, 27 per 
cent is absorbed by water, and 37 per cent is absorbed by land. 
And the Global Carbon Project went on to note that Canada 
absorbs 25 per cent more CO2 than it emits. That is an 
important reality. 
 
Finally when the resource economy strengthens, Mr. Speaker, 
of course we should move forward on a fund supported by a 
levy on large emitters with the fund’s expenditures limited to 
new technologies, new innovation to reduce greenhouse gases 
and not for general revenue. Doesn’t that make sense? 
 
These are solutions — all round, tangible, practical solutions. 
To quote the member from Melfort, what colour is your sky if 
you prefer to leap into the costly abstract over the cost-effective 
practical? We should be having a real point-for-point debate on 
this issue and not lazily spouting slogans, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last line goes to Dr. Bjørn Lomborg, a Danish political scientist 
who advises policy-makers and governments around the world 
on how best to invest development money. He was named by 
TIME magazine as one of the most influential people in the 
world. And he says we should spend money where we know 
how to fix the problems. The problem with the Paris conference 
resolutions was that countries promised everything to everyone, 
everywhere, but by focusing on the things that will do the most 
good, we may feel less virtuous, he says, but we will do much 
more good in the end. 
 
[15:30] 
 
And that’s the point of this white paper. We will do much more 
good if we can get to work, lose these facile, virtuous-sounding 
slogans, and invest in the innovation and technology that gets us 
to a greener place, Mr. Speaker, which is why I support the 
motion brought forward by the Premier and absolutely reject the 
amendment. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 



October 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 809 

And as always it’s . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Do you want 
to get in on the debate? As always it’s an honour to be able to 
enter into debate in this House and each take our turns to have 
our comments made. 
 
I want to start off with a quote that is one that the Premier uses 
often and I think there’s a perfect application to that quote here 
today. And what he often says is, the best predictor of future 
behaviour is past behaviour. And I think that is the actual nub of 
the problem here today, Mr. Speaker. The Premier has not acted 
in the best interests of Saskatchewan people from the get-go, 
despite the fact that he made big promises before he became 
Premier. 
 
So what I want to do today is to get on the record for a lot of 
our stakeholders that are here, stakeholders that I know are 
listening . . . My texts are kind of ringing off the wall here with 
some of the comments that we’re hearing. And I want to sort of 
lay out the real picture of what’s happening in Saskatchewan so 
that our ratepayers, our SaskPower ratepayers and certainly 
those who are in industry, understand that this Premier has 
failed us completely. And that’s how we got into the pickle 
we’re in today, where the federal government is imposing 
onerous obligations on the provinces. 
 
First of all we need to go back, and I want to go back in history. 
On September 24th, 2007, the Sask Party government released 
their platform for the election. And I want to share with you 
what the Sask Party government said they were going to do 
regarding Saskatchewan’s greenhouse emission reduction 
targets. Yes, they had targets, Mr. Speaker, and they were 
interesting. 
 
First of all, they’ve actually failed on the first two, and I highly 
doubt they’ll be able to reach the third one. First one, this is a 
promise by the Sask Party that they would do this when they 
got elected. They would stabilize greenhouse gas emissions by 
2010. Mr. Speaker, the government has failed miserably on that 
promise, and in fact greenhouse gas emissions are now 8 per 
cent higher than they were before. So that’s a massive failure on 
the part of this government right from the get-go. 
 
Secondly, what did they promise? I’m quoting from their 
platform from 2007: “Reduce greenhouse gases by 32 per cent 
from current levels by 2020.” So that is four years from now, 
and right now rather than reducing them at all they’ve gone up, 
8 per cent higher than the 2005 levels. So again, fail, massive 
fail on the part of this Premier and this government to deliver 
what they promised the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The third target that they introduced in their platform in 2007, 
“Reduce greenhouse gases by 80 per cent from current levels by 
2050.” Mr. Speaker, we don’t hear about that anymore. We 
don’t hear any such thing at all, and this again I think is what 
we can expect as this government continues to fail to deliver on 
its greenhouse gas emission reduction targets. Again, the best 
predictor of future behaviour is past behaviour. So what do we 
have so far on this? Three complete fails on the part of this 
government in terms of its promises that it made to the 
Saskatchewan government in 2007. 
 
Now let’s move forward a little bit. Let’s go to 2009. We have a 
press release dated December 1st, 2009. And what do we have 

here? Well there’s still a very ambitious goal but it is not at all 
what this government promised in 2007. They indicated they 
were going to reduce greenhouse gas emissions at that time by 
20 per cent from 2006 levels by 2020, and foster innovation in 
low-carbon technologies. Have they done that? Mr. Speaker, no 
— again a complete fail. 
 
They introduced a bill called The Management and Reduction 
of Greenhouse Gases Act, which they’ve now had to 
reintroduce twice in this Assembly since there was mistakes in 
the first one and there was mistakes in the second one. So once 
again they had to take three swings at the ball before they can 
actually hit it. The trouble is, they didn’t hit it out of the park on 
this one, Mr. Speaker. They got all the way to third base. They 
passed it through this Assembly: first reading, second reading, 
third reading. But in 2010, what happened? Nothing. This bill 
has sat on the shelf. It was the one bill that they used in their 
election platform. It was the bill that they used in 2009. And the 
minister of the day had some very lofty things to say about this 
bill. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What did he say? 
 
Ms. Sproule: — It was a woman who introduced it. It wasn’t a 
he. And she said, “Our government is committed to taking 
action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to meet our 
national-international obligations.” Okay. What else did she 
say? Oh, well they consulted with industry. Here’s what she 
said: 
 

Consultations with industry have made it very clear that 
they prefer a tech fund located outside the government to 
ensure that contributed funds are directed toward 
greenhouse gas emission reductions and don’t just sit in the 
GRF [General Revenue Fund]. [She said] And, Mr. 
Speaker, we agree. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we agree too. That’s exactly the way this 
government should be going. This was on December 2nd, 2009, 
so we’re looking at almost seven years ago when that minister 
made those commitments in this House to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
She went on and described how this bill would operate. There 
would be a technology fund where high emitters . . . They were 
all identified. About 32 of them were high emitters, and 
SaskPower was one of them. And then they would create an 
office of climate change, and then they would create the 
Climate Change Foundation as well so that the monies that 
would flow from these high emitters would go into a fund 
separate from government, completely regulated, and that 
would provide an opportunity for these high emitters to seek out 
low-carbon technologies. Makes total sense, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what did they do with it? In 2010 when revenues were as 
high as they’ve ever been, or almost as high as they’ve ever 
been, record revenues, what did they do? Nothing. So we have 
. . . One of our members got up in the House, and I just want to 
share what he had to say when she made these comments. She 
said, she quoted what the Environment minister said in her 
press release, and he says: 
 

Oh I can just hear the staff saying, real or is it really? It 



810 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2016 

sort of like reminds me of the Saturday Night Live news. 
Really? Really? You’re really going to do this, really? I 
just have to say I don’t think I can quite believe it. 

 
And you know what, Mr. Speaker? He was right. He was 
actually telling the future. Because again we see that future 
behaviour is best predicted by past behaviour. So I didn’t know 
he was a fortune teller and was able to see into the future, but he 
was absolutely right. His incredulity about the promises that 
were being made by that minister and by that government were 
unbelievable, because he knew they weren’t going to do it. 
 
The minister then went on to say in committee in 2010, on April 
29, 2010 she said, and I quote: 
 

We have stated what our targets are. It would then be up to 
large emitters to meet their reduction obligations. If they 
are unable to do that, they will be charged a carbon 
compliance price [a carbon compliance price] that those 
funds would then go into the Saskatchewan Technology 
Fund. 

 
Now call me a hairsplitter, Mr. Speaker, but carbon compliance 
price sounds very much like what this Premier is now shouting 
and Twitter tantruming about. And I mean that’s a part of the 
problem here. He talks on one side of his mouth and then he 
says something that sounds completely different. 
 
This minister was calling on a carbon compliance price for the 
high emitters in this province, about 32 of them who were 
responsible for a large portion of the greenhouse gas emissions 
that we are emitting here in Saskatchewan. And it’s all fine and 
dandy to say, well it’s not that much so we don’t have to do 
anything, Mr. Speaker. But I think that’s irresponsible and I 
think it goes right against the many promises that this 
government has made in this House to the people of 
Saskatchewan to do the responsible thing. 
 
So we then asked the minister, well when are we going to see 
this technology fund? And this is what the minister said: 
 

With the passage of this Bill — hopefully in the spring 
session — we are hoping to have the program implemented 
by spring of 2011, so a year from now. 

 
The carbon compliance [tax, I mean] price hasn’t been set 
yet. It’s still something that we’re examining. The range 
that we’re looking at is $15-25 per tonne. 

 
Now that sounds kind of familiar, Mr. Speaker. It sounds like 
something that’s coming from the other provinces and it sounds 
like it’s something that’s coming from the federal government. 
But for some reason, this minister’s carbon compliance price 
has never been established. She said it was going to be in place 
by 2011. Mr. Speaker, that’s five years ago, over five years ago. 
And what’s happened? Nothing. 
 
So the best indication of future performance is past behaviour. 
Here again we have a government that’s made promises to set a 
carbon compliance price on the high emitters in this province, 
something that we think is a good place to start. It was their 
carbon compliance price. Even the House Leader says, well 
that’s a tax. Yes, Mr. Speaker, anyone can figure that out, and 

that’s the problem. It’s their carbon compliance price. He’s 
astonished that his former minister wouldn’t call it a tax, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’re astonished too. 
 
That’s the problem. She said it on April 29th, 2010, and yet we 
still don’t see any admission on the part of this government that 
that is exactly what this government promised to do, and should 
be doing, and at least doing something so we don’t get into the 
pickle we’re in now where we have to have white papers 
produced by the Premier. 
 
There’s a few other comments that would be fun to read back 
into the record, but I do encourage anyone who’s listening right 
now to go back to April 29th, 2010, look at what the minister 
had to say in the committee, and just read it for yourself. It’s a 
good little read. 
 
But the next question we had is, well now what’s going to 
happen with these equivalency agreements? We hear a lot from 
the various ministers of the Environment — there’s been at 
least five since I took over as the critic for this area — and we 
hear a lot from them about, well we need these equivalency 
agreements with the federal government. Well other 
governments, other provinces have seemed to do it, Mr. 
Speaker, so I’m not sure why this government has so much 
trouble getting these equivalency agreements in place, and why 
they’re dragging their heels on it. Instead of being leaders, as 
we’ve said many times, they are actually being laggards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what did the minister say in April of 2010? We 
were asking about these equivalency agreements. She said: 
 

Yes, an agreement in principle was signed between myself 
and Minister Prentice to work towards an equivalency 
agreement. That equivalency agreement would allow the 
province to be the chief regulator on the file. [Good idea.] 
We felt it was important particularly because of the 
Technology Fund. [Again, good idea.] We didn’t want 
monies to be shipped out of our province; we wanted that 
money to stay here for reinvestment here. So we thought 
an equivalency agreement was the appropriate avenue to 
take. 

 
Again, where are these equivalency agreements? It’s been six 
years and we still don’t see them, Mr. Speaker. So again, if the 
minister could show us the repeated efforts to sit down with 
Prime Minister Harper’s government to find these agreements, 
maybe they could prove and table that they’ve actually been 
trying. But, Mr. Speaker, we know other provinces have done it, 
so why hasn’t this province? Again nothing, nothing from this 
government. 
 
Here’s what she says. This is a quote: 
 

So when our bill is passed and implemented, we are the 
chief regulator. Once the federal program is in place and an 
equivalency agreement is signed, we will then be able to 
continue to be the chief regulator instead of the federal 
government regulating us. 

 
Mr. Speaker, she promised to get that in place even before the 
equivalency agreement. What did she do? Nothing. Once again, 
this is putting us in a bad position. It’s putting the people of 



October 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 811 

Saskatchewan in a bad position. And again, as we heard our 
leader say, all we’ve got from this government is a carbon 
capture tax. We have a carbon capture tax, this $1.5 billion 
job-killing carbon capture tax that every ratepayer in 
Saskatchewan is paying. Every month now there’s hike after 
hike, and they’ve put SaskPower almost in bankruptcy as a 
result of it, Mr. Speaker. Completely irresponsible and again no 
responsibility for implementing what this minister actually had 
a good idea of doing. 
 
She went on to talk about her relationship with Minister 
Prentice who was minister of Environment at that time, rest his 
soul. She said this, and I’m quoting: 
 

The discussions that I’ve had with Minister Prentice to date 
— and he’s done a lot of meetings individually with 
provinces and then collectively, whether it’s the Canadian 
Council of Ministers of the Environment or just holding 
separate meetings to discuss climate change issues — it is 
my belief that there is a willingness on behalf of Ottawa to 
let the provinces oversee their own program. 

 
She had that commitment from Minister Prentice. She had a 
promise to the people of Saskatchewan to make that happen. 
And again, Mr. Minister, what did we get? Nothing. It’s 
shameful, Mr. Speaker, it is absolutely shameful and it has put 
us in a terrible position today. 
 
Now the media had some comments to say about this particular 
bill, and in fact it was quoted on April 28th in Hansard. I 
believe it was from the committee as well. Oh no, this is the 
second reading speech that was given by one of our members 
on this side. He quoted an article by Murray Mandryk from 
May 2009, and the headline was “Saskatchewan adopts 
Harper’s hot-air plan.” And in that article, Mr. Speaker, he 
quoted it, and this is the quote from the quote once again. And it 
says: 
 
[15:45] 
 

Even if one accepts the Sask. Party’s premise that its own 
2007 campaign promise of a 32-per-cent reduction in 
greenhouse gases was just too costly to the provincial 
economy . . . why did it have to be 20 per cent? Why not a 
25-per-cent reduction? 

 
And the journalist went on to say: 
 

Well the only magical thing about a 20-per-cent emission 
reduction target is that it happens to be the same as the 
federal Conservative government’s, which takes us to the 
biggest problem with this supposed 
“made-in-Saskatchewan” strategy: It’s really a 
“made-in-Ottawa” strategy. 

 
So that Premier was being criticized in 2009 for implementing a 
made-in-Ottawa strategy. That was by his Conservative friends 
in the Hill, and now he’s crying about that when we see it’s a 
different government in charge. 
 
He goes on to comment about the relationship between the Sask 
Party and the federal Tories, but he says his last part of the 
article here, the quote is, “And about the last area in which the 

Saskatchewan Party should want to be tied to the federal Tories 
is the environment and greenhouse gas emissions,” Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So that was an interesting comment that was made in 2010 by 
one of our colleagues in the discussions that we were having at 
the time about The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse 
Gases Act, which again is sitting on a shelf collecting dust. 
 
2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, oil prices were quite healthy at that 
time, Mr. Speaker. And what was done? Nothing. Now the 
Premier’s saying, well we can’t do it now because oil prices 
have dropped. But I want him to tell us why he didn’t do it. 
Why didn’t he do it in 2010? Why didn’t he do it in 2011? Why 
didn’t he do it in 2012? He didn’t do anything. And now he’s 
putting us in this position with the federal government because 
of his lack of inactivity . 
 
My leader referred to this earlier, but there was a report done by 
The Conference Board of Canada about the economic impact of 
technology funds. And this is chapter 5 from that report in 
2010. And again, Mr. Speaker, at that time, everyone believed 
this government. Everyone believed that they were going to do 
what they said they were going to do. And they did a study on 
that and they said wow, well what’s going to happen if we 
actually get these technology funds in place? They were 
considerably popular at that time. 
 
Here’s from table 6 on page 31 of that report from The 
Conference Board of Canada. The title for anybody listening 
online is The Economic and Employment Impacts of 
Climate-Related Technology Investments, May 2010. So in 
table 6 they show a table of all the provinces, technology fund 
spending, five-year impacts on real GDP and employment. And 
if you go across the line, you see what their estimate in 
Saskatchewan of the person-years of employment that would be 
in this province right now in green technology jobs, 
mortgage-paying green technology jobs that we could have had 
if this fund was introduced, is $8,568. Now the Premier finds 
that funny. I’m not sure why he finds The Conference Board of 
Canada funny, but you know, he has a real . . . He thinks it’s a 
funny little story. It’s too bad he’s laughing, Mr. Speaker, 
because I don’t think anybody else is. 
 
I’m going to wrap up very soon, but I just wanted to talk a little 
bit about some of the things that was said in committee over the 
years by the various ministers of the Environment that have 
been recycled through the position. June 16th, 2016, the 
minister said, “Well . . . it is a fact we’re waiting for the feds.” 
And that’s in total contrast to what was said by his predecessor 
in 2009. 
 
So who are we supposed to trust here? Well I think, given that 
past behaviour indicates future performance, I think we’d better 
believe this guy in 2016 rather than what was promised in 2009. 
Waiting for the feds. Well we’re waiting for the feds, and look 
what happens, Mr. Speaker. We know what happens. We wait 
for the feds and then when the feds act, we have a temper 
tantrum. That’s not appropriate, and it’s not helpful. He talked a 
little bit about first ministers coming back in September with 
reports. We haven’t seen that; they weren’t getting that job 
done. And so now we have these heavy-handed actions of the 
federal government.  



812 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2016 

This was in March 31st, 2015. And in that time, the ministry 
indicated that once again they were changing the direction of 
the climate change branch of the Ministry of the Economy. 
They changed it again in 2016. And we just see time and time 
again, the minister’s not able to deliver on what they’ve 
promised. 
 
May 1st, 2013, the minister said, I asked him when the fund 
would be up and running, and he said, “Thanks very much for 
the question. Once the Act is through the various stages of 
legislation . . .” Which it already was . . . [inaudible] . . . point, 
although that’s when they had to introduce amendments 
because they now hadn’t caught up with some of the federal 
regs that came in in the meantime: 
 

. . . we begin by looking at the [estimated] regulated 
emitters and receiving information from them and 
estimating what the fees would be that they would have to 
pay into the Technology Fund. We anticipate gaining that 
information early in 2014 and so funds probably wouldn’t 
flow into the technology fund until early 2015, probably 
January 2015. 

 
Now once again, Mr. Speaker, we have a Premier who says we 
can’t do this. We can’t do it then. We can’t do in 2011, 2012, 
2013. His minister said, oh we can do it in 2013. His other 
minister says, we can do this. But the Premier keeps saying we 
can’t. So who’s he talking to, Mr. Speaker? Who’s telling him 
that we can’t do this? His own government passed the bill. It 
went through the House. And he finds excuse after excuse after 
excuse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that the . . . We have to reiterate again that 
we already have a carbon capture tax here in this province, 
brought in by that minister. We have a bill with carbon 
compliance pricing brought in by that Premier. And so he’s 
talking different stories depending on who’s listening, Mr. 
Speaker, and I think that’s really confusing the people of 
Saskatchewan. I think you find that same kind of language in 
his white paper. 
 
And you know, one of my constituents wrote to me and he says 
there’s very little . . . He actually read the white paper. I’m not 
too sure how many people have, but here’s what he had to say. 
He said, there’s very little in here. It’s basically just the status 
quo and 53 pages of arguing and complaining about why we 
don’t need to do anything. 
 
The Premier argues that we basically don’t need to do anything 
because our emissions are so low, and yet the paper 
acknowledges that global warming is caused by humans and is 
an issue. It’s just doublespeak. And he goes on, he has a lot of 
very interesting comments about the white paper, Mr. Speaker.  
 
But before I forget, I do want to talk a little bit about some facts 
because we had the previous speaker give us some facts. I want 
to talk about China, Mr. Speaker. And these are some statistics 
from China that I think would inform the Premier because I 
don’t think he’s getting all the facts all the time. 
 
First of all, China spent a record $111 billion on deployment of 
clean energy infrastructure in 2015. That’s a really big number. 
When we think that our debt right now is 13 billion, that seems 

high to us. They spent $111 billion on deployment of clean 
energy infrastructure in 2015. In Beijing, the city of Beijing, 
they’re going to build four gas-fired power and heating plants. 
So they’re switching to gas-fired power, and they shut down the 
last of their coal-fired generations. They’re going to shut them 
down by 2017. 
 
So Beijing is shutting down coal. They’re not buying into the 
carbon capture sequestration technology that Saskatchewan 
people and taxpayers spent $1.5 billion on. And we have to 
remember, Mr. Speaker, we don’t own the technology. That’s 
owned by industry. So we handed over one and a half billion 
dollars to industry. We now see it as a tax, and I know the 
parliamentary board in Ottawa has said it’s about a 
$50-a-month tax right now. So that’s what we get for carbon 
capture. 
 
Seventeen per cent of the world’s solar capacity is in China. 
How much capacity do we have here in Saskatchewan? Less 
than 5 per cent? And now we’ve just lost the next project so 
we’re not moving ahead very quickly on that. China’s way 
ahead of us. 
 
In China, coal use fell 3.7 per cent in 2015, following a 2.9 per 
cent drop in 2014. In China, their coal use is dropping. In June 
of 2016, Beijing ordered 500 million metric tons of coal 
capacity to close by 2020 — 500 million metric tonnes, or 9 per 
cent of China’s coal capacity is going to close by 2020. China 
was the largest developer of renewable energy projects in 2015, 
accounting for almost 40 per cent of all the wind, solar, 
biopower, and small hydro installations around the world. Mr. 
Speaker, these are very interesting statistics that I think need to 
form part of this discussion. 
 
China has now banned approvals for new coal plants in 
oversupplied regions, although they are still building some 
plants. We have to acknowledge that because we’re being fair. 
We’re using all the facts, and not just some of the facts . . . 
[inaudible interjection] . . . The Premier doesn’t like it when I 
use all the facts. One theory about the continued construction of 
coal plants is that the Chinese government is building them — 
and this is why they’re building coal plants, Mr. Speaker, 
according to this article — to improve the GDP and boost 
employment. So that’s the reason why we’re seeing more coal 
in China. 
 
There’s some other statistics that I may or may not share. Oh 
yes, just about renewable fact sheets . . . This is where we’re 
missing opportunities here in Saskatchewan. In Canada there 
are 800 cleantech companies directly employing more than 
55,000 people in 2014, an increase of 11 per cent over the 
previous year. Cleantech revenues in Canada were pegged at an 
$11 billion market in 2014. Canada’s lost 41 per cent of its 
global cleantech market shares since 2005 because other 
countries are moving more aggressively into the growing field 
of cleantech. Canada’s cleantech companies invested $1.2 
billion in research and development in 2014, which is a bigger 
share of R & D [research and development] against revenues 
than the aerospace industry, Mr. Speaker. And for the first time 
in 2014, more than half the industry revenues — or 6.6 billion, 
or 57 per cent — came from those exports. 
 
Here’s a really important statistic that I think gets lost in this 



October 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 813 

discussion. Direct employment, direct employment in the clean 
energy sector — which encompasses hydro power as well as 
wind, solar, and biomass — is up 37 per cent in 2014 to 23,000 
people in Canada. And that compares with 22,000 directly 
employed in the oil sands. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked about this before. We’ve 
introduced a bill in this House that would’ve allowed this 
government to look into a green economy, a growing economy, 
one that deals well with the needs of all the stakeholders in 
Saskatchewan so that agricultural producers don’t have to see 
these hikes in their power bills under this Premier’s carbon 
capture tax, so that all the industries and transportation 
industries are treated fairly, and that the high emitters are the 
ones that need to start looking at low-carbon technologies to 
improve. 
 
And they can do it, Mr. Speaker. They can do it. We know they 
can do it. We’ve seen the benefits of cogeneration, for example. 
That’s something that needs to happen in this province. We see 
the benefits of demand-side management, where people are 
encouraged through building codes to actually use building 
materials that would create a sustainable envelope, thus 
reducing their need for carbon-fired . . . fossil fuel power. And 
you know, I think everyone’s wearing this, Mr. Speaker, right 
now, and our province is simply looking, as we’ve said before, 
like a laggard and not a leader. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, I really think that the amendment that 
my leader proposed makes a lot of sense. I think this is 
something that we need to incorporate into this motion that will 
make us look better rather than the . . . I don’t know how to 
describe this paper, but it’s wasting people’s time basically, Mr. 
Speaker. It is. It’s a waste of people’s time because this Premier 
has wasted our time for the last six years. 
 
As I said at the beginning, Mr. Speaker, the best predictor of 
future behaviour is past behaviour. We’ve seen a government 
that has made promise after promise after promise to take 
action. They have the carbon capture and sequestration plant 
which deals with less than 2 per cent of our emissions right 
now, Mr. Speaker. Emissions have gone up 8 per cent rather 
than flattening out in 2010. One of the ministers said in 2010 he 
promised that the emissions would be levelled. They’re not 
levelled. They’re going up and we have a government that can’t 
deliver. So when we see these high-handed actions by the 
federal government on our province, we know whose fault it is, 
and we need to place the blame directly there. It’s on this 
Premier and this government. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I urge all you members to think about this 
motion, think about the amendment being something that 
directly improves, and it tells the truth. It tells what’s going on, 
that after nearly a decade in power, you have given up 
Saskatchewan’s voice and credibility when it comes to 
protecting our interests. And that’s unacceptable. So I . . . 
[inaudible] . . . support the motion.  
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Before I recognize the Premier, I’d 
just like to remind members of the rules of debate as found in 
the Rules and Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan. On page 22, rule number 54(2) says as follows: 
 

A reply is permitted by a Member who has moved a 
substantive motion but not to the mover of an amendment, 
the previous question, or an instruction to a committee. A 
Member closing the debate by reply cannot propose an 
amendment. 

 
Having said that, I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very, very much. Thank you, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ll be brief. There are many members that 
want to participate in the debate. 
 
But I was a little incredulous as to the amendment that the 
member just spoke to, and our friend the Leader of the NDP just 
proposed, Mr. Speaker. And just, if I may very quickly repeat 
what it says, the NDP are calling through this amendment for 
the implementation of The Management and Reduction of 
Greenhouse Gases Act so that Saskatchewan can once again 
show leadership in reducing carbon emissions. This was the Act 
that on the 3rd of May, 2010, the NDP voted against. Every 
single member of the NDP, on the 3rd of May, 2010, voted 
against this Act that they’re now calling for in terms of 
implementation. This is part of their amendment. 
 
[16:00] 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we don’t actually agree with the amendment 
because that particular amendment would result in what? It 
would result in, by the member’s own admission and by the 
NDP leader’s own admission, it would result in an immediate 
carbon tax on heavy emitters in the province. Again I’ll canvass 
who those heavy emitters might be in Saskatchewan for the 
member from Nutana. She’s just called on the government to 
tax, through a heavy emitter’s levy, the mining sector, potash 
miners, many of whom who are still laid off, especially at 
Colonsay. They’re laid off. Mr. Deputy Speaker, she just called 
on the Government of Saskatchewan to implement a carbon tax 
on the oil and gas industry because they’re heavy emitters. 
 
The Energy and Resources minister just told me about an 
encounter he had with an oil driller, a directional driller from 
the Carlyle area, who has been . . . Well the member might want 
to hear about this because the individual that she wants to tax 
with her motion, a directional driller from Carlyle, has been out 
of work for two years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. He has two kids 
and he wished us good luck because he’d like to get back to 
work. 
 
And the NDP’s solution to this, her solution to this, is to call on 
the Government of Saskatchewan to implement a levy, a carbon 
tax on heavy emitters. Who else would be impacted by that? 
Farmers in the province of Saskatchewan. At a time when this 
economy can least afford it, the NDP’s solution, the Leader of 
the NDP and the Environment critic for the NDP, their Finance 
critic, their solution is to stand in the legislature today and call 
for an immediate levy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s unbelievable. 
It’s no wonder why you can count them basically on two hands 
over there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Because the people of the 
province of Saskatchewan would be absolutely shocked, they’d 
be so shocked to hear that the NDP today on a carbon tax 
debate have amended the motion to call for a carbon tax on that 
oil worker, on potash miners, on farmers in the province, on 
900 families that depend on a paycheque from Evraz. 



814 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2016 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll sit and take my place, but I’ll tell you 
what. Not only will members on this side of the House vote in 
favour of the motion, but we will vote against the NDP’s 
amendment, their plan to amazingly impose a carbon tax on the 
sectors that generate jobs at a time such as this in the province 
of Saskatchewan. We will be against this NDP job-killing 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm River. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . [inaudible] . . . to 
join in this debate, one of the most important debates that this 
province is going to face probably in the next few years. This is 
one of the most important issues that’s coming forward. 
 
The member that spoke from Nutana had mentioned a quote. 
Well I’ll do a quote: “I’m entirely a farmer, soul and body, 
never scarcely admitting a sentiment on any other subject.” 
That quote was made by President Thomas Jefferson hundreds 
of years ago. They realized then how important agriculture was 
to keep moving, to keep this industry and this province moving. 
 
This particular tax is going to set this province back something 
like the energy program did to Alberta in the ’80s. And I can’t 
believe that the NDP is not supporting that. You don’t have to 
support the government. You don’t have to support 
Saskatchewan Party on this. But stand behind the people of 
Saskatchewan on this one because I’ll tell you what: you’re 
dead wrong if you think that the people are behind you on this. 
 
I was here when Lingenfelter wouldn’t back certain things 
when it came to the people of Saskatchewan. You can look 
back in his speech on a particular issue. And I said then, you’re 
going to be gone. And he was. Broten, same thing, would not 
stand with the people of Saskatchewan when it came to 
supporting this province. We were growing it. He kept running 
it down. Where did you end up? With 10 members. I guarantee 
you that if you don’t support this and get behind the people of 
Saskatchewan — not behind the government, the people of 
Saskatchewan — you’re going to lose your next leader again. 
You’ll be like the Green Party and the Conservative Party in 
Saskatchewan and the Liberals, each leader losing with less 
members. 
 
And you may think that’s rhetoric. But if you’re that out of 
touch, if you’re that out of touch with reality and the people of 
Saskatchewan, I’ll tell you what. I talked to a farmer from 
Imperial today. It was on another issue, another issue 
completely. But at the end he says, you guys are going to fight 
this carbon tax, aren’t you? And I says, you better believe we 
are. Because he says, you know what it’s going to cost me? And 
he’s a rancher. And he says, you know what it’s going to cost 
me? You know, we’ve heard about the . . . [inaudible] . . . 
anywhere from 10 to $15,000 a year depending on the size of 
that particular ranch or farm. That’s just the agricultural 
industry, never mind the spinoffs. We’ve heard about how it’s 
going to hit the potash, the oil, all the mining sector. 
 
You know, I was in West Australia this summer, and they had 
imposed that. And I’ll tell you what: I talked to members about 
it, and you know what? Their mining industry took a hit, and he 
says, that didn’t help when we initiated it. That’s why they 
pulled it back. Each and every member from all parties said, 

you know, that wasn’t the way to go, just to put a tax on carbon. 
That’s not the way to go. Says what we’re trying to do over 
there is looking actually a little bit what we’re doing. 
Innovation, trying to . . . You know, is climate change real? 
Yes, but it’s how you want to handle that, how you want to fix 
that problem. We’re not fixing it. 
 
The way with the tax coming from Trudeau, and if you guys, 
the NDP . . . And I, you know, this isn’t sometimes even 
political on my side on this. I just can’t believe that you 
wouldn’t stand with the people of Saskatchewan on this, you 
know. I mean there’s a little piece of me that says that I’m 
almost glad that you’re not because it’s going to come back to 
haunt you because this is an issue that’s going to be played over 
many years. And if you’re not careful, you’re going to dig a 
hole deep enough, you’re not going to be able to climb out 
when it comes to . . . when this tax is implemented. 
 
Right now we have 70, 75 per cent of the people that don’t like 
it but they haven’t been affected by it yet. You start mentioning 
what’s happening in BC, 6 cents already on a litre of fuel, and 
they haven’t even . . . dealing with what Trudeau’s going to 
bring forward at that end of it and the added costs. When you 
start paying an extra 10 cents in fuel for the working guy and he 
has to pay for more heating, and all of a sudden there’s job 
losses, it’s going to affect right across this province. 
 
And then you’re going to see the people rising up and saying, 
we need to fight this; we need to find a different way to affect 
climate change. And we’ve had one. We brought this up years 
ago on the Boundary dam. There’s a better solution to 
addressing the carbon issues of cleaning it up instead of just, oh, 
let’s just tax everybody, leave the oil in the ground and all the 
minerals. Let’s just leave that alone and we’re all going to ride 
bicycles and live on wind power. You know, that’s unrealistic. 
 
You talk to the average guy out there, the average working guy. 
I won’t go to farmers and the ranchers. I’ll go to the 
working-class people. I door knocked in Riversdale. I door 
knocked in a few other constituencies on that side. And I’ll tell 
you what: there’s, in their constituencies, many 
hard-working-class people that can’t afford an extra tax, can’t 
afford to pay more for fuel. You know, they’re just making it as 
they are, and then if they lose a job or the industry that it 
affects, you know, it’s just not . . . The oil and gas industry 
which is going to take a hit, you know, there could be thousands 
in layoffs. That comes into the service industry going. That’s 
restaurants maybe being, one restaurant being closed in a small 
town, tire shop having to lay off people, garages. 
 
That just affects a domino effect and it was like that in Alberta 
when Trudeau tried to bring in the energy program. You know, 
he almost wrecked that province, and he’s doing the same way 
here. And I don’t think he knows any better. That’s the trouble. 
The Prime Minister I don’t think knows any better. He’s never 
worked a day in his life. And from what I understand, he’s 
taking advice from a chief of staff and a few people that 
basically want to shut the oil down. I think his chief of staff is 
Gerald Butts. You know, I’ve read tweets on it where he just 
condemns the oil industry. That’s who’s running the show 
down there. 
 
I don’t think the Prime Minister is actually smart enough to 



October 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 815 

realize the damage that he’s going to cause not only Western 
Canada but even Eastern Canada. You know, and that should 
scare . . . And I think that’s a message we have to get. We have 
a Prime Minister that basically promised, oh, there’s going to be 
more co-operation with the provinces. We’re going to work. It’s 
going to be sunny days, and we’re going to work together. 
 
And what did he do? He made an announcement when our 
Environment minister and the Environment ministers were 
down east just going to talk about what needs to be done, to 
bring our argument to the table and the other provinces to work 
on solutions. That’s what we’re dealing with. You know, they 
talked about Harper. They ran down, the NDP and the Liberals 
ran down that oh, he was too forceful, one-man control doing 
things. He didn’t do anything like that, that’s going to wreck 
this province and Western Canada if it goes ahead. 
 
We don’t know if ag is going to be exempt. If it’s not, you’re 
going to be looking at 5 to $15,000 extra on the farm. And sure 
you can say . . . Well you have the Liberal MP [Member of 
Parliament] saying, well you’ll just get it back after we take it. 
Well I’ll tell you what. I’ve dealt with Liberals over a number 
of years, and they take tax money. You’re not going to get it all 
back because I tell you what: they’ll set up a level of 
administration — they’re going to have to — create a bunch of 
jobs in Ottawa, and they will take that money off the top to pay 
for that first before it comes back. 
 
And that doesn’t mean in a couple of years that they don’t all of 
a sudden put restrictions on that once they start collecting it, 
they start looking at it. We’re talking about two and a half 
billion dollars coming out of our province. There’s billions of 
dollars floating down there, going to go down to Ottawa across 
Canada. You think after three or four years that they’re going to 
say, oh we’re just going to give that back? 
 
I can see another . . . Just what he did before, basically just 
saying we’re going to do this, imposing his will. How about if 
he imposes . . . You know what? We’re going to start running 
this, or we’re going to take half of the money because we don’t 
think you provinces are doing it right. And you’d better believe 
that he won’t look at that. 
 
What did he do with the health? He told the provinces that they 
did not know how to do it, that they weren’t putting the money 
into health. They weren’t doing it right. So now he’s going to 
put, from what I understand, he’s going to put restrictions on 
how we spend that money. You think he’s not going to do that 
with carbon, the carbon tax? You better believe he’s going to do 
that in a number of years. And if you’re going to support him, I 
can tell you right now that the people of Saskatchewan will 
punish you a lot harder than they punished you in the last two 
elections if you don’t stand behind the people of this great 
province. 
 
You know, this is one of the biggest debates this province is 
going to face. This could actually . . . We’re struggling right 
now, you know. Our resources are down. And now you want to 
stand up and say, you know what. Let’s let the Prime Minister 
give us another hit on this. You know, let’s just let them tax and 
help shut down our oil industry. 
 
You know, you had a convention on the weekend. And I’ll 

admit that some of them batwing ideas, and you had a few of 
them, didn’t hit the floor. But I’ll tell you what. You never did 
talk about carbon capture. You never talked about the carbon 
tax. You know, sure the people in that room would say, 
anything that we’re supporting as a government, don’t do that. 
But you better get out in reality. When you go door to door . . .  
 
Some of you have farming roots. I know that. You go talk to 
some of the farmers in that area and just say, you know what. 
What do you think of this carbon tax? And they’re going to tell 
you this could be our breaking point on this. You know, as we 
move forward in this province, we’re going to face some 
challenges, and I don’t think we need anymore coming from 
Ottawa, especially when we have worked on this file for a 
number of years, how to address the carbon problem.  
 
The Premier is right when it comes to innovation, how to solve 
it. The world is moving in another direction, especially the 
poorer nations. We don’t do something to help them clean it up, 
we’re just making the problem worse. Putting a tax on this 
province and this, well all the country, but it’s going to hit 
Western Canada more severely, and don’t ever think that that 
probably didn’t cross an odd Liberal’s mind when they were 
talking about this and when they decided they were going to 
implement it, you know.  
 
As we move forward to implement a 50-tonne tax by a certain 
year . . . But now it’s saying don’t know what’s exempt; how 
they’re going to take it. Without the rules . . . You know, that’s 
what we sent a minister down there for, to say, what’s 
happening? Let’s discuss things. Let’s see how we can, instead 
of taxing people, how can we . . . And what are the rules if you 
do want to put some price on carbon? I don’t think there is any. 
I don’t think they know yet, you know. What’s going to be 
exempt, what’s not? Is what we did and invested, hundreds of 
million dollars . and it’s working cleaning up coal? Because I’ll 
tell you what, coal’s going to be used as we move in the future.  
 
[16:15] 
 
I just had, at 1 o’clock had a conference call from Carolyn Orr, 
who heads up SARL [State Agriculture and Rural Leaders], 
state rural agricultural leaders, you know, and I asked, you 
know what: Is anybody down there talking about carbon 
capture? She just laughed. She said, we’re not going in that 
route. And I told her I couldn’t believe the carbon tax, you 
know. She said, I couldn’t believe that you guys are looking at 
taxing carbon because she says, you know, the states up there 
would rise up and especially if it was to hit ag like it could hit 
this one with the carbon tax. You know, we’ve talked about the 
capture program, and there’s been some states looking at it, and 
they’re still, looking at it. There’s interest. It’s a technology 
that’s going to take . . . that has been working, and it’s going to 
get better as time goes on. 
 
I can remember the synchrotron. The first year, it didn’t work 
right. I mean there was nothing but issues. I remember it was 
being . . . I wasn’t here, but it was being discussed in the 
legislature, a waste of money. Why would you bring that in? 
And that thing’s, you know, it’s giving nothing but problems. 
Now look at it. It’s a leader in Saskatchewan, you know, known 
all over the world for that, and so will this technology as we 
move forward. 



816 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2016 

That’s what we’re going to be, you know, dealing with, is how 
do we fix the world? And doing a tax is not going to fix what’s 
happening in the rest of the world. We put out less than two per 
cent of the world. A tax that they said, well, it’ll be returned, so 
then you can just turn around and just, like Goodale said, well 
you can just give it back to the guys that paid it. Well then what 
are you putting it on for? How are you solving the problems if 
you’re not going to work through innovation and ideas as we 
move forward? 
 
You know, that’s the Liberal attitude. And they love taxes when 
it comes to, you know, governments. The Liberals always did 
love to tax, you know. They weren’t that great at giving it back, 
and I guarantee you, they won’t give this tax back after a few 
years. They will find a way to keep a lot of it. 
 
You take two and a half billion dollars out of this province 
every year, and I tell you what. You’re going to be looking at a 
Newfoundland or a Maritimes province. Now if that’s what the 
members opposite want, well then that doesn’t speak very much 
for them because like I said before, stand up for the people of 
Saskatchewan. Go out and talk to a farmer. Go up and talk to an 
average working guy and just say you know what: do you think 
this is a good tax for you to pay? And then you might get a 
break back in your income tax a little later. That’s if, if you got 
a job to pay the tax at the end, you know. The average guy, he 
just wants a good job, good-paying job, and he wants that 
industry to go. And I’ll tell you what. Our oil and our mining 
and uranium, they provide many, many good-paying jobs. You 
start killing them and you’re going to feel the effects in 
Saskatoon and Regina, the bigger centres. 
 
You know, another motion . . . You know the NDP never talk 
about uranium. Well you want some clean technology, you 
know, why not look at that? So then that just boils down to at 
the convention just rhetoric, just you hate oil companies, you 
hate pipelines. You know let’s not even move our oil to 
tidewater where at least maybe we can get a little extra money 
for it. You know we have the East stopping that, and yet they 
want to tax our oil industry. I still believe . . . [inaudible 
interjection] . . . Well it is. You have a couple of chief of staffs 
in the Prime Minister’s office who want to shut it down. 
They’ve said so much. They believe it should stay in the 
ground.  
 
And I’ll tell you what. People of Saskatchewan don’t think it 
should stay in the ground. It should come up. It should come up 
responsibility with it, and come up responsible. And you do lots 
of, which there is, the environmental safeties. We have some of 
the stringent environmental records in and rules in North 
America, as good as anybody’s, you know, and yet we have 
people that oppose any use of oil, uranium, eventually the next 
thing. 
 
A certain group, a little group, if they shut down the oil, the 
next thing they’ll shut down potash. You know, why are you 
digging holes in the ground? We don’t need to be doing that 
you know; that’s wrong, you know. And if you’re going to 
listen to that certain little bit segment of population, you’re 
going to end up in a lot of trouble. And our side doesn’t. It’s 
with a majority of people that are in this great province, you 
know. 
 

And this is an issue that’s not going to go away. I mean 
anybody I’ve talked to in my constituency have said you’ve got 
to fight this. You know we got to. We can’t have anything 
that’s going to hurt this province and set it back. I haven’t had 
one guy say you know what, that’s a good thing. Let’s do the 
$50 a tonne of tax and let it go. And yes, if I get some money 
back, I’m all right with it. You know, I haven’t . . . You know 
that’s the sentiment in my constituency. 
 
And I’ve talked to a few others in other constituencies. But I 
would guess, and maybe I’m wrong, but I would guess that the 
majority of people in each and every constituency does not 
support this tax. And if it comes in, they’re definitely not going 
to support it, especially when it hits them in the pocketbook, 
because that’s when people will actually take notice.  
 
They’re taking notice now when it doesn’t affect them in the 
pocketbook. They will. You know then it’s a pretty . . . It’s 
already an issue they’re aware of. And when it starts to hit them 
in the pocketbook, they will really become vocal, and they will 
remember who was fighting that tax. And they will, you know, 
they’ll be saying, you’ve got to fight it any way you can, even if 
we have to go all the way — you know, heaven forbid — to the 
court route, you know.  
 
But when you’re dealing with something that could potentially 
destroy your province or set it way back at the, I would almost 
say maybe not the expense, but basically when other provinces 
aren’t going to be set back in Eastern Canada as much, you 
know, because they don’t rely on oil and gas. That’s to me 
totally unfair when you have a federal government that’s going 
to look . . . basically while penalizing you as a province just 
because that you have natural resources and we don’t, so we’re 
going to punish you. 
 
I’m going to sit down. I could talk about this for hours, but I 
know that many, many of my colleagues want to speak to this 
very important issue that’s going to dominate this province in 
the next couple of years. So I would encourage the members 
opposite to pull that amendment and support the motion, and 
there might be a few more of you here next time, next election. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for allowing me the 
opportunity to offer my support of the government’s position on 
climate change as outlined in the climate change white paper 
released on October 18th, 2016, and to also further support this 
Assembly’s opposition to the federal government’s plan to 
initiate a carbon tax. And I will not be supporting the 
opposition’s amendment. 
 
I hope to discuss the direct effects that such an ill-conceived 
plan has to the hard-working members of Melville-Saltcoats 
and provide my support to some well-explained alternatives and 
potential made-in-Saskatchewan solutions. 
 
It’s very concerning when our Premier questioned the Prime 
Minister after his surprise announcement to the House of 
Commons, where the Premier asked Prime Minister Trudeau 
more than once if the government had done an economic impact 
assessment that such a massive tax imposition was going to do 



October 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 817 

to our federal economy. And from what I understand, you could 
hear the crickets in the Prime Minister’s office. As our Premier 
rightfully questions, has this government decided to just push 
ahead with such a plan without studying what the impact might 
be on local jobs or do they just not care what the impact might 
be? 
 
The federal government has admitted that when 
competitiveness is affected, Canadian firms face pressure to 
reduce domestic production or ship production and/or 
investment to a country that has not yet priced carbon at a 
comparable level. This is referred to as carbon leakage. Carbon 
leakage, in a very callous definition, it’s a person who has 
become expendable in the name of a federal carbon tax because 
the federal government didn’t bother doing a due diligence 
analysis on the potential effects of their carbon tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when this province was under the NDP 
government, we experienced far too much carbon leakage. We 
lost far too many good-paying jobs under the NDP in times of 
increasing taxation and chasing jobs away. We understand what 
happens when bad taxation ideas are thought of to be an easy 
way to balance a budget. How many years pre-2007 did we 
experience job leakage, population leakage, our kids’ leakage 
due to ill-conceived tax strategies? 
 
On October 20th, the National Post wrote an article quoting our 
federal Finance Minister Bill Morneau, warning that our 
slowing Canadian economy could add billions to the federal 
deficit. “The Bank of Canada now forecasts real gross domestic 
product to grow just 1.1 per cent in 2016 . . .” and maybe 2 per 
cent in 2017. I’m not convinced that adding another tax to 
Canadian businesses at this time is going to enhance our 
contributions to GDP. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I think it will be 
detrimental to the future growth. 
 
Derek Burleton, deputy chief economist with the TD Bank 
Financial Group, asked to comment on the GDP revelations of 
our federal Finance Minister, and he isn’t expecting any 
financial stimulus in the fall update to boost the economy, but 
he believes that any new measures will be grounded on the 
government’s long-term plans for innovation. He didn’t claim 
taxation was going to help, but rather putting more meat on the 
bones on the longer term vision for innovation. Innovation is 
the key here, and that’s something that I want to discuss later 
on. 
 
And I’m quite perplexed really by the opposition’s efforts to 
criticize the white paper, which identifies priorities and plans. 
And I ask, what is their legacy? What can I show my 
granddaughter that they’ve contributed, that they’ve left for her 
from their legacy? At least BC implemented a plan. It wasn’t a 
good one, but they implemented a plan. 
 
So drilling down to the constituency level, I want to indicate 
really what the carbon tax burdens are going to be for the 
residents of Melville-Saltcoats. Agriculture is a key driver to 
our local and regional economy, whether our constituents are 
involved in primary, or they’re involved in value-added 
business. 
 
The potash producers of Mosaic in Esterhazy and PCS [Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan] Rocanville directly employ over 

2,000 people between the two entities, and likely another 500 
directly through secondary and contracted businesses. Potash 
royalties are expected to provide 3 per cent of this province’s 
total revenue in 2016-2017. I know the Finance Minister, using 
a forecast assumption of potash sales at $207 US per tonne, in 
our budget, you can see there’s not a lot of margin left in the 
potash industry at this time. So unfortunately, it’s pretty 
difficult that we’ve seen a Saskatchewan mine suspend 
operations until potash prices improve. 
 
Over the weekend, sitting with some officials with Mosaic, they 
indicated power and gas consumption was estimated to be 
anywhere from 5 to 10 per cent of their overall cost production, 
depending on their extraction and drying process. And another 
big factor of their production costs is the rail freight on getting 
their product to port. And it’s safe to assume that most potash 
production’s been retailed at or even under their cost of 
production. So they’re likely ending up with a lot of negative 
and local and provincial effects if we implement a carbon tax on 
that industry, whether it’s layoffs, work slowdowns, or 
ultimately closure. There is no carbon tax in Russia. None in 
Belarus or New Mexico. How is it fair to add an additional tax 
on this industry that competitors do not face? 
 
So again we ask, what is the impact to local good-paying jobs? 
And what indication do we have that how many jobs . . . How 
many jobs is the federal government willing to lose or to accept 
as carbon leakage in this industry? Melville-Saltcoats is blessed 
with the easy access to three canola processing plants. Although 
not in our constituency, we can see them from here. Our 
producers can haul directly to them, but we also have a number 
of constituents who work there. 
 
The Premier indicated, with new information, that now a carbon 
tax assessment of $10 a tonne would create an additional $3 
million expense to each and every plant. Moving at $50 a tonne 
for carbon, we’re looking at over $15 million yearly expense 
added to each crush plant. You may rest assured that the canola 
crush plants in North Dakota, Montana, Michigan, they’re not 
going to be assessed a carbon tax. Neither are the soybean crush 
plants that we’re going to be competing directly against. Even if 
the crush plants were able to factor the additional costs into 
their cost production, ultimately it’s going to come back to the 
primary producer. 
 
A study released in 2013 shows Canadian canola production . . . 
[inaudible] . . . $19.3 billion to the Canadian economy each and 
every year. That includes more than 249,000 Canadian jobs and 
$12.5 billion in wages. Canola generates one quarter of all farm 
cash receipts. So how many of those jobs, how much of that 
revenue are we willing to lose to carbon tax leakage? 
 
Locally, the carbon tax is going to affect the primary producer 
in many ways. A $50 carbon tax is going to add up to thirteen 
and a half cents per litre of diesel fuel. That’s going to increase 
fuel costs up to 25 per cent. Fuel costs typically represent 5 to 
$6 an acre. In addition, fertilizer costs are going to go up 
another $6 an acre. Freight costs, through road and rail freight, 
it’s going to go up as a result of the carbon tax. Energy used for 
farm operations, we’re certainly using a lot right now through 
grain drying, conditioning. General operational energy use is 
going to go up. 
 



818 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2016 

[16:30] 
 
The family who took over our farm can expect up to $100,000 
additional expense due to the carbon tax implication to his farm. 
So all these costs are borne by the producer. In the global 
marketplace, he’s going to have to have, he’s going to have 
difficulty competing with his fellow competitors in South 
America, in the Soviet Union, certainly with the ag economies 
in the US. 
 
One of our significant export competitor is Australia. Tried the 
carbon tax, didn’t work. They were able to measure its negative 
effects pretty quickly and dropped it. So ultimately the strong 
profitability of agriculture, which is now fleeting, it’s now once 
again under financial duress. So not only are Saskatchewan 
farmers worried about a carbon tax that’s going to undercut 
their ability to compete, but they’re wondering is it actually 
going to protect the environment. So how many primary 
producers is the federal government willing to lose to carbon 
tax leakage? 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me emphasize it. Climate change is real. In our 
quest to support the ever-growing population of the earth and to 
provide it a reasonable standard of living, we’re generating 
gasses that are polluting the earth and they’re causing 
irreparable damage. We have to take the initiative to limit the 
negative effects. However the ultimate question is, are we able 
to measure the success of these different types of initiatives that 
we take on? 
 
Interesting. When I had a conversation about carbon tax with 
my millennial son Matthew living in Ottawa, his comment was, 
and I quote: 
 

Now I want to clarify that I’m against the carbon tax, very 
against it. I look at it as the government trying to make an 
instant decision to drastically improve conditions. I would 
go as far as comparing it to Montreal banning pit bulls. [He 
has an issue with that.] Somewhere, somehow, [he 
thought] we needed a solution that had to happen instantly 
without actually thinking it through. And when they have 
difficulty to modify the carbon tax or they get a chance to 
re-evaluate it in the near future, they’re going to look like a 
bunch of buffoons. 
 
What I’d like the government to do is emphasize the need 
for cleaner energy and promote advancements in carbon 
capture and cleaner energy production methods. We do not 
need to lead by example or enforcing and failing reduction 
of carbon emissions. Rather we need to lead by using our 
technological advancements and global relations to 
promote other countries to follow suit in improving their 
energy production methods. 
 
We do need to protect our carbon-capturing trees, all the 
while reducing our output, but we should focus on being 
the technological leader rather than just having a lower 
number. We need to be the one that’s offering that cleaner, 
coal-burning power plant rather than focus on reducing the 
number of coal-burning power plants that we have right 
now. We can reduce the number of coal-burning power 
plants we have in the long-term plan, but right now we 
need to focus on sharing our scientists and 

forward-thinking individuals with the world’s best 
scientists rather than limiting their potential. 

 
Mr. Speaker, those are the thoughts of a 23-year-old millennial 
and the summary of discussions that he’s been having with his 
co-workers and his friends. 
 
In the climate change white paper, initiated by the Government 
of Saskatchewan, we have a detailed analysis of how we as a 
province are going to take on the climate change issues and its 
attempt to refocus the conversation away from the easy stuff, 
from the easy process of creating an economic penalty for 
carbon production. And we want to move it to a new 
conversation that has a more global perspective with a focus on 
true innovation. In that white paper are 13 specific 
recommendations as to what this province can do and what it 
will do to help steer the innovation conversation along. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to comment on one thing that we 
found out about cap and trade. It’s to me an illogical method of 
trying to create taxation. And I simply look at what’s going on 
in Ontario where the cap-and-trade system is so heavily 
supported — both in Ontario and Quebec — and it may end up 
costing them billions of dollars. The last two recent auctions 
have only been 35 per cent sold at levels far under everyone’s 
expectations. Ontario has a five-year, $8.3 billion climate 
change plan that it was going to fund entirely from the 
cap-and-trade revenue from these auctions. There are so many 
uncertainties at play, including legal challenges in the state of 
California who the Ontario and Quebec trade is so to be aligned 
with. There could be a significant transfer of wealth that moves 
from Ontario to California if there remain significant discounts 
in this whole cap-and-trading network. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, innovation is what I really want to talk about, 
and that’s something that this province is very good at. A great 
example of this is found in agriculture, and through the great 
work of our University of Saskatchewan Crop Development 
Centre, we’ve been developing an amazing array of pulse crops 
such as field peas, chickpeas, lentils, fava beans, and dry beans. 
Then they’re improving on nitrogen use — efficiency, 
improving on disease resistance, and the environmental stresses. 
 
The further adaptation of oilseeds, including the increased 
adaptability of soybeans to Saskatchewan agriculture, would 
help further reduce agricultural’s dependency on synthetic 
fertilizers as pulse crops extract most of their needed nitrogen 
from the air around them. Pulse crops in our province have 
moved from 400,000 acres in 1990 to over 6.2 million in 2015, 
and this has a potential to increase significantly — over 10 
million acres in 2030 in this province alone. 
 
Where do we go from here? Well maybe it’s finding a 
mechanism to introduce nitrogen fixation into cereals. Plant 
scientists who study nitrogen fixation caught a break in 2011 
when Microsoft founder Bill Gates became intrigued by the 
concept of developing nitrogen fixing in cereals. The Bill & 
Melinda Gates Foundation funds agriculture development 
around the world, particularly research to boost production in 
sub-Saharan Africa. And that organization has and will continue 
to invest billions of dollars into private research into these and 
other world-changing technologies. 
 



October 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 819 

There are other significant technologies that primary producers 
today have access to that’s going to help mitigate the 
production of greenhouse gases: variable rate fertilizer, 
pesticide applications, spatial soil testing, utilization of satellite 
and infrared analysis technology, RFID [radio frequency 
identification] tags in cattle and livestock that can measure and 
monitor feed uptake and the rate of gain. 
 
Genetic improvements in all aspects of agriculture, whether 
livestock or grain production, have the potential ability to 
reduce emissions throughout the food chain. Mr. Speaker, I 
found a headline in the National Post dated October 21st that’s 
titled, “How one researcher is fighting cow [flatulence] — and 
climate change — by feeding the gassy beasts seaweed.” Rob 
Kinley, a Dalhousie-educated researcher working in Australia, 
is finding that feeding artificial cow stomachs seaweed reduces 
the amount of methane produced by up to 99 per cent. He hopes 
to replicate the experiment with living cows whose 
methane-filled farts and burps make them really the largest 
animal contributors to climate change. Believe it or not, as 
ridiculous as the headline reads, research is ongoing, not only in 
our Saskatchewan labs, but throughout the world on its own, 
and without the threat of carbon tax to make a difference in 
greenhouse gas production. 
 
Mr. Speaker, locally-produced technologies, such as the carbon 
capture process at Boundary dam, has been and will be 
discussed by those that understand the process far better than I 
do. However I do want to introduce or reinforce that we are not 
the only ones who have been working on that technology 
locally. Shell Canada put out a press release in mid-September 
indicating that they had successfully stored 1 000 000 tonnes of 
carbon dioxide under ground with a $1.35 billion Quest project 
in the oilsands, with the help of $745 million from the Alberta 
government, and $120 million from the federal government. 
The Quest project is designed to capture about a third of the 
emissions from the Shell Scotford Upgrader near Fort 
Saskatchewan, Alberta. And officials of the Quest project 
estimate that if they were to build it again, they could reduce the 
cost of building that by 20 to 30 per cent — 20 to 30 per cent 
less to construct or operate another new facility. The more you 
build, the cheaper they get. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very evident that we need to focus on 
innovation and technology to reduce emissions. With more than 
2,400 coal-fired plants being built around the world, carbon 
capture technology can do more to reduce greenhouse gas than 
a carbon tax can. But, Mr. Speaker, we also need to identify the 
positive contributions that agriculture and forestry can present 
to carbon capture. We’re just beginning to now quantify the 
significant contribution that agriculture’s providing to assisting 
this country in mitigating carbon production. We need to 
develop a system of accounting and verification done federally 
to ensure Saskatchewan gets full credit for its relevance in 
accounting for greenhouse gas reductions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in summary, I believe that my millennial son 
agrees with the majority of tax-paying citizens of Canada, 
certainly of Saskatchewan. And it’s interesting to note that 
Larry Martin, the former deputy minister to the Premier of 
Saskatchewan, was quoted recently saying, while most 
Canadians want a climate change response that is, “. . . 
scientifically sound, environmentally sustainable and 

financially realistic . . . the [current] . . . discourse is driven by a 
myopic, ideological obsession with carbon emissions alone.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to continue to develop strategies that will 
assist us both to plan for climate change but also help reduce 
our greenhouse gas footprint. This cannot be undertaken by a 
one-skate-fits-all approach. Each jurisdiction has a unique and 
distinct part that it’s going to play in the national climate 
change stage. 
 
National programs are not going to have a universal fit. They 
will penalize some and be of minimal benefits to others. Let’s 
continue to work convincing the federal government to allow us 
to develop a Saskatchewan-made solution that will benefit all of 
Canada and will help keep Saskatchewan strong. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Estevan. 
 
Ms. Carr: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for giving me the 
opportunity to speak about this very important topic, the topic 
of a carbon tax that is going to be imposed by the federal 
Government of Canada. 
 
In my maiden speech, I talked about the constituency of 
Estevan. I talked about the trials and tribulations of the current 
economic environment that is happening there. To refresh 
people’s memory, I will give you a recap. 
 
The economy of Estevan revolves around agriculture, the oil 
industry, coal mining, and energy production. Sounds like a 
pretty well-rounded constituency, but I’m afraid that all of those 
industries are high emitters of greenhouse gases. With what is 
happening around the oil industry and the price of oil, the 
constituency of Estevan has taken a huge economic hit. 
 
In my travels, I have had the opportunity to visit with various 
service industries — businesses like restaurants, lounges, hair 
salons. I could list more but I think you’ve got the point. They 
are telling me that their sales are off by 40 per cent. Could you 
imagine taking a 40 per cent pay cut and there is nothing you 
can do about it? If the people who live in your community have 
less disposable income to spend, there’s nothing you can do 
about that. Some oil companies have asked their employees to 
take pay cuts; some of them, I’ve heard, as high as 30 per cent. 
 
The member from Cannington likes to tell a story about a 
business in his constituency. And I guess it’s not really a story; 
it’s the truth. The owner went to the staff and he gave them a 
choice. He said, you can all take a 20 per cent pay cut or I’m 
going to have to lay off 29 people. And then he left the room 
and he let the employees make the choice. Of course, the catch 
for them is they don’t know who’s on the list of people that may 
get laid off. In the end, they chose to take the pay cut so that 
everybody can keep their job. 
 
Some of these companies have had to lay off people. And let’s 
make it clear, these positions go right from managers to 
engineers, geologists, consultants, floor hands, and office staff. 
It has affected people in all areas of oil production. No one is 
immune from these cuts. Then there are companies that have 
actually had to close their doors, companies that employed good 
people with spouses and children and mortgages to pay. The fall 



820 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2016 

out from these people losing their jobs is very heartbreaking. 
 
So all of what I have just described is happening because of low 
oil prices and a slowing industry. So, Mr. Speaker, when I heard 
about this carbon tax that is being unilaterally imposed on the 
provinces of Canada, I was even more concerned about the 
province of Saskatchewan and its economy. Needless to say . . . 
something like that would do to a constituency like Estevan, a 
constituency that is already on its knees because of what is 
happening in the resource industry. 
 
Saskatchewan is very reliant on the resources this province has 
to offer, resources that also happen to be heavy emitters of 
GHGs [greenhouse gas]. And what does the federal government 
do? It imposes a tax without proper consultation, which I might 
add they agreed to do, imposed a tax while a meeting . . . which 
our Minister of the Environment was trying to negotiate with 
other ministers from across Canada. 
 
This is very serious for our province. And I might add that I 
stand behind the decision of the Minister of Environment for 
walking out of that meeting when he heard the news that the 
Prime Minister had announced a carbon tax while these 
ministers were trying to come to an agreement in good faith. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Nutana stands over there and says 
our Premier has failed miserably. I beg to differ. I’m proud to 
stand on this side of the room because we have a government 
and a Premier that is fighting for this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that our opposition across the room does 
not take this economic future of our province very seriously. 
You might ask how I know this. I know this because one of the 
resolutions that was to be brought forward by Saskatoon Nutana 
NDP at their conference this past weekend was to shut down all 
coal-fired power plants. That is right. They want to shut down a 
reliable source of power for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
[16:45] 
 
So not only are they not satisfied that the federal government is 
going to tax this industry, which will make it difficult enough 
and may cause rate increases or job losses, they just want to 
shut the industry down completely, which will cause an 
uncountable amount of job losses, not to mention the fact that 
this is a very reliable source of power for the province. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition says this government is doing 
nothing and investing nothing. In his own words, “We as a 
province have invested 1.5 billion in carbon capture and 
sequestration in Estevan at Boundary dam 3.” The Leader of the 
Opposition calls this a carbon capture debacle. On the contrary, 
this is a success story that helps take out up to 90 per cent of all 
CO2 that is emitted from Boundary dam 3. 
 
And one of the most exciting pieces of this technology is the 
fact that it can be used all around the world. We already know 
that these other countries are not going to stop using coal any 
time soon. In fact, they are continually putting up new coal 
plants all the time. 
 
So why not embrace the technology that has been designed in 
our own backyard so that greenhouse gas emissions go down 

globally also? We also know Canada is responsible for 
approximately 2 per cent of all emissions globally. So if we 
have technology that can help other parts of the world reduce 
their emissions, why would we not do that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the constituency of Estevan has coal mines. The 
primary customer for these mines is SaskPower and SaskPower 
uses that coal to fuel the coal-powered plants that are in 
Estevan. So not only would the NDP close down our plants, the 
mines would no longer have their primary customer to sell to 
which no doubt will put that industry at risk in Estevan, once 
again creating more job losses. If this were to happen, our 
service industry would be feeling more than a 40 per cent 
revenue loss as well as creating more job losses in those 
industries. 
 
And this carbon tax that will be imposed on our province, it will 
affect agriculture in this province of Saskatchewan. There is a 
farmer named Jake Leguee that wrote an open letter to the 
Prime Minister of Canada. In his letter he writes, and I quote, 
“A carbon tax has the ability to drastically increase my costs, 
without creating an incentive to reduce my emissions,” which I 
guess brings us to what should be the point of this whole 
conversation — reducing greenhouse gasses or emissions. 
 
Will imposing this tax on the people of Saskatchewan actually 
reduce emissions? My thoughts are it will do one of two things. 
The price of goods to the consumer will go up as Mr. Leguee 
has pointed out, which will come at a cost to the people, all of 
the people of Saskatchewan or the heavy-emitting companies 
will cut their costs so it doesn’t get passed on to the people of 
Saskatchewan. And those companies will most likely have to 
lay off people to compensate for this increase which has not 
reduced emissions at all. 
 
The federal minister from Regina said the tax can be revenue 
neutral, meaning we will tax the heavy emitters and then just 
turn around and give the money back to them in a form of a 
credit — money in and money out. Of course I’m sure, as our 
other speakers talked of, it will come at a cost in the form of an 
administrative fee from the federal government. But we don’t 
know that for sure because we don’t know the details of what 
exactly this new carbon tax will look like or how it will be 
administered. But regardless, if it is the federal minister’s 
rationale that all of the money will stay in the province of 
Saskatchewan and it can all be rebated back to the companies, 
what is the point? This is definitely not reducing our carbon 
footprint which is supposed to be the goal of this whole 
exercise. 
 
There was also mention that we could just tax the heavy 
emitters and give tax reductions to the people of Saskatchewan. 
Then I go back to the fact that there will be job losses because 
of this carbon tax. And do you think the people who are not 
working really care if they have a tax break? They will have no 
income to tax. 
 
But back to the point. We are trying to reduce greenhouse 
gasses, and this would not help us reach our goal either. So let’s 
make a plan. Let’s look at the ways we are already helping to 
reduce our carbon footprint and what we can do to help reduce 
it in the future. Our provincial government has already 
committed to getting to have our power supply 50 per cent 



October 24, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 821 

non-renewable and 50 per cent renewable by 2030. And I 
believe this goal will be met. 
 
And lastly, the Premier of Saskatchewan released a document 
called climate change white paper last week. This document is 
absolutely jam-packed with facts and figures, ideas, and 
possible solutions, information that is evidence-based and very, 
very thought provoking. If you’re interested, you can find this 
document on the Government of Saskatchewan’s website. 
 
I am sure that some of my colleagues will be getting into some 
of these details as some of them already have with their 
comments. So when we are talking about this issue please ask 
yourself, what is the goal? And are we achieving it through this 
type of arbitrary carbon tax? 
 
I support the motion brought forward by the Premier of 
Saskatchewan and do not support the amendment. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Moosomin. 
 
Mr. Bonk: — Mr. Speaker, as we all know, global warming 
continues to be the greatest existential threat of our time. There 
is unfortunately a lot of poor science thrown around about the 
problem. But there’s even more good science from which we 
can learn and begin to tackle the dilemma that we can’t leave 
for our children to solve. 
 
But we have plenty of stark facts. The global population is 
expected to reach 10 billion. We have land that is turning to 
desert, and we have climate change. Mr. Speaker, no one can 
refute that we will only solve the problem of replacing fossil 
fuels with technology. But fossil fuels, carbon, coal, and gas are 
by no means the only things that are causing climate change. 
 
I propose to you today, Mr. Speaker, that international research 
suggests that what is happening globally in agriculture is 
causing climate change as much as burning fossil fuels and 
maybe more. It is estimated that the average person today needs 
about half a tonne of food per year, yet we are creating 10 
tonnes of eroding soil for every person alive on the planet 
today. This is causing global desertification and land 
degradation at an alarming rate. But Saskatchewan, with our 
knowledge and experience in regenerative agriculture, can offer 
more hope than you can imagine. We are part of the solution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, desertification, or biodiversity loss, is what 
happens when we create bare soil. There is no other cause. And 
this is what I intend to focus on today. In many parts of the 
world that are humid year round, it is almost impossible to 
create bare ground. Nature just covers it up so quickly. But 
where we see desertification occurring is the seasonal rainfall 
areas that have long periods of humidity followed by periods of 
prolonged dry spells. And as I’ve already stated, these tend to 
be the seasonal grasslands of the world — the North American 
prairies, the Central Asian steppe, and so on. 
 
You see, Mr. Speaker, when soil is left bare and you receive 
rainfall, most of that moisture is left to run off, causing erosion 
and, in many circumstances, flooding. Or it is simply lost to 
evaporation just as it would on your driveway after a rain. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, water and carbon are linked to soil organic 

matter. And when soils are damaged, they release both carbon 
and water back to the atmosphere, creating more bare, eroding 
soil. This simply perpetuates the problem. 
 
Traditionally we have been taught that crop production, along 
with livestock and overgrazing, are the cause of soil 
degradation. But as we rested the land and reduced stocking 
rates, we’ve only accelerated the problem. When we use 
summer fallow, as an example, as a way to rest the land, we 
produce bare, eroding soil and we expose the micro-organisms 
living in that soil to the elements, effectively destroying them. 
Think of it as a tornado going through a town. If the tornado 
happens once, the residents — and I’m talking about the 
micro-organisms here — will rebuild. If it happens two or three 
times a year for 20 years, some of those residents will 
undoubtedly be killed, while others simply move away. 
 
When we try to rest grasslands or by reducing the stocking rate, 
we break the carbon, water, and nutrient cycle. As plants grow 
through photosynthesis, they store carbohydrates in their roots. 
These roots then feed the plant material growing above the soil. 
The aim of plants is to produce seed, and after that, plant 
material must break down biologically before the next growing 
season. In areas that are rested, this biological process cannot 
occur. It then switches to oxidation, which is a slow chemical 
process that smothers the plants, blocking sunlight from 
reaching the plant’s growth points, and results in bare eroding 
soil and increased woody vegetation. This releases water and 
carbon into the atmosphere. 
 
We have traditionally used fire to control this problem by 
removing excess plant material and allowing plants to regrow, 
but this creates bare ground and releases carbon from the soil as 
well as releasing black particulate carbon into the atmosphere. 
As we know, we can’t rest the land because this causes bare 
eroding soil and releases carbon. We know we can’t burn the 
residue because this causes bare ground and releases carbon. 
What are we to do? 
 
As we begin to understand nature’s complexity, we have 
adopted management techniques that mimic nature. By keeping 
livestock bunched and moving as a proxy for former herds of 
wild animals and by the use of specific planning processes, we 
are able to account for the variables that are inherent in 
agriculture and nature. We have also developed technology in 
crop production that regenerates the soil instead of depleting it. 
By incorporating organic matter back into the soil and 
protecting the micro-organisms in the soil with minimal soil 
disturbance and increasing moisture retention, we can 
rejuvenate and build healthy soils. In Saskatchewan we are 
absolutely world leaders in this effort. There have been huge 
strides made in adopting management techniques and 
technology. Many of these have been pioneered and developed 
right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, take 1 square metre of bare soil. I promise you 
that it will be much cooler in the morning and much hotter at 
midday than another square metre of soil that is covered with 
plant litter. If you were to water those two plots and come back 
a day later, you would see that the water from the bare ground 
would have been evaporated, but the ground that was covered 
with plant litter would still be holding moisture. By holding this 
moisture, what you have done, Mr. Speaker, is that you have 



822 Saskatchewan Hansard October 24, 2016 

effectively changed the microclimate. When we multiply this by 
the area of the world’s grasslands, which cover about 40 per 
cent of the land on Earth, Mr. Speaker, we have changed the 
macroclimate. 
 
Soil restoration may be our greatest ally in countering global 
climate change and creating a liveable future. The benefits of 
restoring soil are many. In addition to providing safe haven for 
atmospheric carbon, soil restoration provides localized cooling, 
builds resilience to droughts and floods, and helps produce 
nutritious food. 
 
Our prairie grasslands co-evolved with vast herds of herbivores 
over millions of years. These herds were kept bunched and 
moving by pack-hunting predators. This action of keeping herds 
bunched and moving is what created our deep, rich prairie soils. 
These grazing animals would remove some of the plant material 
and trample the remaining material into close contact with the 
ground. This close contact allowed for the biological decay 
process to take place. This allowed a healthy flush of plants the 
next season and increased and promoted biodiversity. With 
varying roots depths in the different plant species, it also 
supported the nutrient and water cycle. 
 
As foliage above the surface is eaten, the root mass below the 
surface dies back. The dead root material turns to carbon in the 
soil and creates capillaries which in turn allow the soil to act 
like a giant sponge, absorbing and retaining water. As the cycle 
continues it creates layer and layer of new soil. Imagine the 
pages of a book being laid one of top of each other. This 
increases both production of plants and animals, building 
healthy soils that are able to break down methane and store 
carbon. 
 
Remember the stories of the 10 feet of black topsoil that the 
settlers found when they arrived here. Well this is how these 
soils were created. On Saskatchewan’s 12.5 million acres of 
native grassland we store three times Canada’s annual 
emissions of CO2. To quote the very well-respected ecologist 
Allan Savory, very little attention has been placed on the 
biological soil that can be created very quickly through holistic 
management. This had led to a dramatic underestimation of the 
soil organic storage in assessing sequestration potential with 
respect to global warming. 
 
Furthermore, there is a predominant assumption that soils have 
a carbon sequestration capacity that is limited, or we would call 
that . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . Okay, I’ll keep going. Both 
estimates, however, effectively remove new soil from the 
equation and thereby underestimate soil sequestration capacity 
by a yet unknown but potential significant magnitude. 
 
To further highlight the potential of growing soils, last fall at 
the Paris climate talks the Agriculture minister of France, 
Stéphane Le Foll proposed a declaration called four in one 
thousand. Its mandate is to increase soil organic matter by point 
four per cent per year on the world’s agricultural soils. 
 
The Speaker: — It being 5 p.m., this Assembly stands recessed 
until 7 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 17:00 until 19:00.] 
 



 

 

 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 Ruling on a Point of Order 
  The Speaker ............................................................................................................................................................................... 789 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 789 
  Wotherspoon ..................................................................................................................................................................... 790, 791 
  Cheveldayoff .............................................................................................................................................................................. 790 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 790 
  Makowsky.................................................................................................................................................................................. 790 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 790 
  Beaudry-Mellor ......................................................................................................................................................................... 791 
  Doherty ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 792 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 792 
  Stewart ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 792 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 792 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 792 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 793 
  Phillips ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 793 
  Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 793 
  Forbes ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 793 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 793 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 794 
  McCall ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 794 
  Sarauer ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 794 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 794 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Prince Albert Police Service Celebrates 130th Anniversary 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 794 
 Remembering Corporal Nathan Cirillo and Warrant Officer Patrice Vincent 
  Lawrence ................................................................................................................................................................................... 795 
 Resolutions at New Democratic Party Convention 
  Belanger ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 795 
 Saskatoon Achievers in Business Excellence Awards 
  Olauson ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 795 
 Battlefords Business Excellence Awards Gala 
  Cox ............................................................................................................................................................................................. 796 
 Girls Self-Esteem Workshop 
  Ross ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 796 
 Former Deputy Premier Receives Shevchenko Medal 
  Hart ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 796 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Role of the Global Transportation Hub in Land Acquisitions 
  Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 797 
  Wall ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 797 
  Harrison ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 797 
 Support for the North 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................... 798 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................... 799 
 Funding for Emergency Shelters 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................... 799 
  Beaudry-Mellor ......................................................................................................................................................................... 799 
 Funding for Health Care 
  Chartier ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 799 
  Reiter ......................................................................................................................................................................................... 800 
 Funding for Education 
  Beck ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 800 
  Morgan ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 800 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 Position on Climate Change and Carbon Tax 
  Wall .................................................................................................................................................................................... 801, 813 



Wotherspoon ............................................................................................................................................................................. 806 
Eyre ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 807 
Sproule ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 808 
Brkich ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 814 
Kaeding ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 816 
Carr ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 819 
Bonk ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 821 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


