






















































Hansard: November 29, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 

 

of the 

 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 

 

DEBATES 

and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 

The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 

 

 

N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 50A  TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 29, 2016, 13:30 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Hon. Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Hon. Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Hon. Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, Hon. David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Don — Indian Head-Milestone (Ind.) 
Merriman, Hon. Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 50; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10; Independent (Ind.) — 1 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Terry Quinn http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1511 
 November 29, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 13:30.] 
 
[Prayers] 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Deputy Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, seated in your gallery are a 
number of members of the Saskatchewan Professional Fire 
Fighters Association. These gentlemen were in the legislature 
today meeting with MLAs [Member of the Legislative 
Assembly] on both sides of the House, raising a number of 
issues that are important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of all MLAs, we want to thank them for 
their ongoing work that they do in keeping our province safe 
and secure. I would like to list them by name, Mr. Speaker: 
Chris Bourdon, Kevin Tetlow, Neal Matechuk, Gord Hewitt, 
Craig Farrell, Brian Belitsky, Morley Desmarais, Lloyd Zwack, 
Todd Brown, Jeff Reeder, Paul Hills. Mr. Speaker, I’d ask that 
all MLAs join in welcoming them to their legislature today, as 
well as thanking them for the great work that they do 
throughout the year. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to join with the Deputy Premier and welcome the 
firefighters and paramedics that have joined us here today as 
part of the Saskatchewan Professional Fire Fighters Association 
day of meetings here at the legislature.  
 
What I’d want to convey to each and every one of these 
members, and their members and firefighters across 
Saskatchewan, is just a great and hearty thank you for your 
sacrifice and service. Your efforts, your work, the risk you take 
provides protection and peace of mind and safety for all of us, 
all across Saskatchewan. You have a direct role in saving lives, 
and in the process of doing so you put at risk your own lives. 
And we can only say thank you to you enough . . . Well we can 
never say thank you to you enough, and we really value your 
service across our province. 
 
I also want to say thank you for your continued leadership and 
advocacy on very important matters relevant to community 
safety and firefighters and the protection of firefighters. I want 
to thank you for your voice when it came to PTSD 
[post-traumatic stress disorder] and the protection of all 
workers, not just emergency workers but all workers, and the 
meaningful changes that we’ve been able to bring forward by 
working together. Your leadership was critical to making that 
happen.  
 
So to the firefighters all across Saskatchewan and the 
professional firefighters that are gathered here today and 
President Lloyd Zwack, on behalf of the official opposition and 
a grateful province, I say thank you and welcome. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Advanced 

Education. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d ask leave for 
an extended introduction. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Eyre: — Thank you. With us today in your gallery is 
president and CEO [chief executive officer] of Saskatchewan 
Polytechnic, Dr. Larry Rosia, and Sask Poly board Chair Ralph 
Boychuk. While Dr. Rosia hails originally from Alberta, Mr. 
Speaker, he has become a pillar of exemplary leadership here in 
the province at Sask Poly since 2012. Mr. Boychuk has been 
Chair of the board since 2008. Ralph has nearly 40 years of 
experience in the financial service industry, has served in 
several positions in not-for-profit organizations, and was 
awarded the lifetime membership of the Prince Albert Chamber 
of Commerce in 2008 for his outstanding community work. 
 
Sask Poly has undergone many exciting changes in recent 
years, including degree granting, soaring enrolments, campus 
expansions, and its transition from SIAST [Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology] to a polytechnic. 
It’s been a pleasure to meet Mr. Boychuk and also to work with 
Dr. Rosia, whose enthusiasm about all things Sask Poly is 
infectious, Mr. Speaker. And I would ask all members to join 
with me in welcoming Dr. Rosia and Mr. Boychuk to their 
legislature. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
join with the minister opposite in welcoming Dr. Larry Rosia 
and Chair Ralph Boychuk with the Saskatchewan Polytechnic 
to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
We had a good meeting this morning, Mr. Speaker, where we 
got to hear about various of the opportunities and challenges 
that are on the horizon for Sask Polytechnic, and about their 
commitment and desire to do everything that they can to build 
the future here in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, we also had an 
opportunity to hear from two students at the institution and the 
great work that they’re doing and going on to impact their 
communities. 
 
So I guess on behalf of the official opposition, Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to say thank you to these two gentlemen for the work that 
they do in building the future here in Saskatchewan with the 
Saskatchewan Polytechnic and to welcome them to their 
Legislative Assembly. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To you 
and through to all members of this Assembly, I want to 
introduce, all the way from the University of Saskatchewan 
from the department of biology, the king of caribou in 
Saskatchewan, Dr. Phil McLoughlin. Mr. Speaker, 



1512 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2016 

accompanying Mr. McLoughlin or Dr. McLoughlin, is Kevin 
Murphy, the assistant deputy minister in Environment here. 
And we’ll hear more about Dr. McLoughlin’s work in a 
member’s statement here shortly with respect to woodland 
caribou, Mr. Speaker, and the healthy habitat that we have here 
in northern Saskatchewan and how that is equated to a healthy 
woodland caribou population here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
These are some great science-based results, Mr. Speaker, that 
the Government of Saskatchewan will most definitely support 
as we continue with the conversation of some of the species at 
risk that we have in the province here, Mr. Speaker, and the 
healthy habitat that we offer here in the province and the great 
results that come with that. So all members, please join me in 
welcoming Dr. Phil McLoughlin, the king of caribou here in 
Saskatchewan to his Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Fairview. 
 
Ms. Campeau: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of this Assembly, I would like to 
introduce two individuals in your gallery, constituents of 
Saskatoon Fairview: Terry Budnick and Deb Davies. I met 
Terry first in 2011 when I first started campaigning, and 
definitely with his help and his family’s help, he helped me, 
pushed me over the edge. Everybody knows that I had quite a 
close race, and again this past election they definitely helped 
push me over the edge. 
 
Deb Davies really needs no introduction in this Assembly. She 
works with foster families, and she’s dedicated her life over 30 
years ensuring the safety and well-being of our children. So to 
all members, I would like you to help me welcome them to this 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, I too would like to take an opportunity to 
welcome the king of caribou to his Legislative Assembly. I like 
that name. The member from the northwest thought it was his 
name, but we’re going to straighten him out there. 
 
Certainly, we know the work that you’ve been doing along with 
CPPAS [Community Pasture Patrons Association of 
Saskatchewan] and Weyerhaeuser. There’s been some really 
good progress made on determining exactly what is the caribou 
habitat, and where their critical areas are for the habitat. And we 
know how critical that is to the long-term sustainability of that 
particular species and of course the habitat itself. 
 
So on behalf of the official opposition, we too would like to 
extend a warm welcome to you and to your Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you, I’d like to introduce two people sitting in your 

west gallery. The first, Mr. Speaker, is Tim Rohovie. Tim 
Rohovie was my long-time banker — well, he actually still is 
my banker — and good friend, and hopefully he remembers that 
when it comes time to issue more money to me. But anyway, 
thank you very much. 
 
Tim is also a very political junkie, I’ll call him. And he’s 
travelled here from Edmonton for a meeting, but he insisted he 
wanted to come to the legislature because he loves politics. And 
so we’re so very happy to have him here. 
 
And sitting with him is another lady that I know very well. I’ve 
known her for a lot of years. She’s my wife, and she’s making 
sure Tim stays out of trouble when he’s in the legislature. So I’d 
like everyone to welcome them to the Legislative Assembly. 
Thank you very much for coming. Thank you. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, 
I’d also like to join the minister in welcoming Mr. Ralph 
Boychuk. Ralph Boychuk is a constituent of mine and a 
long-time friend of mine, and also a former banker as we . . . 
[inaudible] . . . have in common. So Ralph is very well known, 
very well known in the city of Prince Albert. He’s involved in 
everything. We go to so many functions. We’re at the same 
functions all the time together. He’s just a wonderful citizen. 
We’re so fortunate to have him living in Prince Albert. And I’d 
like to welcome him to his Legislative Assembly as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Parks, Culture and 
Sport. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cheveldayoff: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to introduce to you and through you, someone 
seated in the west gallery, Mattea Merta. Mattea is from 
Saskatoon. She’s lived in the Silverspring area for the last 12 
years. 
 
Mattea’s passions are politics and people. Though she’s only 20 
years old, she recently ran a very spirited campaign in 
Saskatoon’s last civic election in ward 10. She currently works 
for her Member of Parliament. She serves her city by 
volunteering for charitable and non-charitable organizations and 
keeps up to date on political issues in order to educate those of 
her own age. She is also a great door knocker, Mr. Speaker, 
Mattea. 
 
She is encouraged by Saskatchewan’s innovation. She desires 
her city and province to continue to prosper and, Mr. Speaker, 
she’s a young leader in our province that I am confident that 
we’ll hear much more from in the future. 
 
So I’d ask all members to help me welcome Mattea to her 
Legislative Assembly. Thank you for being here. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is 
my great pleasure to introduce 24 grade 8 students seated in the 
west gallery from Regina Christian School, a school I’ve had an 
opportunity to spend some time at. Ms. Jane Robertson and Ms. 
Amy Klassen are also with them today. And I’m looking 
forward to spending some time with those students after 



November 29, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1513 

question period is over. I really miss interacting with students, 
so I’m looking forward to that opportunity. I can’t wait. 
 
Secondly while I’m on feet, Mr. Speaker, I just also want to 
give a shout-out to Deb Davies, who is seated in your gallery, 
and all the great work that she does with the Saskatchewan 
Foster Families on behalf of our ministry. And also to Dr. Larry 
Rosia, Sask Polytech is an important constituent in my 
constituency, and so I would like to welcome you also. Please 
join me everyone. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you and to 
all members of the Assembly, I would like to introduce some 
people in the west gallery. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce 
Candace Mitschke-Hiller, the CEO; Myles Thorpe, president; 
and Dave Zerr, the vice-president of a farm group called the 
Saskatchewan Farm Stewardship Association. And they are a 
relatively new farm group who are dedicated to providing a 
voice for ag producers with regards to agricultural land and 
water stewardship. And I ask all members to join me in 
welcoming them to their Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join the 
member opposite in welcoming the Farm Stewardship folks to 
their Legislative Assembly. The work you do is very important 
and much appreciated, and we look forward to future 
developments as you continue your work. So welcome to your 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a very 
special guest sitting in your gallery that I’d like to introduce to 
you, and that’s my daughter Melissa. Melissa, I’m very proud 
of her. She’s a hard-working young lady. She’s very 
compassionate, kind, and she’s strong and independent. And 
she’s a wonderful mother to her little boy that brings me so 
much joy as well. Melissa is such a hard worker. She has three 
jobs that help her support her family. And she also knows the 
value of giving your time also, and whenever someone needs a 
volunteer, she always steps up to the plate. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, oftentimes we say it’s really tough 
to have a mother who’s a social worker or a parent who’s a 
social worker because we oftentimes analyze everything. But I 
have to argue that it must be tough to have a parent who’s a 
politician as well. And so during the election, Melissa was an 
amazing canvasser, and oftentimes I bump into people and they 
say that she knocked on their doors and they had a very lovely 
visit with her. 
 
And so I appreciate everything she does to help support me, and 
I’m very honoured to be her mother and spend time with her. So 
I’m happy that she made it through the snowstorm last night to 
come here and watch the session. 
 

And while I’m on my feet, I also would like to welcome Deb 
Davies here too from the foster parents’ association. We 
appreciate everything that you do, and I look forward to 
meeting with you in the next few weeks. 
 
So I ask that all members welcome my daughter Melissa, and 
Deb, to their Assembly. 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
[13:45] 
 
Mr. Nerlien: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to present a petition from citizens who are opposed to the 
federal government’s decision to impose a carbon tax on the 
province of Saskatchewan. I’d like to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: to cause the Government of 
Saskatchewan to take the necessary steps to stop the 
federal government from imposing a carbon tax on the 
province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of — and it’s 
a long list — Wishart, Foam Lake, Wynyard, Bankend, 
Kelliher, Lintlaw, Preeceville, Canora, Okla, Margo, Hazel 
Dell, Endeavour, Kelvington, Invermay, Archerwill, Rose 
Valley, Bjorkdale, Wadena, Fosston, Quill Lake, Yellow Quill, 
Rama, Sheho, Kuroki, Yorkton, Buchanan, Jansen, Kylemore, 
Theodore, Insinger, Springside, Porcupine Plain, Elfros, and 
Leslie. Thank you. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition to reverse the cuts to the 
Lighthouse program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners point out that in April 2014, the 
then minister of Social Services said the Lighthouse in 
Saskatoon would “. . . take pressure off existing detox facilities, 
hospitals and police cells, while keeping people safe, especially 
in our brutally cold winters.” The petitioners point out too that 
on that very same day, Mr. Speaker, the minister of Health, the 
then minister of Health said, “We want to ensure that 
individuals with mental health and addictions issues have a safe 
place to stay.” 
 
The petitioners also point out that since that time, Mr. Speaker, 
this government has repeatedly indicated that the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit keeps individuals out of hospital emergency 
rooms and jail cells. Mr. Speaker, we couldn’t agree more on 
this side of the House. We only need to look at the Saskatoon 
Health Region and the issues of overcrowding, the record over 
capacity in our hospitals in Saskatoon, to recognize that the cut 
to the Lighthouse was short sighted and is having an impact on 
those waits and the over capacity in those hospitals, Mr. 
Speaker. I would like to read the prayer: 



1514 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2016 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan immediately reverse 
their recent cuts to funding that allows extremely 
vulnerable people to access the services of the Lighthouse 
stabilization unit in Saskatoon, and revisit their imposition 
of a strict and narrow definition of homelessness in 
November of 2015 which forced the Lighthouse to cut 
back its hours of essential service in February of 2016, and 
take immediate steps to ensure that homeless people in 
Saskatchewan have emergency shelter, clothing, and food 
available to them before more lives are lost. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions today are signed by citizens of 
Saskatoon and Regina. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition to stop the redirection of funding of 
the northern teacher education program, NORTEP. Mr. 
Speaker, a recent report shows that 94 per cent of NORTEP 
grads found employment in the North, and the province’s 
financial deficit cannot be fixed by cutting indigenous 
education in the North and to a program that has served the 
North for over 40 years. And, Mr. Speaker, many people from 
all throughout Saskatchewan have signed this petition. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Respectfully request that the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan call on the Saskatchewan Party government 
to immediately restore their five-year agreement to fund 
the NORTEP program and to continue funding NORPAC 
and NORTEP programs in La Ronge. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these particular 
pages are from Beauval, La Ronge, Air Ronge, and there are 
many, many people from many, many communities across the 
many corners of our province that have signed this petition. 
And I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Ms. Sproule: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition 
regarding the community pasture program. We know that in 
2012 the federal government announced an end to the 
community pasture program that had operated under the Prairie 
Farm Rehabilitation Act since the 1930s to restore marginal 
lands subject to erosion and manage them for livestock grazing. 
The land is being transferred to the Saskatchewan government 
which has offered the pastures for sale. These pasture lands 
serve a vital role to species at risk, mitigating climate change 
for cattle ranchers and their communities, preserving cultural 
and heritage values, and for recreational and cultural purposes. 
I’ll read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
the Government of Saskatchewan to halt the sale of public 
land with ecological value, including Crown lands that, 
until removed by recent order in council, had been 
protected under The Wildlife Habitat Protection Act; 
conduct a complete inventory of our remaining native 
grasslands; create legislation that recognizes the value of 

our remaining native grassland; and protect native prairie, 
including monitoring and enforcing conservation 
easements preventing breaking of these lands. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the individuals that have signed this 
particular petition are from Saskatoon and Martensville. I so 
submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Centre. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition in support of Wakamow Valley Authority. And we 
know that as a result of the passage of The Wakamow Valley 
Authority Amendment Act, 2016 on June 30th, the Wakamow 
Valley Authority lost its statutory funding of $127,000 from the 
Saskatchewan government, in addition to the $30,000 in 
supplemental funding. And this loss of annual funding 
negatively affected the ability of Wakamow to maintain its 
facilities, and repair its park and buildings, and provide services 
to its community. And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s a well-known fact 
that this will negatively impact Moose Jaw economy through 
job loss and negatively impact Moose Jaw tourism and 
businesses. I’d like to read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan take the 
following action: 
 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your 
honourable Legislative Assembly call on this government 
to immediately repeal The Wakamow Valley Authority 
Amendment Act, 2016 and reinstate statutory funding to the 
Wakamow Valley Authority. 
 
And as in duty bound, the petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people signing this petition come from the city 
of Moose Jaw. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to 
present to you a petition for a second bridge for Prince Albert. 
That the Diefenbaker bridge in Prince Albert is the primary link 
that connects the southern part of the province to the North. 
With no other crossing, heavy truck traffic must be rerouted, 
adding a significant amount of cost for the businesses in and 
around Prince Albert in terms of losses or added expenses. That 
current residents, businesses, and tourists in Prince Albert and 
northern communities require a safe and effective transportation 
infrastructure that include adequate bridges. 
 
That the Saskatchewan Party government refuses to stand up for 
Prince Albert in this crucial infrastructure issue. That local 
municipal governments have limited resources and require a 
second bridge to be funded through federal and provincial 
governments, not a P3 [public-private partnership] model. That 
the support for the people and municipal governments of Prince 
Albert and neighbouring communities for a second bridge is 
overwhelming and has been joined by support from industry 
groups, the Saskatchewan Association of Regional 



November 29, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1515 

Municipalities, and many others across the province, and that 
the need for a second bridge for Prince Albert has never been 
clearer than it is today. Prince Albert, communities north of 
Prince Albert, and businesses that send people and products 
through Prince Albert require a solution. I will read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan ask that the 
Saskatchewan Party government stop stalling, hiding 
behind rhetoric and refusing to listen to the people calling 
for action, and begin immediately to plan and then quickly 
commence the construction of a second bridge for Prince 
Albert using federal and provincial dollars. 

 
Mr. Speaker, we have tons of these petitions, and they’re signed 
by people across the province, but these particular petitions are 
signed by people in Prince Albert and Regina. I do so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina 
Lakeview. 
 
Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition regarding child care in the province. Those who have 
signed this petition wish to draw our attention to the following: 
across Saskatchewan, licensed non-profit child care centres are 
taxed inconsistently. Many of our licensed non-profit child care 
centres pay commercial property taxes, and this is not done in 
Manitoba, Alberta, Ontario, British Columbia, or New 
Brunswick. 
 
Child care is essential to the economy, yet most centres struggle 
to balance their budgets. This issue threatens both the number 
of child care spaces as well as the quality of care. Quality child 
care has an enormous positive impact on a child’s future 
outcomes and yields high rates of economic return. Child care 
centres are institutions of early learning and childhood 
development. It’s appropriate that they have the same tax 
treatment as schools. I will read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan recognize 
that licensed, non-profit child care centres provide 
programs that are foundational to a healthy society by 
including them in The Education Act and exempt all 
licensed, non-profit child care centres in Saskatchewan 
from property tax through amendment to the appropriate 
legislation. 
 

Mr. Speaker, those signing this petition today reside in Tisdale 
and Star City. I do so submit. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
present a petition calling for a stop to the Sask Party sell-off of 
SaskTel. The petitioners point out that after nearly a decade of 
wasting the economic boom and blowing through the savings, 
the government is now forcing people to pay for Saskatchewan 
Party mismanagement. The petitioners point out that in the 
recent election campaign, the Sask Party promised that they 
would not privatize SaskTel, but now, the petitioners astutely 
point out, instead of looking at their own waste and scandal, the 
Sask Party is talking about breaking their promise and looking 

to sell off SaskTel to make a quick dollar. And, Mr. Speaker, 
the petitioners point out that once SaskTel is gone, there’s no 
getting it back and there’s no telling what else the Sask Party 
will then sell. 
 

In the prayer that reads as follows [Mr. Speaker], the 
petitioners respectfully request that the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan call on the Saskatchewan Party 
government to keep their promise, stop their plan to sell off 
SaskTel, and to keep our valued Crown corporation in the 
hands of Saskatchewan people. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this particular petition is signed by good citizens 
of Birch Hills and Moose Jaw. I so present. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Regina Douglas 
Park. 
 
Ms. Sarauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise yet again today 
to present another petition calling on the government to reverse 
the cuts to the Aboriginal court worker program. The 
Government of Saskatchewan cut the budget for the Aboriginal 
court worker program in the 2016-2017 provincial budget, 
resulting in layoffs of Aboriginal court workers throughout the 
province and completely flying in the face, Mr. Speaker, of the 
recommendations made by the Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission. 
 
Those on this side of the House know that Aboriginal court 
workers play an important role helping Aboriginal people in 
criminal and child apprehension cases. Aboriginal peoples are 
disproportionately represented in Saskatchewan’s correctional 
centres, and Aboriginal court workers successfully help to make 
our communities safer through reduced recidivism rates. I’d like 
to read the prayer: 
 

We, in the prayer that reads as follows, respectfully request 
that the Government of Saskatchewan reverse its 
short-sighted and counterproductive cuts to the Aboriginal 
court worker program. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the individuals signing the petition today come 
from Saskatoon, Perdue, Big River, Prince Albert, and Moose 
Jaw. I do so submit. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
University. 
 

Research Shows Healthy Woodland Caribou Population 
 
Mr. Olauson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
in the House today to inform members about the great research 
being conducted at the University of Saskatchewan regarding 
Saskatchewan’s woodland caribou and their healthy habitat. 
 
Led by world-renowned ecologist Dr. Philip McLoughlin, 
researchers have found that the woodland caribou population in 
northern Saskatchewan has been increasing over the past two 
years and is one of the largest woodland caribou populations in 
all of Canada. These findings are contained in an interim report 
of a five-year study into the population dynamics and critical 



1516 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2016 

habitat of woodland caribou in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
The U of S [University of Saskatchewan] received more than 
$2.2 million in funding for the project from government and 
industry partners, including the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been determined that the Saskatchewan 
woodland caribou population occupies some of the most 
pristine habitat available to non-migratory, forest-dwelling 
caribou in Canada with very low levels of human disturbance, 
and we are pleased that this is resulting in healthy caribou 
populations. 
 
Despite the initial conclusion by the federal government 
through the Species at Risk Act that the Saskatchewan woodland 
caribou population has not been self-sustaining, this research 
indicates otherwise. Dr. McLoughlin’s research indicates that 
Saskatchewan’s woodland caribou are in fact one of the largest 
self-sustaining and most secure of all woodland caribou 
populations in Canada. 
 
Our government is proud and supportive of the research and 
results achieved by Dr. McLoughlin and his team. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 

Lives Impacted by Student Wellness Initiative 
in Saskatoon 

 
Ms. Sproule: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday I had the 
pleasure of attending the third annual SWITCH [student 
wellness initiative toward community health] charity breakfast 
in Saskatoon. It featured a short program of testimonials from 
current volunteers, mentors, clients, and staff, highlighting how 
their experiences at SWITCH have impacted their lives. 
 
The student wellness initiative toward community health, 
known as SWITCH, has been operating since October 2005. 
Compared to other student-run clinics in Canada, SWITCH 
offers the largest variety of services, operates the highest 
volume of shifts, and has been open for the most number of 
years. Their volunteers come from a variety of backgrounds and 
disciplines with unique experiences to share. 
 
[14:00] 
 
Mr. Speaker, their outreach team is responsible for making each 
SWITCH shift run smoothly by preparing and serving food, 
assisting with educational programming, and providing child 
care. And their clinical team is made up of many different 
health disciplines collaborating together on each case to provide 
non-judgmental and client-centred care. The students volunteer 
alongside a doctor or nurse practitioner, cultural support 
worker, receptionists, and other health care mentors. In addition 
to traditional clinical services, they offer counselling, 
speech-language pathology, physical therapy, occupational 
therapy, chiropractic, acupuncture, reiki, naturopathic medicine, 
herbology, reflexology, iridology, cultural supports, 
gynecology, pediatrics, pharmacy, and nutritional education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was proud to be able to attend the event last 

week and support such an important organization. And I ask all 
members to join me in recognizing SWITCH and the incredible 
work they do. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Westview. 
 

Saskatoon Literacy Organization Provides Support to 
Adults and Families 

 
Mr. Buckingham: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday I 
met with READ Saskatoon and would like to share with 
members of this Assembly the good work that they are doing. 
Today more than ever, reading, writing, and numeracy skill 
development is important to adults and families. Literacy is 
linked to economic and personal success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for almost 40 years, READ Saskatoon have 
provided access to family, adult, and financial literacy supports 
for adults and families. I want to share some of their results: 78 
per cent completion rate in their adult tutoring program; 88 per 
cent of parents and caregivers in the family literacy programs 
report better ways to support their children’s literacy 
development; 44 per cent of participants made monthly 
contributions to a new savings account after attending financial 
literacy programs; 50 per cent took steps to repair their credit; 
73 per cent reported making changes in the way they managed 
their money. 
 
Last year READ Saskatoon reached 3,500 people with their 
programs. That’s why READ Saskatoon led the Central Park 
Common initiative, a shared space on Duchess and 7th, shared 
between the Saskatoon chapters of MS [multiple sclerosis], 
arthritis, and READ Saskatoon. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I want to give a shout-out to the 250 
volunteers of READ Saskatoon who put the agency’s mission 
and vision to work every day. Saskatchewan is built on the 
commitment of volunteers like those at READ Saskatoon, a 
commitment to ensure everyone has opportunity to reach their 
potential. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Cumberland. 
 

Isabel Gibson Celebrates 100th Birthday 
 
Mr. Vermette: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I would 
like to recognize a constituent of mine, Isabel Gibson, who will 
be celebrating her 100th birthday this December 2nd. Isabel 
McLean was born December 2nd, 1916 to Charles and Luella 
McLean in Ellisboro, Saskatchewan. She was the first of four 
daughters, and grew up at Breezy Point Farm near Ellisboro. 
Isabel attended school in Ellisboro and graduated from Normal 
Teachers’ College in Regina. She taught school in several small 
Saskatchewan towns and for three years on Vancouver Island. 
 
In 1950, Isabel married Doug Gibson. They resided in 
Rocanville, Saskatchewan where their children were born. In 
1960 they moved to Creighton, Saskatchewan where they 
continue to reside. Isabel resumed teaching at Creighton school 
in 1967 and taught until 1986. During this time, she completed 
her Bachelor of Education degree from the University of 
Saskatchewan, graduating when she was 69, and retired the 



November 29, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1517 

following year. 
 
Isabel has been an active volunteer with her church, the North 
Saskatchewan Seniors’ Association where she has taught 
English to immigrants. She and her husband, Doug, have 
enjoyed many trips, both within Canada, to the United States, 
Great Britain, Europe, and Australia, and recently celebrated 
their 66th wedding anniversary in September. They have four 
children, seven grandchildren, and 14 great-grandchildren. 
 
I ask all the members to join me in recognizing this exceptional 
life of Isabel Gibson and in wishing her a very happy birthday. 
Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Social Services. 
 

Regina Quarterback Most Outstanding Player in 
Canadian University Football 

 
Hon. Ms. Beaudry-Mellor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last 
Thursday, the University of Regina Rams quarterback, Noah 
Picton, became the 50th recipient of the Hec Crighton Trophy. 
Mr. Speaker, this prestigious award is presented by U Sports 
[university sport] annually to the most outstanding player in 
Canadian football. 
 
In his third year with the Rams, Noah has become the first 
University of Regina player to win the Hec Crighton Trophy. 
Picton’s 3,186 passing yards are the most ever thrown by a 
Canadian university quarterback in a single season. His 224 
completions set a new Canada West record. His 25 touchdowns 
led the nation this season and his 69.3 per cent completion rate 
was the best in his division. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with two years of university eligibility remaining, 
Noah has the highest career completion percentage and the 
second most completions, passing yards, and touchdown passes 
in U of R [University of Regina] history. Rams head coach, 
Steven Bryce, praised his quarterback saying, “Given his 
leadership qualities, the time he devotes to watching tape, his 
academic performance, and of course his on-field 
accomplishments, he is tremendously deserving of being called 
the best player in the country.” 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I know this family and extended family very 
well and have taught some of their kids. My son has had the 
fortune of having Noah as his quarterback coach and 
unfortunately will have him as his standard. And I want to say 
that the Picton family — Noah’s dad, Dean, his aunt Donna, 
and his uncle Derek — are community business owners and 
tireless community volunteers in our city, and I want to thank 
them very much for their contributions. And join me in 
congratulating Noah on this prestigious award. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from 
Melville-Saltcoats. 
 

Melville Students Bring Awareness to 
Dangers of Driving Impaired 

 
Mr. Kaeding: — Mr. Speaker, for the second year in a row, the 
Melville Comprehensive School SADD [Students Against 
Drinking and Driving] chapter has been named the most active 

chapter in the province. At the 28th annual provincial Students 
Against Drinking and Driving Conference on October 22nd, the 
students were presented the Nicole Nakonechny Memorial 
Award. The students received a $1,000 bursary from SGI 
[Saskatchewan Government Insurance] plus the memorial 
plaque to display in the school for one year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these students have been working very hard to 
enforce the message that no one should be driving while 
impaired. Under the guidance of teacher Sharon Roach and EA 
[educational assistant] Annette Callfas, the students have come 
up with many unique and innovative awareness ideas. In fact in 
October the students filmed a public service announcement 
about the dangers of driving intoxicated or distracted. The video 
included students carrying a casket to the Melville cemetery to 
show other students the potential consequences of driving 
impaired. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no one should lose a loved one due to impaired 
driving. That is why our government has taken action through 
effective legislation, more tools for law enforcement, and doing 
more to build awareness. We commend the Melville chapter of 
SADD for all they have done to bring awareness to the dangers 
of driving impaired, and I ask all members to join me in 
congratulating these students for winning this very prestigious 
award. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Highways and 
Infrastructure. 
 

New School Opens in Gravelbourg 
 
Hon. Mr. Marit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This September, 
students in Gravelbourg were able to walk up the stairs to the 
newly renovated pre-kindergarten to grade 12 École 
Gravelbourg School. It was great to attend the grand opening of 
the school in my constituency on October 18th along with the 
Minister of Education as well as local dignitaries, school 
officials, teachers, and of course lots of students. 
 
Our government committed nearly $10 million to this project 
and worked with Prairie South School Division and the 
community to help turn this project into a reality that now 
includes state of the art facilities, including expanded 
classrooms, administration offices, and a daycare, Mr. Speaker. 
This is the first major school project in the community in over 
50 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this story is evidence that our government is 
investing in the province that was so neglected by the policies 
of the previous NDP [New Democratic Party] government. That 
is why our government, since taking office in 2007, has 
invested approximately $1.4 billion toward 65 major school 
projects across the province, and numerous other small projects. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly to join 
me in congratulating the students and staff on the opening of 
their new school and thanking Prairie South School Division 
and the whole community for their support. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
 



1518 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2016 

QUESTION PERIOD 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 

Public Accounts Committee Meeting and 
Details of Land Transaction 

 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a lot about the Sask 
Party’s growing GTH [Global Transportation Hub] scandal 
that’s not very clear. But there are some facts that are becoming 
indefensible. The Premier’s office was intricately involved. The 
whole cabinet was kept in the loop, was in the loop for a year. 
The Sask Party paid more than they should have. Millions and 
millions of Saskatchewan people’s money ended up in the 
hands, in the bank accounts of Sask Party supporters. There’s 
an RCMP [Royal Canadian Mounted Police] investigation into 
the matter. The Sask Party continues to hide from the truth, not 
answering basic question in this Assembly day after day. And 
they’re even misrepresenting what the auditor concluded, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
With only two days left of session, will the Premier drop the 
tired talking points, the political spin, and start answering with 
an easy question? Will he simply admit that yesterday the 
auditor said, “. . . the audit did not conclusively state that there 
was no conflict of interest, fraud, or wrongdoing with respect to 
these land transactions related to GTH”? Will he simply admit 
that? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Day 
after day after day, we hear the same allegations from the 
Leader of the Opposition, even though, even though through the 
Provincial Auditor’s own testimony to the standing committee 
of the legislature, they have been debunked. The phone call that 
was the source of about three days of his question was 
debunked by the auditor, Mr. Speaker. The leaked cabinet 
document that he said was leaked and some in the media said 
was leaked, the auditor said was not at all leaked but formed the 
basis of negotiations. And then yesterday, I guess taking his cue 
from that one media outlet as well, the Leader of the Opposition 
stood in his place and breathlessly asked about the 
government’s involvement, about the Premier’s office’s 
involvement as a result of an email to the chief of staff. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . Yes, well the members will want to listen very 
carefully. Mr. Speaker, in November ’13 Mr. Donlevy received 
a one-sentence email updating him on the negotiations. In June 
of 2013 . . . I ask the member for Athabasca to listen. In June of 
2013, five months earlier, those same negotiations with that 
same land owner that were referenced in the one-line email had 
been discussed by the cabinet committee on land use, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And the auditor even commented on it. If he even read the 
auditor’s report, he would know that she said in June of 2013 
the GTH minister gave the cabinet an overview of the land 
assembly activities for the east parcels. Yes, Mr. Donlevy 
received this email in December, five months after all of the 
cabinet knew, Mr. Speaker, because this was the normal 
function of the land assembly for the GTH. 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, that Premier’s bluster just 
doesn’t add up. And let’s be clear. It was the Premier’s office 
that was involved before this dirty deal was done. And let me be 
abundantly clear. A premier in a premier’s office worth its salt 
would have stopped this dirty deal and saved taxpayers millions 
of dollars. 
 
The auditor said herself that she is concerned that there is an 
impact on the understanding of the results of the audit and has 
“overshadowed” the audit’s conclusions. The auditor was clear 
that the audit did not conclude what the Sask Party, and 
particularly that Premier and that minister continually say it 
concluded, day after day as part of their weak defence in this 
Assembly. 
 
So can the Premier not even admit that they were wrong to 
misrepresent the auditor’s press release as conclusions of her 
audit? This is a disrespect to Saskatchewan people that have 
lost millions of dollars in this dirty deal. Why is he working so 
hard to cover this scandal over? Why won’t he come clean? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll correct my honourable 
friend and indicate to members of the House that the land 
acquired is already selling, including the servicing, for more 
than was spent in terms of purchasing. Well he’s nodding. 
That’s the fact of the matter. There’s a half a million dollar 
non-refundable deposit already with the government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And moreover, moreover, I want to . . . He’s asking for 
admissions. I want to give him the chance to admit that the 
allegations he made, based on the phone call that he referenced 
in about two question periods, was debunked by the Provincial 
Auditor. I want to give him the chance to admit that the 
allegations about a leaked cabinet document and all that we 
heard from that member was wrong, Mr. Speaker. And it’s been 
proven to be wrong. And he has yet to say, you know, Mr. 
Speaker, we got that absolutely wrong. 
 
I want him to, Mr. Speaker, to admit that what he was telling 
the House breathlessly yesterday about the Premier’s office 
involvement is also wrong, because five months earlier it was in 
the cabinet committee discussions that were set up by the 
government, Mr. Speaker. Finally, I want him to respond to the 
fact that on the 4th of July, in the media, the Provincial Auditor 
said this, and I quote: 
 

What we did is, we didn’t do what is termed a forensic 
audit, but in any audit, as auditors we’re always looking 
for red flags. Because this is land transactions, we did look 
for conflicts of interest. We didn’t find evidence of 
conflict of interest or indications of fraud or wrongdoing 
in the course of our work, so there were no red flags. 

 
July the 4th of this year, Mr. Speaker: the Provincial Auditor of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
[14:15] 
 



November 29, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1519 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — There he goes again, Mr. Speaker. There 
he goes again. And pretty worked up to make sort of his weak 
defence somehow work. Nothing, nothing has been debunked, 
Mr. Speaker, and the auditor in fact has been clear that she did 
not conduct a forensic audit and has stated now she would 
pause in doing so because of a criminal investigation. And it’s 
past time that this Premier start coming clean with 
Saskatchewan people on question after question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, they say that they have nothing to hide but they 
keep on hiding. Just yesterday in the Public Accounts, they 
rejected a motion to bring in key witnesses to provide testimony 
to the Assembly, professional public servants who had senior 
roles at the GTH and the Ministry of the Economy while 
members of that cabinet were cooking up the dirty deal that 
wasted millions of dollars. The Sask Party even used a 
procedural trick and dodged the vote. They didn’t even have the 
courage to vote against it. 
 
So let me try a question to the Premier: why does this Premier 
not have the courage or the decency to ensure testimony from 
key witnesses? Why is he blocking access? What is he hiding 
from Saskatchewan people? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the same key witnesses that 
the Provincial Auditor interviewed through the course of her 
work? You mean those witnesses, Mr. Speaker? Yes, that’s 
what he means. Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House think 
the Provincial Auditor and her professional staff, those are the 
right people to ask those questions, to interview those 
witnesses, and then to report back to the taxpayers, and that’s 
exactly what she did. Well they’re all heckling from their seats, 
Mr. Speaker, because every time they raise another . . . 
 
[Interjections] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Because every time they raise another 
conspiracy theory, it’s debunked, Mr. Speaker. And moreover, I 
again read into the record for my honourable friend across the 
way the direct quote from the Provincial Auditor on news talk 
radio, July the 4th of this year: 
 

What we did is, we didn’t do what is termed as a forensic 
audit, but in any audit, as auditors we’re always looking for 
red flags. And because this is a land transaction, we did 
look for conflicts of interest. 

 
That’s what she says. And she goes on to say: 
 

And we didn’t find evidence of conflict of interest or 
indications of fraud or wrongdoing in the course of our 
work so there were no red flags there [Mr. Speaker]. 

 
And she was able to make those comments based on the fact 
that it was the government that asked her to look into the 
matter, to get to the bottom of it. She has done that. When will 
the NDP accept what the auditor has said? 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Mr. Speaker, when will the member 
opposite act like the Premier of Saskatchewan? You know, if 
the Premier wants to quote the auditor, maybe he should quote 
the statements yesterday taking him to task for misrepresenting 
the conclusions of the auditor’s report, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yesterday the auditor said that fraud and wrongdoing are a 
possibility, and yet she reminded us that there is a criminal 
investigation. And yet we know that the Premier’s office was 
directly involved, and then day after day the Premier refuses — 
refuses — to answer basic questions in this Assembly but also 
to the media. He won’t come clean. He’s blocking witnesses. 
To the Premier: what’s he hiding? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, on the 4th of July 2016, this is 
what the Provincial Auditor said about her report: 
 

What we did is we didn’t do what is termed as a forensic 
audit. But in any audit, as auditors we’re always looking 
for red flags. And because this is a land transaction, we did 
look for conflicts of interest. We didn’t find evidence of 
conflict of interest or indications of fraud or . . .  

 
Well the Deputy Leader said, it’s all unravelling. It most 
assuredly is, Mr. Speaker. Every single conspiracy theory 
they’ve brought forward to smear an hon. member and to smear 
private citizens is unravelling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Hon. Leader of the Opposition stands in his 
place and says, when will you stop hiding things? We referred 
the matter to the Provincial Auditor. The Provincial Auditor 
then reported publicly. The Provincial Auditor has now twice 
been at the Public Accounts Committee with the media, Mr. 
Speaker. This government has responded, has responded in the 
correct way, to refer it to an independent officer of the 
legislature. That independent officer has reported, Mr. Speaker. 
When will the NDP accept the report? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 

Changes to Property Taxes 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Times have changed, Mr. Speaker. They said 
they’d be transparent; they are not. They said they’d invest; 
they cut. They said they would never raise taxes; now they’re 
hiking them. 
 
In fact yesterday as the bad news kept coming for the Sask 
Party, they squeezed in that they have a plan for tax hikes for 
Saskatchewan people. That’s right — they are paving the way 
for property taxes to go up to cover the Sask Party 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste. They pillage through the 
pockets of our most vulnerable and the budgets of school 
boards, health regions, and post-secondary institutions, and they 
still haven’t found what they need. Now they’re moving on to 
municipalities. 
 
The minister is using the word “revaluation,” but she’s fooling 



1520 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2016 

no one. They are raising taxes. Why does the minister think that 
it is the people of Saskatchewan who should be forced to pay 
the price for the Sask Party mismanagement, scandal, and 
waste? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I am very happy to take 
this question. Yet again the member opposite or else her staff 
need to do a little more research and get to know the file a little 
bit better. It is by legislation that assessment is done every four 
years. At that time, the new assessment . . . It’s by legislation 
that this is done. And when those assessments are done there is 
a revaluation that has . . . It’s all set out in legislation, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So when the revaluation was done on properties because of 
actually the good growth that has happened in our province in 
every classification, the assessment is higher than it was in 
previous years, Mr. Speaker. So that then goes to the 
municipalities as well as the provincial government, and their 
budget deliberations will decide what mill rate they’ll apply to 
those assessments, Mr. Speaker. But the taxes are not decided 
until the mill rates are set. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Ms. Rancourt: — Mr. Speaker, they just don’t want to take 
responsibility for the mess they are in. They had record 
revenues, and they bragged and bragged, taking credit for high 
commodity prices. Now, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party’s 
mismanagement, scandal, and waste are coming home to roost. 
Residents across the province could see their property taxes go 
up. 
 
Now yesterday the minister said, “Municipalities have the tools 
to provide additional tax relief if they wish to do so.” Are they 
serious, Mr. Speaker? They are going to try and throw 
municipalities under the bus now too. They have backed 
municipalities into a corner. They have effectively taken money 
out of their pockets. 
 
And the minister tries to pretend that they have a lot of options. 
If municipalities have to make up for the Sask Party’s increases, 
they either have to raise taxes or cut programs. How does the 
minister not understand this? And why doesn’t she just take 
responsibility for this? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Government 
Relations. 
 
Hon. Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t even know where 
to begin answering that question. That was so ridiculous. I’m 
supposed to take responsibility for the fact that values of 
property in our province has gone up. Somehow I’m supposed 
to take responsibility for that. Assessment is done, and it is 
decided what value . . . 
 
It’s the same system the NDP uses. There’s no tax changes yet. 
We have increased revenue sharing to municipalities incredibly 
over what the NDP did. When the NDP were in power, we had 

tax revolts across our province because of the downloading that 
they did into municipalities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I don’t even know where to begin to explain what that member 
doesn’t even begin to understand about her file. We haven’t set 
the tax rates, Mr. Speaker. We just had an assessment of the 
values of property in our province, Mr. Speaker, and because of 
the growth in our province, values have gone up, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 

Gradworks Internship Program 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, at the start of this month we 
found out that Saskatchewan had lost 11,000 jobs this year over 
last. Last week, Mr. Speaker, this government finally fessed up 
to the fact that this province is facing a $1 billion deficit. And in 
the wake of that, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen cuts continuing in 
terms of different groups that seem to be vulnerable when it 
comes to the work of this government and cuts that don’t make 
much sense. 
 
You think about what happened at NORTEP-NORPAC 
[northern teacher education program-Northern Professional 
Access College]. You think about what’s happening in the 
post-secondary education sector generally, Mr. Speaker. And 
then yesterday, Mr. Speaker, we found out that the latest group 
to be targeted by this government to solve their $1 billion 
deficit on the backs of them are the Gradworks interns, Mr. 
Speaker. At a time when jobs are all the more precious, Mr. 
Speaker, how is it that cutting a program that provides that 
critical first job for new graduates in this province makes any 
kind of sense, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
our province has been faced with a $1 billion drop in resource 
revenue and on the intake of personal and corporate taxes. 
We’ve asked all government agencies, including the Crowns, to 
find additional revenues and cost savings while maintaining the 
high level of customer service and safety that they are so well 
known for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, decisions have to be made, and they are tough 
decisions. Unfortunately the Gradworks program, it was felt, 
could be phased out at this time. Mr. Speaker, these decisions 
don’t come easy, but they have to be made in order to move 
ahead against other decisions that could have been made, Mr. 
Speaker, that could have affected customer service and safety. It 
was felt that the Gradworks program could be phased out at this 
time. Thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Opposition House Leader. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, in terms of addressing a $1 
billion deficit of this government’s own making, I can think of a 
bunch of ministers on that side of the House that should be 
phased out a million times before any Gradworks, any 
Gradworks interns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a program that in the last year that reporting was 



November 29, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1521 

available in terms of the CIC [Crown Investments Corporation 
of Saskatchewan] annual report, there were 83 interns hired 
from a pool of 4,600 applicants, Mr. Speaker. This is a very 
valuable program and how is it that this government seeks to 
solve their $1 billion deficit on the backs of interns? How does 
that make any sense whatsoever, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Crown 
Investments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hargrave: — This program certainly had its 
benefits. We acknowledge that. There’s costs associated with 
those benefits though, Mr. Speaker, and the Crowns expect that 
they will realize over $3 million in savings annually based on 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Crown sector has identified areas that were 
able to reduce costs and improve revenues totalling $50 million. 
This is $3 million of that, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. Speaker, 
these efforts will ensure that our Crown sector is able to 
continue to provide important services to the people of this 
province while doing their part to help our current fiscal 
challenges, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, now that mandatory retirement is no longer, Mr. 
Speaker, recruitment in this province is much improved, Mr. 
Speaker. You know, 11 years ago when this program came in 
existence, Mr. Speaker, that was when the NDP government 
was shipping kids out of this province like there was no 
tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. And today under this government, Mr. 
Speaker, these students are here and there’s abundance of 
employment for them. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Presumptive Coverage Under Workers’ Compensation 
 
Ms. Chartier: — Mr. Speaker, it is unbelievable how this 
government thinks that taking away jobs and training is the 
right decision. It just makes sense to ensure these programs are 
protected when times are tough. It also makes sense to ensure 
that workers are protected and have the supports they need. 
 
Thankfully after a lot of advocacy work from workers like the 
firefighters and paramedics we have here in the gallery today, 
the government picked up and built on a private member’s bill 
from our side, and we now have legislation that ensures workers 
are covered for PTSD. But the work to protect workers goes on. 
We’re once again trying to get the Sask Party to make the right 
choice. 
 
Firefighters risk their health every day just doing their jobs. 
And yet here in Saskatchewan, breast, prostate, skin, and 
myeloma cancers are not presumptive diseases for firefighters. 
Other provinces and territories are leading the way. So will the 
minister commit today to doing the right thing and provide 
presumptive coverage for these work-related cancers? 
 
[14:30] 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Labour. 
 

Hon. Mr. Morgan: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member 
opposite for the question. She met with the firefighters this 
morning. We met with the firefighters this morning. They raised 
some issues. We’ve asked them if they have some information 
that we can review, be reviewed; we would do it. 
 
It is not something that we’re prepared to do, to go ahead and 
just pass legislation. We want to make sure there’s good 
science, good practicality behind it. And, Mr. Speaker, if there 
is valid information we’ll certainly want to review and assess it, 
and we’ll be asking the Workers’ Compensation Board and the 
people in the ministry to look at this issue as well. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 

Staffing of HealthLine Service 
 
Ms. Chartier: — New information, Mr. Speaker? These folks 
have been bringing these issues to this legislature for some 
time. If that’s not evidence, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
This government regularly recommends that people in need call 
811. This is something the Premier himself recommended as 
part of the solution for the youth suicide epidemic in the North. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, at the Premier’s advice, people have called 
the HealthLine and they have found that a mental health worker 
wasn’t always available. 
 
We brought this up in this very Chamber and the Sask Party 
said they were concerned and they said they would look into it. 
But, Mr. Speaker, when we followed up and asked about how 
often services were unavailable, they couldn’t say. And when 
we asked about how many mental health workers provide 
services at 811, they couldn’t say. 
 
They don’t know the answer, Mr. Speaker, and it is so 
important to them that they promised to look into it sometime in 
the next six months. Do they think that people struggling with 
mental health issues, struggling with suicidal thoughts, can 
wait? Will the minister commit to looking into this now, getting 
the answers and, at the very least, ensuring that the Premier 
isn’t encouraging people in need to use a service that is not 
available? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of course 
mental health issues and suicidal issues are very important to 
this government. That’s why we’ve continued conversations, 
have kept in contact with the chiefs and leaders from the North 
in post this situation, as well as the Premier and I and the 
Minister of Government Relations have been up there meeting 
with some of the leaders from the area as well in the group 
meeting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can report that just, I think, a week or so ago, the 
members did bring up some issues with 811. I did contact the 
member from Athabasca for the information he had; didn’t get a 
response. I did talk to him personally and still haven’t gotten 
information from him. 
 



1522 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2016 

What I can report to the House, Mr. Speaker, is the HealthLine 
is staffed 24-7. In fact, during the day there are four RNs 
[registered nurse] plus a relief RN and one mental health 
clinician. During evenings, there are five registered nurses plus 
a relief RN plus one mental health clinician. During the night, 
three RNs, one psychiatric nurse. Also there are LPNs [licensed 
practical nurse] on site to back them up, Mr. Speaker. I would 
also point out that before 2009 there was no mental health 
clinicians on the 811. We brought that in in 2009, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Riversdale. 
 
Ms. Chartier: — It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that that 
minister can bring forward numbers today, but they order 
written questions, Mr. Speaker. And I can assure you, Mr. 
Speaker, that there are many people, there are people who have 
called that line who have not got the response that they need, 
Mr. Speaker. The 811 HealthLine is an important support for 
people suffering from health issues in this province. It is 
supposed to be available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. It 
is, they say, Mr. Speaker, but that is not the experience of 
people who have contacted our office. 
 
The Sask Party couldn’t even tell us the number of people who 
worked there. They said we were wrong when we said the 
service wasn’t available. We were not; we are not. And they 
don’t even know how many people work there, Mr. Speaker. 
People need, people who hear their Premier promoting a service 
need to be assured that it works, and it will be there for them at 
all times of day. 
 
Will the minister commit to ensuring that this line is fully 
staffed with the appropriate staff at all times? 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Rural and Remote 
Health. 
 
Hon. Mr. Ottenbreit: — Mr. Speaker, these comments were 
very similar to the member from Athabasca brought up a 
number of weeks ago, and it is very concerning to us. We want 
to get to the bottom of these matters, Mr. Speaker. That’s why I 
asked him for the information that he presented a couple of 
weeks ago. I’m asking for the member across questioning right 
now to please supply us the information so we can follow up on 
this to find out if there has been a shortcoming, if 811 has fallen 
short. 
 
We want to ensure that that service is available, Mr. Speaker, 
but directly from 811 they confirmed to us that it is available 
24-7. I have gone through the numbers. For the purposes of 
time, I won’t repeat those numbers. But, Mr. Speaker, we know 
that from time to time there are surges, and whether it’s flu 
season or whatever else, Mr. Speaker, that they are equipped to 
deal with surges in calls. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is always the number, complement of 
professionals on the 811 line that I have mentioned. There is 
always the access to mental health professionals, Mr. Speaker, 
and in case there is no access to mental health professionals, an 
RN will take the call and somebody from mental health 
profession will get back to them as quickly as possible if that’s 
who they indeed require to talk to. 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 44 — The Water Security Agency 
Amendment Act, 2016 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 44, The 
Water Security Agency Amendment Act, 2016 be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of the 
Environment that Bill No. 44, The Water Security Agency 
Amendment Act, 2016 be now introduced and read a first time. 
 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be read a second time? I 
recognize the Minister of the Environment. 
 
Hon. Mr. Moe: — Next sitting of this House. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm River. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 15, The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2016 
without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the Minister of 
Justice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill now be read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 15, The 
Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2016 and that this bill will be 
now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 



November 29, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1523 

Bill No. 15 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2016 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the bill now be 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 15, The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2016 be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm River. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 19, The Film and Video Classification Act, 2016 
without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move the . . . leave to 
waive consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and 
that the bill now be read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 19, The 
Film and Video Classification Act, 2016 and that the bill be 
now read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 19 — The Film and Video Classification Act, 2016 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the bill now be 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 19, The Film and Video Classification Act, 2016 be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. Is the Assembly 
ready for the question? 
 

Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm River. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 35, The Small Claims Act, 2016, bilingual bill without 
amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill now be read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 35, The 
Small Claims Act, 2016 and that the bill be now read a third 
time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 35 — The Small Claims Act, 2016 
Loi de 2016 sur les petites créances 

 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the bill now be 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 35, The Small Claims Act, 2016 be now read a third time 
and passed under its title. Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 



1524 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2016 

Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm River. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 36, The Small Claims Consequential Amendments Act, 
2016 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? 
 
I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill now be read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bills for Bill No. 
36, The Small Claims Consequential Amendments Act, 2016 
and that the bill be now read the third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 36 — The Small Claims Consequential 
Amendments Act, 2016 

 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the bill now be 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that the Bill 
No. 36, The Small Claims Consequential Amendments Act, 
2016 be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm River. 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
Bill No. 8, The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 
2016 without amendment. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this bill be considered in 
Committee of the Whole on Bills? I recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on this bill and that 
the bill now be read a third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has requested leave to waive 
consideration in Committee of the Whole on Bill No. 8, The 
Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2016 and that 
the bill be now read a third time. Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. The minister may proceed to move 
third reading. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 8 — The Summary Offences Procedure 
Amendment Act, 2016 

 
Hon. Mr. Wyant: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the minister that Bill 
No. 8, The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2016 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. Is the 
Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Question. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Third reading of this bill. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Arm River. 
 

Standing Committee on Intergovernmental 
Affairs and Justice 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the Standing 
Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice to report 
that it’s considered certain supplementary estimates and to 
present its second report. I move: 
 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 



November 29, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1525 

Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be now concurred in. 
 

The Speaker: — The member from Arm River has moved the 
motion: 
 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 
Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice be concurred in. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from Regina 
Gardiner Park. 
 

Standing Committee on the Economy 
 
Mr. Makowsky: — Mr. Speaker, I’m instructed by the 
Standing Committee on the Economy to report that it has 
considered certain estimates and to present its second report. I 
move: 
 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member from 
Regina Gardiner Park: 
 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on the 
Economy be now concurred in. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the member from 
Cannington. 
 

Standing Committee on Human Services 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I am instructed by the 
Standing Committee on Human Services to report that it has 
considered certain estimates and to present its third report. I 
move: 
 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on Human 
Services be now concurred in. 

 
[14:45] 
 
The Speaker: — The member from Cannington has moved a 
motion: 
 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on Human 
Services be concurred in. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Opposition House 
Leader. 
 

Standing Committee on House Services 
 
Mr. McCall: — Or as some might say, the Deputy Chair of the 
House Services Committee, but who’s quibbling, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m instructed by the Standing Committee on House Services to 
report that it has considered certain estimates and to present its 
fifth report. I move: 
 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on House 
Services be now concurred in. 

 
The Speaker: — The member from Regina Elphinstone-Centre 
has moved the motion: 
 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on House 
Services be concurred in. 

 
Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 
Principal Clerk: — Committee of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — I do now leave the Chair. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Supply 
 
The Chair: — Committee of Finance. The business before the 
committee is the resolution. I call upon the Minister of Finance 
to move his resolution. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I move the 
following resolution: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2017, the sum of $160,906,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 
The Chair: — The Minister of Finance has moved resolution 
no. 1: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2017, the sum of $160,906,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 
 

Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Mr. Chair, I move that the committee 



1526 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2016 

rise and that the Chair report that the committee has agreed to a 
resolution and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Chair: — It has been moved by the Minister of Finance 
that the committee rise and that the Chair report that the 
committee has agreed to a resolution and ask for leave to sit 
again. Is that agreed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Chair: — Carried. 
 
[The Speaker resumed the Chair.] 
 
The Speaker: — I call the Assembly to order. I recognize the 
Chair of committees. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Committee of Finance has agreed to a certain resolution and has 
instructed me to report the same and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the resolution be read the first 
time? I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
the resolution be now read the first and second time. 
 
The Speaker: — Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — First and second reading of the resolution. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall the committee sit again? I 
recognize the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Next sitting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Next sitting. I recognize the Minister of 
Finance. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 

Bill No. 45 — The Appropriation Act, 2016 (No. 2) 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 45, The Appropriation Act, 2016 (No. 2) be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has moved that Bill 
No. 45, The Appropriation Act, 2016 (No. 2), be now 
introduced and read the first time. Is it the pleasure of the 
Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. 
 
Principal Clerk: — First reading of this bill. 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Doherty: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave of 
the Assembly and pursuant of rule 32(1)(e), I move Bill No. 45, 
The Appropriation Act, 2016 (No. 2) be now read a second and 
third time. 
 
The Speaker: — The Minister of Finance has asked for leave 
to move second and third reading of Bill No. 45, The 
Appropriation Act, 2016 (No. 2). Is leave granted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. Leave has been granted. The 
question before the Assembly is Bill No. 45, The Appropriation 
Act, 2016, be now read a second and third time. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
An Hon. Member: — On division. 
 
The Speaker: — On division. 
 
Principal Clerk: — Second and third reading of this bill. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this House now be adjourned . . . [inaudible interjection] . . . 
Oh, sorry, Mr. Speaker, I will sit back down. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 43 — The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016 
 

The Speaker: — I recognize the Minister of Energy and 
Resources. 
 
Hon. Mr. Duncan: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And thank you to my colleagues for allowing me the 
opportunity to rise today to move second reading of The 
Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016. Saskatchewan’s existing 
pipeline legislation is known as The Pipelines Act, 1998. The 
Act’s main functions include the licensing of pipelines, the 
regulation of their construction, operation, and abandonment, 
and rules regarding operator liability. 
 
The Act also establishes the authority of the Oil and Gas 
Conservation Board under The Oil and Gas Conservation Act. 
This authority includes the ability to conduct hearings, 
investigations, or inquiries related to legislative and regulatory 
matters. 
 
Three types of pipelines are currently exempt from the 
provision of the Act. These include interprovincial pipelines 
regulated by the National Energy Board, natural gas distribution 
pipelines operated by SaskEnergy, and pipelines situated within 
refineries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these changes will assist the Ministry of the 
Economy in addressing the remaining outstanding issues from 
the 2012 Provincial Auditor’s report on pipeline regulation. The 



November 29, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1527 

changes lay the foundation for strengthening our regulatory 
oversight of the industry. 
 
The proposed amendments introduce a number of changes to 
address various shortcomings of the current Act. First, they 
create the legal framework for the phased-in licensing of over 
80,000 flow lines currently exempt from the licensing under the 
Act. Second, they provide the legal framework for building an 
online pipeline licensing system using the recently launched 
integrated resource information system, also known as IRIS. 
Third, they establish new inspection, investigation, and 
compliance audit powers for ministry staff. Fourth, they update 
and modernize the penalty provisions of the Act, including 
introducing administrative penalties equivalent to what exists 
under other provincial laws. Fifth, they provide the legal basis 
for creating technical directives for pipeline licensing, 
construction, operation, and abandonment. Sixth, they provide 
new regulatory authorities to require financial assurance from 
operators for pipelines located in high-risk locations such as 
water crossings. Lastly, they establish ongoing obligations 
related to addressing any environmental issues that might be 
discovered after a pipeline is abandoned. 
 
These items include the licensing of flow lines and the 
development of new programs to audit industry compliance 
with pipeline maintenance standards. Progress has already been 
made in several areas in response to the Provincial Auditor’s 
report. These areas include development of consistent 
documentation of easements, of pipeline licence applications, 
and increases to ministry staff and equipment resources. 
 
The proposed amendments will not automatically trigger new 
spending on pipeline regulations. They will however provide 
the foundation for building new programs and data systems to 
strengthen our regulatory oversight of the industry. Any 
incremental spending on these programs beyond the ministry’s 
ongoing appropriation will be approved through the normal 
budgeting process. Ninety per cent of the ministry’s current 
spending on pipeline regulation programs is offset by the annual 
well levy. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, it’s important to put these amendments 
into their larger context. Saskatchewan depends on its pipeline 
infrastructure to take our energy products to market and to 
provide energy services to Saskatchewan communities. The 
events of this summer have shown the critical role of regulatory 
oversight in maintaining public confidence in the system. The 
proposed amendments will assist the Government of 
Saskatchewan in addressing both of these priorities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with that, I move second reading of The Pipelines 
Amendment Act, 2016. 
 
The Speaker: — The minister has moved the second reading of 
Bill No. 43, The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016. Is it the 
pleasure of the Assembly to . . . Is the Assembly ready for the 
question? I recognize the member from Athabasca. 
 
Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to have this opportunity to get up and give our initial 
comments on Bill 43, The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016. 
And, Mr. Speaker, what’s really important on this particular bill 
is that I want to give a very brief history of what we within the 

NDP movement here in Saskatchewan really aspired and 
viewed the importance of the oil and gas industry in the 
province of Saskatchewan and how it relates to this particular 
bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to give full marks to my colleague, the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana, who quite frankly insisted all along that oil 
and gas development, when done responsibly, is a huge 
opportunity for the people of Saskatchewan. And that part of 
the process when we were starting to evaluate these 
opportunities coming our way, even in tough times, that it is 
important to look at the balance that we often talk about within 
the NDP Party itself, Mr. Speaker, the fact that the economy, 
the importance of the oil and gas sector in the economy is there. 
We all appreciate that. We all realize that, and we all recognize 
that on this side of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the other important factor that we want to implore upon the 
people of Saskatchewan is the fact that in any economic 
strategy there’s got to be a balance when you talk about 
environmental protection. And we see evidence of some of the 
moves in this particular bill that the Sask Party is finally getting 
it, that there is a thing called balance between the environment 
and the economy. And more importantly, Mr. Speaker, the 
people of Saskatchewan really want to make sure that these 
values are entrenched in many of our government members’ 
thinking. And obviously this is something that the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana pulled the Saskatchewan Party government 
along kicking and screaming, that some of these regulations 
were important, Mr. Speaker. And why this took four years to 
implement, Mr. Speaker, is still a question that we have on this 
side of the Assembly, and I’ll tell you why. 
 
First of all this whole notion, this great facade that the 
Saskatchewan Party had been promoting on a regular basis in a 
sense that saying that the NDP are anti-development, Mr. 
Speaker. That is nothing; that is the furthest thing from the 
truth. There is absolutely nothing but self-serving politics on the 
Saskatchewan Party side when it comes to telling people of 
Saskatchewan that great lie, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What’s also really important, Mr. Speaker, is to look at the 
history of Saskatchewan’s economy. When the Saskatchewan 
economy was doing very well, Mr. Speaker — and I would 
encourage those that follow politics in Saskatchewan in 
particular to look at the history of Saskatchewan — every single 
time that the economy was going great, Mr. Speaker, it was an 
NDP government in charge during that era, Mr. Speaker.  
 
And what happened with the Saskatchewan Party is that they 
saw and viewed that the great progress that the New Democratic 
Party was making, when it came to balancing the environment 
and the economy, was something that they had to dispel 
quickly, Mr. Speaker. They went on their soapboxes. And 
wherever they went, they decried the whole notion that when it 
came to the economy, and now things like pipelines and oil and 
gas, that they can’t trust the NDP, is what they were telling the 
people of Saskatchewan. Absolutely nothing is further from the 
truth, Mr. Speaker. That is how they prop up their failing 
economic policies that we’re seeing today, Mr. Speaker, by 
simply telling the people of Saskatchewan to look at the NDP 
and try and be critical of the NDP at all times. 
 



1528 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2016 

[15:00] 
 
And we within the NDP want to say a number of things as it 
relates to the oil and gas industry. When the former premier, 
Lorne Calvert, attracted the millions if not billions of dollars in 
oil and gas development prior to 2007, Mr. Speaker, I 
remember Premier Calvert telling the people in the oil and gas 
industry — in particular the CAPP members, the Canadian 
Association of Petroleum Producers in Lloydminster, Mr. 
Speaker — when he told them that they wanted to bring the oil 
patch and their investment to Saskatchewan, that it was very 
important to do that. 
 
And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that some of that leadership 
was phenomenal in the sense that there was the attraction of the 
oil and gas sector to come to Saskatchewan. And that was 
compliments of the Saskatchewan New Democratic Party under 
the leadership of not only Roy Romanow, Mr. Speaker, but as 
well as Lorne Calvert. 
 
Now what does that really have to do with this particular 
pipeline bill today, Mr. Speaker? It is all interrelated. One of the 
most important things that people need to understand out there 
is that the New Democratic Party want to attract investment to 
the province of Saskatchewan. That is our most important 
message that we want to share today. It is important because it’s 
going to create jobs for oil and gas workers, Mr. Speaker. We 
understand that the oil patch is hurting. We understand that 
there’s mortgages that have to be paid. We understand that 
there’s many, many families that are struggling. 
 
But as you look at the record of the Saskatchewan Party 
government, Mr. Speaker, this was a government that inherited 
a booming population, a booming economy, and money in the 
bank. And today we see, after nine short years — barely, just 
under a decade of rule — we are now facing record debt, Mr. 
Speaker, record debt. 
 
And we have been asking them on a continual basis, as you try 
and attract investment to Saskatchewan — whether it’s the 
uranium industry or the forestry industry or, in this case, the oil 
and gas sector — it is important to incorporate in our values the 
benefits of attracting that investment. Yes, the investment is 
attractive, Mr. Speaker. We need to have that investment into 
our economy, and we need to have the private corporate parties 
build our economy together with the other sectors such as the 
Crowns, Mr. Speaker. Our people in Saskatchewan need to go 
to work and they want to go to work, Mr. Speaker. They need 
those jobs. We understand that wholeheartedly, and I wanted to 
be able to share with the people of Saskatchewan that very 
message today. 
 
And when you look at the oil and gas sector hurting, Mr. 
Speaker, we say that something has to be done to support these 
workers. And we will do all we can as the New Democratic 
Party to ensure that their message gets through and to assure 
them that we fully hear your concerns around employment and 
the need to make your mortgage payments, the need to support 
your family. We understand that and we respect that, Mr. 
Speaker. And we certainly want to be part of the solution when 
it comes to attracting the oil and gas sector’s investment to our 
province and to our borders. 
 

And part of that process — and this is the important part, Mr. 
Speaker — as you attract the oil and gas companies to come to 
Saskatchewan and to invest in our province, it’s also important 
to make sure that the jobs are here for the people of 
Saskatchewan. We have to extract as many benefits as we 
possibly can, immediate benefits and downstream benefits, Mr. 
Speaker, as many of those benefits as we possibly can. We need 
to attract them and to keep them here for Saskatchewan’s 
interests. 
 
And what are some of those downstream and current 
opportunities, Mr. Speaker? It could mean anything from 
employment to some of the royalties, Mr. Speaker. It could talk 
about the investment into training. These are some of the 
immediate benefits you benefit from when you attract industry 
to Saskatchewan. 
 
So I wanted to make it perfectly and abundantly clear. On this 
particular bill I want to dispel the notion and the myth that the 
Saskatchewan Party have been spreading for years around the 
notion that the New Democratic Party is not supportive of the 
oil and gas industry. And that is the furthest thing from the 
truth. 
 
And if anybody wants to debate me or certainly wanted to 
challenge me on that point, you need look no further than some 
of the immediate comments of their current leader, the Premier 
of Saskatchewan, when he was asked about the royalty regime 
established by the Calvert administration to attract, Mr. 
Speaker, to attract the oil and gas sector here to Saskatchewan. 
And that’s exactly what he did. And, Mr. Speaker, we can see 
some of that investment paid off for years and years and years. 
 
And this whole notion, this whole notion that the Saskatchewan 
Party’s trying to propagate in the sense of saying, well they’re 
not trying to attract investment, I want to tell the people of 
Saskatchewan that is our primary function as a party that wants 
to form government in Saskatchewan, is to create opportunity, 
jobs, and investment in this province from a wide variety of 
sources, from a wide variety of corporate players, Mr. Speaker. 
This province needs that investment and we in the NDP 
understand it. 
 
Now how does this relate to this particular bill, Mr. Speaker, 
Bill 43? We want to share with the corporate world that want to 
come and invest in Saskatchewan that the public, the public 
understands the importance of environmental protection as well 
as attracting investment. Every person in the province 
understands a very simple argument that we have within the 
NDP. We want investment. We want to attract that investment, 
and that investment that we want to attract has no bounds, Mr. 
Speaker. They should come and invest as much as they want in 
our province because that creates jobs for our people. And 
that’s the reason why we want to form government: to create 
more jobs, more investment. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as Saskatchewan people will tell you, it’s 
also important to make sure that you extract as many benefits 
from that investment, and that also includes training dollars, 
investment into infrastructure, and making sure that the 
environmental protection is there for some of these industries 
that really want to do the right thing. 
 



November 29, 2016 Saskatchewan Hansard 1529 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I look at some of the portions of this 
particular bill. Some of the items that . . . brought forward that 
the member from Saskatoon Nutana insisted, in many of the 
conversations as the environmental critic, that these are things 
that are basic packages of the business that many of the oil and 
gas companies want to do. They want to offer that, Mr. Speaker. 
And when they come to Saskatchewan, when they come to 
Saskatchewan, they come here as responsible investors, as 
responsible parties to creating the economy here in 
Saskatchewan. And that’s exactly what we want. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what’s important I think overall is that as 
you look at some of the recent activity, and in particular the 
spill, the spill that occurred, people out in Saskatchewan got a 
front-row seat as to what occurred under that particular spill, 
and there was a lot of concerns and questions as it relates to 
how this occurred. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’ve sat with members of CAPP on 
numerous occasions in my previous capacity as the minister for 
the Environment, and I can tell you the Canadian Association of 
Petroleum Producers are a responsible lot. They have brought 
forward a lot of innovative ideas. They are leaders when it 
comes to extracting oil and gas. And certainly, Mr. Speaker, all 
the members of CAPP are organizations that have a reputable 
background, and they are great partners in building the 
economy for Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to assure CAPP of several things, Mr. Speaker, as a 
result of this particular bill, is I’m glad that CAPP probably 
gave the advice to the minister on how to do this properly. I can 
see the consultation would be highly valuable for them and for 
the people of Saskatchewan for CAPP to make sure that the 
regulations are workable, so that a solution could be found and 
that balance between the environment and the economy can be 
maintained by responsible partners, not only the industry but by 
the government as well. 
 
And what we have saw, Mr. Speaker, from the Saskatchewan 
Party government is they’re always late to the game, despite 
getting advice from the NDP how to do this, Mr. Speaker. We 
advised them on the royalty regime, which they have not 
changed, and they dare not change. They dare not change. And 
I’ve said it in this House time and time again: the blueprint for 
economic success that was designed by the NDP in concert with 
the people of Saskatchewan, do not mess with that. Because 
you mess with that, you’re going to create a lot of problems 
with the future of Saskatchewan. So just follow our lead when it 
comes to the economy, and you’ll be fine, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When you start messing around with royalty regimes, start 
messing around with other aspects of what was laid out in front 
of you prior to you being government, then you will see. Then 
you will see, Mr. Speaker, that you will have responsible 
partners, that you will have investment, and you will have that 
sense of sharing in the responsibility when it comes to 
environmental protection. And that’s exactly what this bill talks 
about, Mr. Speaker, that balance between the economy and 
environmental protection. 
 
Now what’s important, Mr. Speaker, is that as we look at the 
history of the Saskatchewan Party government, there really isn’t 
any history, Mr. Speaker. The history has been . . . well it was 

created in the dark of night. But the problem we have is that 
they have really not provided any leadership, any leadership on 
any issue, whether it’s attracting investment, they’re following 
our plan. We know that. In the meantime, they are trying to 
discourage people from looking at the NDP’s economic record, 
and I would encourage people of Saskatchewan to do that. And 
they haven’t got any environmental track record; so as a result 
of that, Mr. Speaker, they really don’t know what they’re doing. 
 
So my advice to them is very clear: please stop spreading the 
misinformation about the NDP not wanting to attract 
investment. We want to attract investment to Saskatchewan. Let 
me make that very clear today, Mr. Speaker. We want to see 
jobs created for our Saskatchewan men and women, men and 
women across this great province. We want all the benefits, Mr. 
Speaker, of taxation when corporations invest into our 
economies. We want the potential training dollars. We want the 
potential infrastructure investment. But we also want the 
partners to be stewards of the environment which they would 
automatically, Mr. Speaker, assume as part of their role. 
 
So when you see members of CAPP, the Canadian Association 
of Petroleum Producers, standing side by side with Rachel 
Notley, this is what I’m talking about leadership, Mr. Speaker, 
because they know they have a role to play. They have a role to 
play. They’re embracing that role. They’re embracing the NDP 
Government of Alberta and making sure that the right thing is 
being done. 
 
And today now in Saskatchewan, once again, the Saskatchewan 
Party’s following the New Democratic lead on royalties and 
taxation. Don’t change that because you’re just going to distract 
all the investment that we worked years on trying to get, Mr. 
Speaker. We also talked about extracting as many benefits as 
you can. That includes employment. That includes training 
dollars. That includes infrastructure investment. And more 
importantly, they finally get the memo today, Mr. Speaker, on 
this particular bill, Bill 43, that there is an environmental role to 
play for the industries that are investing into our economy that 
are resource based, Mr. Speaker. They embrace that role and, 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party is finally getting, after 
four years and the embarrassing spill this past summer, that 
quite frankly got the public up in arms, and that they’re very 
disappointed. 
 
My final comment on this particular bill, Mr. Speaker. As you 
engage industry, as you partner with industry, Mr. Speaker, they 
will come with solutions as well as investment. So listen to their 
advice. Listen to their advice, and they will provide that 
leadership in the vacuum of leadership displayed by the 
Saskatchewan Party on many files, whether it’s financial 
mismanagement, scandals, or waste, Mr. Speaker. These guys 
need a lot of help and a lot of advice. And at the very least, Mr. 
Speaker, under Bill 43, they paid a little bit of attention to the 
member from Saskatoon Nutana on how to make sure that all 
these benefits we’re talking about are maximized for the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
We’re going to be challenging the Saskatchewan Party on every 
myth and untruth they speak about the New Democratic Party, 
Mr. Speaker, on the economic front. And we’re starting that as 
loud and as often as we can. So on that note, Mr. Speaker, I 
move that we adjourn debate on Bill 43. 



1530 Saskatchewan Hansard November 29, 2016 

The Speaker: — The member from Athabasca has moved to 
adjourn debate on Bill No. 43, The Pipelines Amendment Act, 
2016. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. I recognize the Government House 
Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Merriman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
this House be now adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved that this Assembly do now 
adjourn. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt the motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 
 
The Speaker: — Carried. This Assembly now stands adjourned 
until tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
[The Assembly adjourned at 15:15.] 
 





 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1511 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1511 
  Eyre .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1511 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1511 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1511 
  Campeau .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1512 
  Sproule ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1512, 1513 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1512 
  Cheveldayoff ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1512 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1512 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1513 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1513 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 
  Nerlien ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1513 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1513 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1514 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1514 
  Forbes ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1514 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1514 
  Beck .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1515 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1515 
  Sarauer .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1515 
STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 Research Shows Healthy Woodland Caribou Population 
  Olauson .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1515 
 Lives Impacted by Student Wellness Initiative in Saskatoon 
  Sproule ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1516 
 Saskatoon Literacy Organization Provides Support to Adults and Families 
  Buckingham ............................................................................................................................................................................ 1516 
 Isabel Gibson Celebrates 100th Birthday 
  Vermette .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1516 
 Regina Quarterback Most Outstanding Player in Canadian University Football 
  Beaudry-Mellor ....................................................................................................................................................................... 1517 
 Melville Students Bring Awareness to Dangers of Driving Impaired 
  Kaeding .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1517 
 New School Opens in Gravelbourg 
  Marit ........................................................................................................................................................................................ 1517 
QUESTION PERIOD 
 Public Accounts Committee Meeting and Details of Land Transaction 
  Wotherspoon ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1518 
  Wall .......................................................................................................................................................................................... 1518 
 Changes to Property Taxes 
  Rancourt .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1519 
  Harpauer ................................................................................................................................................................................. 1520 
 Gradworks Internship Program 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1520 
  Hargrave .................................................................................................................................................................................. 1520 
 Presumptive Coverage Under Workers’ Compensation 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1521 
  Morgan .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1521 
 Staffing of HealthLine Service 
  Chartier ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1521 
  Ottenbreit ................................................................................................................................................................................ 1521 
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 Bill No. 44 — The Water Security Agency Amendment Act, 2016 
  Moe ........................................................................................................................................................................................... 1522 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 Standing Committee on Intergovernmental Affairs and Justice 
  Brkich ...................................................................................................................................................................................... 1522 
 Standing Committee on the Economy 
  Makowsky................................................................................................................................................................................ 1525 



 

 Standing Committee on Human Services 
  D’Autremont ........................................................................................................................................................................... 1525 
 Standing Committee on House Services 
  McCall ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1525 
THIRD READINGS 
 Bill No. 15 — The Provincial Court Amendment Act, 2016 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1523 
 Bill No. 19 — The Film and Video Classification Act, 2016 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1523 
 Bill No. 35 — The Small Claims Act, 2016/Loi de 2016 sur les petites créances 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1523 
 Bill No. 36 — The Small Claims Consequential Amendments Act, 2016 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1524 
 Bill No. 8 — The Summary Offences Procedure Amendment Act, 2016 
  Wyant ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 1524 
ORDERS OF THE DAY 
GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 Motions for Supply 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1525 
FIRST AND SECOND READINGS OF RESOLUTIONS 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1526 
APPROPRIATION BILL 
 Bill No. 45 — The Appropriation Act, 2016 (No. 2) 
  Doherty .................................................................................................................................................................................... 1526 
SECOND READINGS 
 Bill No. 43 — The Pipelines Amendment Act, 2016 
  Duncan ..................................................................................................................................................................................... 1526 
  Belanger ................................................................................................................................................................................... 1527 
 
 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 
CABINET MINISTERS 

_____________________________________________________ 
 

Hon. Brad Wall 
Premier 

President of the Executive Council 
Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 

 
 

 

Hon. Tina Beaudry-Mellor 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 
 

Hon. Ken Cheveldayoff 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 
 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 
 

Hon. Bronwyn Eyre 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Joe Hargrave 
Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Transportation Company 

 
Hon. Donna Harpauer 

Minister of Government Relations 
Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 
 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for The Global 
Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 
Minister Responsible for Innovation 

 

 

Hon. David Marit 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 
Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Education 
Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 
Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 
Capital Commission 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 
Gaming Corporation 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 
Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 
 


