



















































Hansard: May 24, 2016


 

 

 

 

 

 

STANDING COMMITTEE ON 

CROWN AND CENTRAL AGENCIES 
 

 

 

Hansard Verbatim Report 
 

No. 1 – May 24, 2016 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 

 

Twenty-Eighth Legislature 

 



STANDING COMMITTEE ON CROWN AND CENTRAL AGENCIES 

 

 

 

 

 

Mr. Fred Bradshaw, Chair 

Carrot River Valley 

 

Ms. Carla Beck, Deputy Chair 

Regina Lakeview 

 

Mr. Greg Brkich 

Arm River 

 

Mr. Terry Dennis 

Canora-Pelly 

 

Mr. Warren Kaeding 

Melville-Saltcoats 

 

Mr. Kevin Phillips 

Melfort 

 

Ms. Colleen Young 

Lloydminster 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Published under the authority of The Hon. Corey Tochor, Speaker



 STANDING COMMITTEE ON CROWN AND CENTRAL AGENCIES 1 

 May 24, 2016 

 

[The committee met at 17:17.] 

 

Ms. Ursulescu: — Good evening, committee members. Seeing 

that this is the first committee meeting of your committee, I’m 

here as your Committee Clerk to preside over the election of a 

Chair. I just want to remind you guys how this process works. 

So we first take a nomination, and then we’ll ask for an actual 

motion for the member to be the Chair. So I will open the floor 

right now for nominations. Mr. Phillips. 

 

Mr. Phillips: — I would nominate Fred Bradshaw. 

 

Ms. Ursulescu: — Okay. Any further nominations? Seeing 

none, I’ll ask Mr. Phillips to move that motion. 

 

Mr. Phillips: — I would move: 

 

That Fred Bradshaw be elected to preside as Chair of the 

Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

Ms. Ursulescu: — Mr. Phillips has moved that motion. Is that 

agreed? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

Ms. Ursulescu: — Carried. I will ask Mr. Bradshaw to come 

and take his seat. Thank you. 

 

The Chair: — I would like to take this opportunity to introduce 

the members of the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 

Agencies. They are Carla Beck, Greg Brkich, Terry Dennis, 

Warren Kaeding, Kevin Phillips, and Colleen Young. 

 

The first item of business will be the election of a Deputy Chair. 

I want to remind members of the process. I will first ask for 

nominations. Once there are no further nominations, I will then 

ask a member to move a motion to have a committee member 

preside as Deputy Chair. I now call for the nominations for the 

position of Deputy Chair. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — I nominate Carla Beck. 

 

The Chair: — Mr. Brkich has nominated Carla Beck as 

position of Deputy Chair. Are there any further nominations? 

Seeing none, I would now invite one of the members to move 

that motion. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — I will move that motion that Carla Beck be 

Deputy Chair. 

 

The Chair: — It has been moved by Mr. Brkich: 

 

That Mrs. Beck be elected to preside as Deputy Chair of 

the Standing Committee on Crown and Central Agencies. 

 

All in favour of the motion? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — I declare the motion carried. 

 

Next on the agenda is the establishment of a steering 

committee. I would ask a member to move the following 

motion: 

 

That a steering committee be appointed to establish an 

agenda and priority of business for subsequent meetings, 

and that the membership be comprised of the Chair and 

Deputy Chair; and further, 

 

That the steering committee shall meet from time to time 

as directed by the committee or at the call of the Chair; that 

the presence of all members of the subcommittee is 

necessary to constitute a meeting, and that substitutions for 

the membership of the Standing Committee on Crown and 

Central Agencies be permitted on the steering committee. 

 

I’m looking for a motion on that. 

 

Mr. Dennis: — Mr. Chair, I will so move. 

 

The Chair: — Mr. Dennis has moved the motion. Do members 

approve of the motion as read? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — The motion is carried. Members, in accordance 

with section 5(1) of The Crown Corporations Public Ownership 

Act, Bill No. 1, The Crown Corporations Public Ownership 

Amendment Act, 2016 has been committed to the Standing 

Committee on Crown and Central Agencies earlier today in the 

Assembly. 

 

Members should be aware that the requirement of a referral 

motion under rule no. 79(1) and 79(3) is superseded by the 

statutory provisions of The Crown Corporations Public 

Ownership Amendment Act, 2016. 

 

In accordance with section 5(2)(a), the committee: 

 

(a) must provide the opportunity for representations by 

members of the public; and 

 

(b) shall not meet to review the Bill until 14 days after the 

day on which the public is given notice of the date, time 

and place of the Policy Field Committee’s meeting. 

 

Members, we should consider public meetings for Bill No. 1, 

The Crown Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 

2016. 

 

Ms. Young: — I would like to make a motion. 

 

The Chair: — Ms. Colleen Young. Ms. Young is about to 

make a motion. 

 

Ms. Young: — I would like to move: 

 

That the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 

Agencies, in accordance with section 5 of The Crown 

Corporations Public Ownership Act, shall immediately 

provide notice that it will hold a public hearing on June the 

8th, 2016 at 7 p.m. to 10 p.m. in room 8 of the Legislative 

Building for consideration of Bill No. 1, The Crown 



2 Crown and Central Agencies Committee May 24, 2016 

Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 2016; 

and, 

 

That each representative of an organization or individual 

member of the public shall be given 10 minutes to present 

to the committee, followed by 10 minutes of questions by 

committee members. 

 

The Chair: — Ms. Young has moved: 

 

That the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 

Agencies, in accordance with section 5 of The Crown 

Corporations Public Ownership Act, shall immediately 

provide notice that it will hold public meetings on June 

8th, 2016 at 7 p.m. to 10 p.m. in room 8 of the Legislative 

Building for consideration of Bill No. 1, The Crown 

Corporations Public Ownership Amendment Act, 2016; 

and, 

 

That each representative of an organization or an 

individual member of the public shall be given 10 minutes 

to present to the committee, followed by 10 minutes of 

questions by committee members. 

 

That has been moved by Colleen Young. Do we have any 

debate on the motion? Ms. Beck. 

 

Ms. Beck: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Some points of discussion 

around that motion, in the event that there is increased interest 

that could not be accommodated on that initial date of June 8th 

between the hours of 7 and 10 p.m., I wonder if we might have 

provisions for an additional hearing to hear from additional 

members of the public at another date. 

 

The Chair: — Mr. Brkich. 

 

Mr. Brkich: — If they could do written submissions, would 

that be all right? 

 

Ms. Beck: — I think that what I’d like to see is if in the event 

that we do see a great deal of interest in presentations to this 

committee regarding this bill, that we might set aside another 

date or another three hours to hear those additional submissions. 

 

The Chair: — Ms. Young. 

 

Ms. Young: — Would there be a possibility of possibly 

entertaining some time on June the 9th, the next following day? 

 

The Chair: — Okay, Ms. Young, you would suggest a time for 

the following day for another three hours. Is this what you’re 

suggesting? 

 

Ms. Young: — Would that suffice? Or do we need three? 

 

Ms. Beck: — I think that would be dictated by how many 

submissions we have. But if my math is correct, the three hours 

along with the question and answer period would allow for only 

nine members of the public to present to that committee . . . to 

this committee, rather. And if we could set a date aside, should 

we have fewer submissions and require less time, I think that 

that would be reasonable to shorten that time. 

 

The Chair: — Okay. We could if our . . . Is the committee 

happy with an amendment such as adding June the 9th and 

doing it from 2 o’clock until 5 o’clock? Would the committee 

be in favour of that amendment? I could ask for a . . . Could I 

get a motion on that if the committee is in acceptance with that? 

 

Mr. Phillips: — I would so move, with the addition of, should 

it be necessary. 

 

The Chair: — Okay, Mr. Phillips is moving, if it is necessary, 

to be able to move on June the 9th for another three hours if 

necessary. 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Yes. 

 

The Chair: — Yes. We’ll recess for a couple of minutes just 

till we can get this all written out. 

 

[The committee recessed for a period of time.] 

 

The Chair: — Okay. While we were gone, we have been 

talking about an amendment. Mr. Phillips. 

 

Mr. Phillips: — Yes, I would like to move an amendment: 

 

The following to be inserted after 10 p.m.: 

 

and June 9th, 1:30 to 4:30 as deemed necessary by the 

CCA steering committee. 

 

The Chair: — Is the amendment agreed to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — Carried. 

 

Okay, the motion as amended reads: 

 

That the Standing Committee on Crown and Central 

Agencies, in accordance with section 5 of The Crown 

Corporations Public Ownership Act, shall immediately 

provide notice that it will hold public meetings on June 8, 

2016 at 7 p.m. to 10 p.m., and on June 9th, 1:30 p.m. to 

4:30 p.m. as deemed necessary by the CCA steering 

committee, in room 8 of the Legislative Building for 

consideration of Bill No. 1, The Crown Corporations 

Public Ownership Amendment Act, 2016; and, 

 

That each representative of an organization or individual 

member of the public shall be given 10 minutes to present 

to the committee, followed by 10 minutes of questions by 

committee members. 

 

Is the motion as amended agreed to? 

 

Some Hon. Members: — Agreed. 

 

The Chair: — The motion is carried. If there is no other 

business, I will ask a member to move a motion for 

adjournment. 

 

Ms. Young: — So moved. 

 



May 24, 2016 Crown and Central Agencies Committee 3 

The Chair: — Ms. Young so moved. This meeting is now 

adjourned. 

 

[The committee adjourned at 17:40.] 

 


