






















































Hansard: May 17, 2016


 

FIRST SESSION - TWENTY-EIGHTH LEGISLATURE 
 

of the 
 

Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan 
____________ 

 
 

DEBATES 
and 

PROCEEDINGS 
 

____________ 
 

(HANSARD) 
Published under the 

authority of 
The Hon. Corey Tochor 

Speaker 
 

 
N.S. VOL. 58 NO. 1A  TUESDAY, MAY 17, 2016, 10:00 
 

 



MEMBERS OF THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 
1st Session — 28th Legislature 

 
 

Speaker — Hon. Corey Tochor 
Premier — Hon. Brad Wall 

Leader of the Opposition — Trent Wotherspoon 
 
 
 

 
Beaudry-Mellor, Tina — Regina University (SP) 
Beck, Carla — Regina Lakeview (NDP) 
Belanger, Buckley — Athabasca (NDP) 
Bonk, Steven — Moosomin (SP) 
Boyd, Hon. Bill — Kindersley (SP) 
Bradshaw, Fred — Carrot River Valley (SP) 
Brkich, Greg — Arm River (SP) 
Buckingham, David — Saskatoon Westview (SP) 
Campeau, Hon. Jennifer — Saskatoon Fairview (SP) 
Carr, Lori — Estevan (SP) 
Chartier, Danielle — Saskatoon Riversdale (NDP) 
Cheveldayoff, Hon. Ken — Saskatoon Willowgrove (SP) 
Cox, Hon. Herb — The Battlefords (SP) 
D’Autremont, Dan — Cannington (SP) 
Dennis, Terry — Canora-Pelly (SP) 
Docherty, Hon. Mark — Regina Coronation Park (SP) 
Doherty, Hon. Kevin — Regina Northeast (SP) 
Doke, Larry — Cut Knife-Turtleford (SP) 
Duncan, Hon. Dustin — Weyburn-Big Muddy (SP) 
Eyre, Bronwyn — Saskatoon Stonebridge-Dakota (SP) 
Fiaz, Muhammad — Regina Pasqua (SP) 
Forbes, David — Saskatoon Centre (NDP) 
Hargrave, Joe — Prince Albert Carlton (SP) 
Harpauer, Hon. Donna — Humboldt-Watrous (SP) 
Harrison, Hon. Jeremy — Meadow Lake (SP) 
Hart, Glen — Last Mountain-Touchwood (SP) 
Heppner, Hon. Nancy — Martensville-Warman (SP) 
Kaeding, Warren — Melville-Saltcoats (SP) 
Kirsch, Delbert — Batoche (SP) 
Lambert, Lisa — Saskatoon Churchill-Wildwood (SP) 
Lawrence, Greg — Moose Jaw Wakamow (SP) 

Makowsky, Gene — Regina Gardiner Park (SP) 
Marit, David — Wood River (SP) 
McCall, Warren — Regina Elphinstone-Centre (NDP) 
McMorris, Hon. Don — Indian Head-Milestone (SP) 
Merriman, Paul — Saskatoon Silverspring-Sutherland (SP) 
Michelson, Warren — Moose Jaw North (SP) 
Moe, Hon. Scott — Rosthern-Shellbrook (SP) 
Morgan, Hon. Don — Saskatoon Southeast (SP) 
Nerlien, Hugh — Kelvington-Wadena (SP) 
Olauson, Eric — Saskatoon University (SP) 
Ottenbreit, Hon. Greg — Yorkton (SP) 
Parent, Roger — Saskatoon Meewasin (SP) 
Phillips, Kevin — Melfort (SP) 
Rancourt, Nicole — Prince Albert Northcote (NDP) 
Reiter, Hon. Jim — Rosetown-Elrose (SP) 
Ross, Laura — Regina Rochdale (SP) 
Sarauer, Nicole — Regina Douglas Park (NDP) 
Sproule, Cathy — Saskatoon Nutana (NDP) 
Steele, Doug — Cypress Hills (SP) 
Steinley, Warren — Regina Walsh Acres (SP) 
Stewart, Hon. Lyle — Lumsden-Morse (SP) 
Tell, Hon. Christine — Regina Wascana Plains (SP) 
Tochor, Hon. Corey — Saskatoon Eastview (SP) 
Vermette, Doyle — Cumberland (NDP) 
Wall, Hon. Brad — Swift Current (SP) 
Weekes, Randy — Biggar-Sask Valley (SP) 
Wilson, Hon. Nadine — Saskatchewan Rivers (SP) 
Wotherspoon, Trent — Regina Rosemont (NDP) 
Wyant, Hon. Gordon — Saskatoon Northwest (SP) 
Young, Colleen — Lloydminster (SP) 
 
 

 
 
 
Party Standings:  Saskatchewan Party (SP) — 51; New Democratic Party (NDP) — 10 
 
 
 
 
Clerks-at-the-Table 
Clerk — Gregory A. Putz 
Law Clerk & Parliamentary Counsel — Kenneth S. Ring, Q.C. Hansard on the Internet 
Principal Clerk — Iris Lang Hansard and other documents of the 
Clerk Assistant — Kathy Burianyk Legislative Assembly are available 
 within hours after each sitting. 
Sergeant-at-Arms — Maurice Riou http://www.legassembly.sk.ca/legislative-business/legislative-calendar 



 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1 
 May 17, 2016 
 
[The Assembly met at 10:00.] 
 
Clerk: — Members, I wish to inform the Assembly that I have 
received a communication from the private secretary to Her 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor stating that Her Honour will 
open the first session of the twenty-eighth legislature at 10 a.m. 
today this 17th day of May 2016. 
 
[Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber at 
10:02.] 
 
Her Honour: — Pray be seated. 
 
Hon. Ms. Wilson: — I am commanded by Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor to inform you that she does not see fit to 
declare the causes of the summoning of the present legislature 
until later today when the Legislative Assembly shall have 
elected a Speaker according to law. 
 
[Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 10:04.] 
 

ELECTION OF SPEAKER 
 
Clerk: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, pursuant to 
the rules of this Assembly, it is my duty to call upon you to 
elect a member to preside over your deliberations as Speaker. 
 
Pursuant to the rules of procedure under rule 43(1), the 
following members have declared their intention to stand as 
candidates for election to the office of Speaker. I’ll ask each of 
the candidates to rise as I call their name so that they may be 
recognized: Mr. Greg Brkich, the hon. member for Arm River; 
Mr. Dan D’Autremont, the hon. member for the constituency of 
Cannington; Mr. Corey Tochor, the hon. member for the 
constituency of Saskatoon Eastview. Members, we’ll now take 
a moment to set the Chamber up for the polling to take place. 
 
Members, if I may have your attention please. In preparation for 
the vote, the Sergeant-at-Arms will now bring in the ballot box. 
The ballot box will be inspected and the sealed ballots opened, 
and I’ll announce the beginning of the voting procedure. The 
list of candidates has been distributed to you; it should be on 
your desks. All members will also have a map with directions to 
the registration table that you’re asked to vote. The list of 
members who are candidates for Speaker is also posted in the 
polling booths. 
 
Members of the Assembly, I will now ask those members who 
wish to cast their ballots to proceed to the designated 
registration tables to receive your ballot paper, sign the 
registration sheet, and then proceed to the polling booths. May I 
remind all of you to please print the first and last name of the 
candidate of your choice on the ballot paper. 
 
[The members proceeded to cast ballots.] 
 
Clerk: — Members, if I could have your attention please. 
Order. Order. If there are any members who have not voted and 
wish to do so, will you please vote now. Seeing that 
everybody’s voted, we’ll recess to the call of the bells, and the 
Table Officers will count the ballots. The bells will ring for 
three minutes to recall members to the Chamber when the result 
of the ballot is ready to be announced. I’ll go and tally 

the votes. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 10:21 until 10:41.] 
 
Clerk: — Members of the Assembly, it’s my duty to inform the 
Assembly that a second ballot will be necessary. The list of 
candidates for the second ballot has been prepared in 
accordance with the rule for excluding the name of the 
candidate who received the fewest votes on the previous ballot. 
 
The list of candidates for the second ballot is as follows, in 
alphabetical order: Mr. Dan D’Autremont, the hon. member of 
the Assembly for Cannington; and Mr. Corey Tochor, Member 
of the Legislative Assembly for Saskatoon Eastview. If any 
hon. member whose name has just been read to the Assembly 
wishes to withdraw as a candidate in the second ballot, will he 
please rise in his place and state that intention now. 
 
The Chamber will now prepare for the second ballot. The list of 
candidates will be distributed to members and the sealed ballots 
brought in. 
 
[10:45] 
 
Members of the Assembly, if I could bring you back to order. I 
would invite members to please proceed to cast their ballots in 
the same manner as before, and may I again remind hon. 
members to please print the first and last name of the candidate 
on your ballot paper. Thank you. The voting may proceed. 
 
[The members proceeded to cast ballots.] 
 
Clerk: — Members, if I could bring you back to order and have 
your attention, please. If there are any members who have not 
voted and wish to do so, would you do so now, please. 
 
Seeing that all members have voted, the Assembly will again 
recess to the call of the bells while the Table Officers count the 
ballots. The bells will ring for three minutes to recall the 
members to the Chamber when the result of the second ballot is 
ready to be announced. Thank you. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 10:54 until 11:11.] 
 
Clerk: — Members of the Assembly, if I could bring the House 
back to order, it is my duty to inform you that you have elected 
as your Speaker, Mr. Corey Tochor, the hon. member for the 
Legislative Assembly for Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, I wish to express 
my grateful thanks and humble acknowledgment of the high 
honour the Assembly has conferred on me. While I leave the 
floor of this Assembly to take the Speaker’s Chair, I leave 
behind all political partisan bias in order that I discharge with 
impartiality to all, and to the best of my ability, the various and 
important duties pertaining to the high office of Speaker. 
 
It will be my aim and duty to uphold the principles and 
traditions of the Assembly and secure for each member the right 
to express his or her opinions within the limits necessary to 
preserve decorum; to recognize the rights and privileges of the 
honoured members, political groups, and the Assembly itself; to 
facilitate the transition of the public business in an orderly 



2 Saskatchewan Hansard May 17, 2016 

manner; and above all, to seek to be fair and impartial in 
decisions you entrust in me. 
 
To members, thank you very much for your confidence in me to 
perform these duties. I’ll do it to the best of my ability. To my 
family, thank you so much to be here today. And to the Clerks, 
to thank them in advance for their wisdom and support. I 
appreciate the opportunity to serve in this humble building. I’m 
very appreciative of the support that I received today, and every 
day on I will work hard to confirm that trust that was put in me. 
And with that, I’ll recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wall: — Thank you very, very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all, on behalf of members on this side of the House, the 
government members, congratulations on your election today. 
We appreciate your remarks just now and your affirmation of 
your intentions to serve the House in an impartial way, and no 
doubt we have confidence that you’ll be able to do precisely 
that. 
 
May I also say thank you to the other members of the 
Legislative Assembly who let their names stand for the 
Speaker’s office: the member for Cannington and the member 
for Arm River-Watrous. We owe them our thanks as well for 
contesting the Speaker’s election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just very briefly, we’re going to work hard so that 
you don’t have to work quite as hard perhaps as you might 
otherwise have to if members weren’t earnest in abiding by the 
rules and the decorum of this august room. Mr. Speaker, I think 
it was British Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli who was 
commenting in the British parliament after a particularly 
raucous session that the Speaker had managed to quiet down, 
and his quote went something like “Mr. Speaker, you behold a 
range of exhausted volcanoes. Not a flame flickers on a single 
pallid crest.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, obviously that Speaker was pretty successful I 
think in bringing decorum on that occasion to the British House 
of Commons. We’re hopeful you won’t have to do that, but 
we’re also fresh from an election where our electors have sent 
us here to represent them and to serve in the legislature, and so 
there is a certain amount of energy and enthusiasm that comes 
with that. And, Mr. Speaker, I hope there actually will be some 
flames that still flicker from these pallid crests that are before 
you, but in a way that doesn’t cause you to have to work any 
harder than you should. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also quote today, Walter Bagehot, the 
British journalist who noted that anyone who is admiring, and 
I’m paraphrasing, but anyone who admired the British House of 
Lords could cure that admiration by just looking at it. 
 
We want to ensure that for those who come and witness the 
proceedings of the Legislative Assembly in person or on 
television, that they wouldn’t feel the same way as Bagehot did 
when he obviously said those words. But we are going to 
approach our work with a high degree of energy and 
enthusiasm, and we look forward to working with you and 
working with all of the Table Officers, with the Clerk and his 
team. We’re grateful to them. We also thank them in advance, 
as well as the Pages, and the members of the opposition with 
whom we’ll be working together as well. Congratulations again 

on your election to the Speaker’s Chair. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Mr. Wotherspoon: — Thank you, and I’d like to join with the 
Premier in providing some remarks and offering congratulations 
to the member for Saskatoon Eastview in your election, in his 
election as Speaker. Thank you for taking on this role. 
 
Thank you also though to the other members who have put their 
name forward here today and that have run for Speaker. I guess 
it’s not a bad thing in this house of democracy to have a 
democratic process to elect our Speaker. 
 
I would like to say specifically a warm thanks and a sincere 
thanks to the Speaker of the twenty-seventh Assembly, 
somebody that certainly provided leadership and service to this 
Assembly and also, I believe, the longest serving member 
within this Assembly. So thank you very much to the member 
for Cannington. 
 
The role of the Speaker has a long history in our British 
parliamentary process, dating back, as I understand, to 1377. In 
fact I think that the member from Thunder Creek, possibly the 
member for Saskatoon Centre, might recall its genesis. It’s 
important that we all respect the role of the Speaker and to 
uphold the rules of the House. The Speaker plays a very 
important role as well as protecting the rights of the minority. 
 
And you know, I guess, as this new Speaker enters into his 
work in keeping order in this venerable House, I’d urge a 
particular eye to the member for Saskatoon Southeast and 
maybe the member from Athabasca also. Keep a watchful eye 
on those two. 
 
We recognize how important your role is to this democratic 
institution. We offer our commitment to do what we can to 
make this Assembly work, including in how we engage in 
debate and in an interest in being constructive and supportive of 
improvements to the functioning of this Assembly. We wish 
you the best as Speaker and thank you for your service. 
 
The Speaker: — To the Assembly and members and guests in 
the gallery, I made a mistake. I have erred on the first day of 
this job. I was not prepared. I was prepared for possibly a 
different outcome, and I erred in not thanking my fellow 
members that put their name forward. I appreciate their public 
service over the years. And especially Speaker D’Autremont 
that I am very thankful, the province is very thankful for your 
public service over the years. And as a member, I am very 
thankful of his willingness to share with me his time and 
guidance during the last term. And I erred and I wish to correct 
that and thank them both for their public service. And I think a 
round of applause is in order as well. 
 
[Applause] 
 
The Assembly will now recess until 2 p.m. later today when 
Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor will present the Speech 
from the Throne. 
 
[The Assembly recessed from 11:20 until 14:00.] 



 TABLE OF CONTENTS 

ELECTION OF SPEAKER 
  Clerk ..............................................................................................................................................................................................1 
  The Speaker ...................................................................................................................................................................................1 
  Wall ................................................................................................................................................................................................2 
  Wotherspoon .................................................................................................................................................................................2 



GOVERNMENT OF SASKATCHEWAN 

CABINET MINISTERS 
_____________________________________________________ 

 

Hon. Brad Wall 

Premier 

President of the Executive Council 

Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs 
 

 
 

Hon. Bill Boyd 
Minister of the Economy 

Minister of Energy and Resources 

Minister Responsible for The Global 

Transportation Hub Authority 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Power Corporation 

 

Hon. Jennifer Campeau 
Minister of Central Services 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Transportation Company 

 

Hon. Herb Cox 

Minister of Environment 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Water 

Security Agency 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Water Corporation 

 

Hon. Mark Docherty 
Minister of Parks, Culture and Sport 

Minister Responsible for the Provincial 

Capital Commission 

 

Hon. Kevin Doherty 
Minister of Finance 

 

Hon. Dustin Duncan 
Minister of Health 

 

Hon. Donna Harpauer 
Minister of Social Services 

Minister Responsible for the Status of Women 

 

Hon. Jeremy Harrison 
Minister Responsible for Immigration, 

Jobs, Skills and Training 

Minister Responsible for Tourism Saskatchewan 

Minister Responsible for Innovation 

Minister Responsible for Trade 

 

Hon. Nancy Heppner 
Minister of Highways and Infrastructure 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Gaming Corporation 

Hon. Don McMorris 
Deputy Premier 

Minister of Crown Investments 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Government Insurance 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Liquor and Gaming Authority 

Minister Responsible for the Public Service Commission 

Minister Responsible for the Lean Initiative 

 

Hon. Scott Moe 
Minister of Advanced Education 

 

Hon. Don Morgan 
Minister of Education 

Minister of Labour Relations and Workplace Safety 

Minister Responsible for the Saskatchewan 

Workers’ Compensation Board 

 

Hon. Greg Ottenbreit 
Minister Responsible for Rural and Remote Health 

 

Hon. Jim Reiter 
Minister of Government Relations 

Minister Responsible for First Nations, 

Métis and Northern Affairs 

Minister Responsible for SaskEnergy Incorporated 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan 

Telecommunications 

 

Hon. Lyle Stewart 
Minister of Agriculture 

Minister Responsible for Saskatchewan Crop 

Insurance Corporation 

 

Hon. Christine Tell 
Minister Responsible for Corrections and Policing 

 

Hon. Gordon Wyant 
Minister of Justice and Attorney General 

Minister Responsible for SaskBuilds 


